                              III.

     The Copenhagen Interpretation of
            Quantum Theory


THE Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory starts from
a paradox. Any experiment in physics, whether it refers to the
phenomena of daily life or to atomic events, is to be described
in the terms of classical physics. The concepts of classical
physics form the language by which we describe the arrange-
ment of our experiments and state the results. We cannot and
should not replace these concepts by any others. Still the
application of these concepts is limited by the relations of un-
certainty. We must keep in mind this limited range of applica-
bility of the classical concepts while using them, but we cannot
and should not try to improve them.
   For a better understanding of this paradox it is useful to com-
pare the procedure for the theoretical interpretation of an
experiment in classical physics and in quantum theory. In New-
ton's mechanics, for instance, we may start by measuring the
position and the velocity of the planet whose motion we are
going to study. The result of the observation is translated into
mathematics by deriving numbers for the co-ordinates and the
momenta of the planet from the observation. Then the equations
                               44
     COPENHAGEN INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM THEORY 45
of motion are used to derive from these values of the co-ordinates
and momenta at a given time the values of these co-ordinates or
any other properties of the system at a later time, and in this
way the astronomer can predict the properties of the system at a
later time. He can, for instance, predict the exact time for an
eclipse of the moon.
   In quantum theory the procedure is slightly different. We
could for instance be interested in the motion of an electron
through a cloud chamber and could determine by some kind of
observation the initial position and velocity of the electron. But
this determination will not be accurate; it will at least contain
the inaccuracies following from the uncertainty relations and
will probably contain still larger errors due to the difficulty of
the experiment. It is the first of these inaccuracies which allows
us to translate the result of the observation into the mathe-
matical scheme of quantum theory. A probability function is
written down which represents the experimental situation at the
time of the measurement, including even the possible errors of
the measurement.
   This probability function represents a mixture of two things,
partly a fact and partly our knowledge of a fact. It represents a
fact in so far as it assigns at the initial time the probability unity
(i.e., complete certainty) to the initial situation: the electron
moving with the observed velocity at the observed position;
"observed" means observed within the accuracy of the experi-
ment. It represents our knowledge in so far as another observer
could perhaps know the position of the electron more accurately.
The error in the experiment does—at least to some extent—not
represent a property of the electron but a deficiency in our
knowledge of the electron. Also this deficiency of knowledge is
expressed in the probability function.
46                 PHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY

   In classical physics one should in a careful investigation also
consider the error of the observation. As a result one would get
a probability distribution for the initial values of the co-ordinates
and velocities and therefore something very similar to the proba-
bility function in quantum mechanics. Only the necessary un-
certainty due to the uncertainty relations is lacking in classical
physics.
   When the probability function in quantum theory has been
determined at the initial time from the observation, one can
from the laws of quantum theory calculate the probability func-
tion at any later time and can thereby determine the probability
for a measurement giving a specified value of the measured
quantity. We can, for instance, predict the probability for find-
ing the electron at a later time at a given point in the cloud
chamber. It should be emphasized, however, that the probability
function does not in itself represent a course of events in the
course of time. It represents a tendency for events and our
knowledge of events. The probability function can be connected
with reality only if one essential condition is fulfilled: if a new
measurement is made to determine a certain property of the
system. Only then does the probability function allow us to
calculate the probable result of the new measurement. The result
of the measurement again will be stated in terms of classical
physics.
   Therefore, the theoretical interpretation of an experiment
requires three distinct steps: (1) the translation of the initial
experimental situation into a probability function; (2) the fol-
lowing up of this function in the course of time; (3) the state-
ment of a new measurement to be made of the system, the result
of which can then be calculated from the probability function.
For the first step the fulfillment of the uncertainty relations is a
      COPENHAGEN INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM THEORY                  47

 necessary condition. The second step cannot be described in
 terms of the classical concepts; there is no description of what
happens to the system between the initial observation and the
next measurement. It is only in the third step that we change
over again from the "possible" to the "actual."
    Let us illustrate these three steps in a simple ideal experiment.
It has been said that the atom consists of a nucleus and electrons
moving around the nucleus; it has also been stated that the con-
cept of an electronic orbit is doubtful. One could argue that it
should at least in principle be possible to observe the electron
in its orbit. One should simply look at the atom through a
microscope of a very high resolving power, then one would see
the electron moving in its orbit. Such a high resolving power
could to be sure not be obtained by a microscope using ordinary
light, since the inaccuracy of the measurement of the position
can never be smaller than the wave length of the light. But a
microscope using y-rays with a wave length smaller than the size
of the atom would do. Such a microscrope has not yet been
constructed but that should not prevent us from discussing the
ideal experiment.
   Is the first step, the translation of the result of the observation
into a probability function, possible? It is possible only if the un-
certainty relation is fulfilled after the observation. The position
of the electron will be known with an accuracy given by the
wave length of the y-ray. The electron may have been practically
at rest before the observation. But in the act of observation at
least one light quantum of the y-ray must have passed the micro-
scope and must first have been deflected by the electron. There-
fore, the electron has been pushed by the light quantum, it has
changed its momentum and its velocity, and one can show that
the uncertainty of this change is just big enough to guarantee
48                PHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY

the validity of the uncertainty relations. Therefore, there is no
difficulty with the first step.
   At the same time one can easily see that there is no way of
observing the orbit of the electron around the nucleus. The
second step shows a wave pocket moving not around the nucleus
but away from the atom, because the first light quantum will
have knocked the electron out from the atom. The momentum
of light quantum of the y-ray is much bigger than the original
momentum of the electron if the wave length of the y-ray is
much smaller than the size of the atom. Therefore, the first light
quantum is sufficient to knock the electron out of the atom and
one can never observe more than one point in the orbit of the
electron; therefore, there is no orbit in the ordinary sense. The
next observation—the third step—will show the electron on its
path from the atom. Quite generally there is no way of describ-
ing what happens between two consecutive observations. It is
of course tempting to say that the electron must have been
somewhere between the two observations and that therefore the
electron must have described some kind of path or orbit even if
it may be impossible to know which path. This would be a
reasonable argument in classical physics. But in quantum theory
it would be a misuse of the language which, as we will see later,
cannot be justified. We can leave it open for the moment,
whether this warning is a statement about the way in which we
should talk about atomic events or a statement about the events
themselves, whether it refers to epistemology or to ontology.
In any case we have to be very cautious about the wording of
any statement concerning the behavior of atomic particles.
   Actually we need not speak of particles at all. For many ex-
periments it is more convenient to speak of matter waves; for
instance, of stationary matter waves around the atomic nucleus.
     COPENHAGEN INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM THEORY 49
Such a description would directly contradict the other description
if one does not pay attention to the limitations given by the un-
certainty relations. Through the limitations the contradiction is
avoided. The use of "matter waves" is convenient, for example,
when dealing with the radiation emitted by the atom. By means
of its frequencies and intensities the radiation gives information
about the oscillating charge distribution in the atom, and there
the wave picture comes much nearer to the truth than the par-
ticle picture. Therefore, Bohr advocated the use of both pictures,
which he called "complementary" to each other. The two pic-
tures are of course mutually exclusive, because a certain thing
cannot at the same time be a particle (i.e., substance confined to
a very small volume) and a wave (i.e., a field spread out over a
large space), but the two complement each other. By playing
with both pictures, by going from the one picture to the other
and back again, we finally get the right impression of the strange
kind of reality behind our atomic experiments. Bohr uses the
concept of "complementarity" at several places in the inter-
pretation of quantum theory. The knowledge of the position of
a particle is complementary to the knowledge of its velocity or
momentum. If we know the one with high accuracy we cannot
know the other with high accuracy; still we must know both for
determining the behavior of the system. The space-time descrip-
tion of the atomic events is complementary to their deterministic
description. The probability function obeys an equation of
motion as the co-ordinates did in Newtonian mechanics; its
change in the course of time is completely determined by the
quantum mechanical equation, but it does not allow a descrip-
tion in space and time. The observation, on the other hand,
enforces the description in space and time but breaks the de-
50                PHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY

termined continuity of the probability function by changing our
knowledge of the system.
   Generally the dualism between two different descriptions of
the same reality is no longer a difficulty since we know from
the mathematical formulation of the theory that contradictions
cannot arise. The dualism between the two complementary pic-
tures—waves and particles—is also clearly brought out in the
flexibility of the mathematical scheme. The formalism is nor-
mally written to resemble Newtonian mechanics, with equations
of motion for the co-ordinates and the momenta of the particles.
But by a simple transformation it can be rewritten to resemble
a wave equation for an ordinary three-dimensional matter wave.
Therefore, this possibility of playing with different comple-
mentary pictures has its analogy in the different transformations
of the mathematical scheme; it does not lead to any difficulties
in the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory.
   A real difficulty in the understanding of this interpretation
arises, however, when one asks the famous question: But what
happens "really" in an atomic event? It has been said before
that the mechanism and the results of an dbservatidn can always
be stated in terms of the classical concepts. But what one deduces
from an observation is a probability function, a mathematical
expression that combines statements about possibilities or tend-
encies with statements about our knowledge of facts. So we can-
not completely objectify the result of an observation, we cannot
describe what "happens" between this observation and the next.
This looks as if we had introduced an element of subjectivism
into the theory, as if we meant to say: what happens depends on
our way tif observing it or on the fact that we observe it. Before
discussing this problem of subjectivism it is necessary to explain
quite clearly why one would get into hopeless difficulties if one
     COPENHAGEN INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM THEORY 51
tried to describe what happens between two consecutive, ob-
servations.
   For this purpose it is convenient to discuss the following ideal
experiment: We assume that a small source of monochromatic
light radiates toward a black screen with two small holes in it.
The diameter of the holes may be not much bigger than the
wave length of the light, but their distance will be very much
bigger. At some distance behind the screen a photographic plate
registers the incident light. If one describes this experiment in
terms of the wave picture, one says that the primary wave pene-
trates through the two holes; there will be secondary spherical
waves starting from the holes that interfere with one another,
and the interference will produce a pattern of varying intensity
on the photographic plate.
   The blackening of the photographic plate is a quantum
process, a chemical reaction produced by single light quanta.
Therefore, it must also be possible to describe the experiment in
terms of light quanta. If it would be permissible to say what
happens to the single light quantum between its emission from
the light source and its absorption in the photographic plate, one
could argue as follows: The single light quantum can come
through the first hole or through the second one. If it goes
through the first hole and is scattered there, its probability for
being absorbed at a certain point of the photographic plate can-
not depend upon whether the second hole is closed or open. The
probability distribution on the plate will be the same as if only
the first hole was open. If the experiment is repeated many times
and one takes together all cases in which the light quantum has
gone through the first hole, the blackening of the plate due to
these cases will correspond to this probability distribution. If one
considers only those light quanta that go through the second
52                 PHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY

hole, the blackening should correspond to a probability distribu-
tion derived from the assumption that only the second hole is
open. The total blackening, therefore, should just be the sum of
the blackenings in the two cases; in other words, there should be
no interference pattern. But we know this is not correct, and
the experiment will show the interference pattern. Therefore, the
statement that any light quantum must have gone either through
the first or through the second hole is problematic and leads to
contradictions. This example shows clearly that the concept of
the probability function does not allow a description of what
happens between two observations. Any attempt to find such a
description would lead to contradictions; this must mean that
the term "happens" is restricted to the observation.
   Now, this is a very strange result, since it seems to indicate
that the observation plays a decisive role in the event and that
the reality varies, depending upon whether we observe it or not.
To make this point clearer we have to analyze the process of
observation more closely.
   To begin with, it is important to remember that in natural
science we are not interested in the universe as a whole, includ-
ing ourselves, but we direct our attention to some part of the
universe and make that the object of our studies. In atomic
physics this part is usually a very small object, an atomic particle
or a group of such particles, sometimes much larger—the size
does not matter; but it is important that a large part of the
universe, including ourselves, does not belong to the object.
   Now, the theoretical interpretation of an experiment starts
with the two steps that have been discussed. In the first step we
have to describe-the arrangement of the experiment, eventually
combined with a first observation, in terms of classical physics
and translate this description into a probability function. This
     COPENHAGEN INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM THEORY 53
probability function follows the laws of quantum theory, and its
change in the course of time, which is continuous, can be calcu-
lated from the initial conditions; this is the second step. The
probability function combines objective and subjective elements.
It contains statements about possibilities or better tendencies
("potentia" in Aristotelian philosophy), and these statements
are completely objective, they do not depend on any observer;
and it contains statements about our knowledge of the system,
which of course are subjective in so far as they may be different
for different observers. In ideal cases the subjective element in
the probability function may be practically negligible as com-
pared with the objective one. The physicists then speak of a
"pure case."
   When we now come to the next observation, the result of
which should be predicted from the theory, it is very important
to realize that our object has to be in contact with the other part
of the world, namely, the experimental arrangement, the meas-
uring rod, etc., before or at least at the moment of observation.
This means that the equation of motion for the probability func-
tion does now contain the influence of the interaction with the
measuring device. This influence introduces a new element of
uncertainty, since the measuring device is necessarily described
in the terms of classical physics; such a description contains
all the uncertainties concerning the microscopic structure of
the device which we know from thermodynamics, and since the
device is connected with the rest of the world, it contains in fact
the uncertainties of the microscopic structure of the whole world.
These uncertainties may be called objective in so far as they are
simply a consequence of the description in the terms of classical
physics and do not depend on any observer. They may be called
54                 PHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY

subjective in so far as they refer to our incomplete knowledge of
 the world.
   After this interaction has taken place, the probability function
contains the objective element of tendency and the subjective
element of incomplete knowledge, even if it has been a "pure
case" before. It is for this reason that the result of the observa-
tion cannot generally be predicted with certainty; what can be
predicted is the probability of a certain result of the observation,
and this statement about the probability can be checked by re-
peating the experiment many times. The probability function
does—unlike the common procedure in Newtonian mechanics—
not describe a certain event but, at least during the process of
observation, a whole ensemble of possible events.
   The observation itself changes the probability function dis-
continuously; it selects of all possible events the actual one that
has taken place. Since through the observation our knowledge
of the system has changed discontinuously, its mathematical
representation also has undergone the discontinuous change and
we speak of a "quantum jump." When the old adage "Natura
non facit saltus" is used as a basis for criticism of quantum
theory, we can reply that certainly our knowledge can change
suddenly and that this fact justifies the use of the term "quan-
tum jump."
   Therefore, the transition from the "possible" to the "actual"
takes place during the act of observation. If we want to describe
what happens in an atomic event, we have to realize that the
word "happens" can apply only to the observation, not to the
state of affairs between two observations. It applies to the
physical, not the psychical act of observation, and we may say
that the transition from the "possible" to the "actual" takes
place as soon as the interaction of the object with the measuring
     COPENHAGEN INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM THEORY                 55

device, and thereby with the rest of the world, has come into
play; it is not connected with the act of registration of the result
by the mind of the observer. The discontinuous change in the
probability function, however, takes place with the act of regis-
tration, because it is the discontinuous change of our knowledge
in the instant of registration that has its image in the discontinu-
ous change of the probability function.
   To what extent, then, have we finally come to an objective
description of the world, especially of the atomic world? In
classical physics science started from the belief—or should one
say from the illusion?—that we could describe the world or at
least parts of the world without any reference to ourselves. This
is actually possible to a large extent. We know that the city of
London exists whether we see it or not. It may be said that clas-
sical physics is just that idealization in which we can speak
about parts of the world without any reference to ourselves. Its
success has led to the general ideal of an objective description of
the world. Objectivity has become the first criterion for the
value of any scientific result. Does the Copenhagen interpreta-
tion of quantum theory still comply with this ideal? One may
perhaps say that quantum theory corresponds to this ideal as far
as possible. Certainly quantum theory does not contain genuine
subjective features, it does not introduce the mind of the physi-
cist as a part of the atomic event. But it starts from the division
of the world into the "object" and the rest of the world, and
from the fact that at least for the rest of the world we use the
classical concepts in our description. This division is arbitrary
 and historically a direct consequence of our scientific method;
 the use of the classical concepts is finally a consequence of the
 general human way of thinking. But this is already a reference
56                  PHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY

 to ourselves and in so far our description is not completely
 objective.
    It has been stated in the beginning that the Copenhagen
 interpretation of quantum theory starts with a paradox. It starts
 from the fact that we describe our experiments in the terms of
 classical physics and at the same time from the knowledge that
 these concepts do not fit nature accurately. The tension between
 these two starting points is the root of the statistical character of
 quantum theory. Therefore, it has sometimes been suggested
 that one should depart from the classical concepts altogether and
 that a radical change in the concepts used for describing the
 experiments might possibly lead back to a nonstatical, com-
 pletely objective description of nature.
    This suggestion, however, rests upon a misunderstanding. The
 concepts of classical physics are just a refinement of the concepts
 of daily life and are an essential part of the language which
 forms the basis of all natural science. Our actual situation in
science is such that we do use the classical concepts for the
description of the experiments, and it was the problem of quan-
tum theory to find theoretical interpretation of the experiments
on this basis. There is no use in discussing what could be done if
we were other beings than we are. At this point we have to
realize, as von Weizsacker has put it, that "Nature is earlier than
man, but man is earlier than natural science." The first part of
the sentence justifies classical physics, with its ideal of complete
objectivity. The second part tells us why we cannot escape the
paradox of quantum theory, namely, the necessity of using the
classical concepts.
   We have to add some comments on the actual procedure in
the quantum-theoretical interpretation of atomic events. It has
been said that we always start with a division of the world into
     COPENHAGEN INTERPRETATION OF QUANTUM THEORY 57
an object, which we are going to study, and the rest of the world,
and that this division is to some extent arbitrary. It should in-
deed not make any difference in the final result if we, e.g., add
some part of the measuring device or the whole device to the
object and apply the laws of quantum theory to this more com-
plicated object. It can be shown that such an alteration of the
theoretical treatment would not alter the predictions concerning
a given experiment. This follows mathematically from the fact
that the laws of quantum theory are for the phenomena in which
Planck's constant can be considered as a very small quantity,
approximately identical with the classical laws. But it would be
a mistake to believe that this application of the quantum-
theoretical laws to the measuring device could help to avoid the
fundamental paradox of quantum theory.
   The measuring device deserves this name only if it is in close
contact with the rest of the world, if there is an interaction be-
tween the device and the observer. Therefore, the uncertainty
with respect to the microscopic behavior of the world will enter
into the quantum-theoretical system here just as well as in the
first interpretation. If the measuring device would be isolated
from the rest of the world, it would be neither a measuring
device nor could it be described in the terms of classical physics
at all.
   With regard to this situation Bohr has emphasized that it is
more realistic to state that the division into the object and the
rest of the world is not arbitrary. Our actual situation in research
work in atomic physics is usually this: we wish to understand a
certain phenomenon, we wish to recognize how this phe-
nomenon follows from the general laws of nature. Therefore,
that part of matter or radiation which takes part in the phe-
nomenon is the natural "object" in the theoretical treatment and
58                PHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY

should be separated in this respect from the tools used to study
the phenomenon. This again emphasizes a subjective element in
the description of atomic events, since the measuring device has
been constructed by the observer, and we have to remember that
what we observe is not nature in itself but nature exposed to our
method of questioning. Our scientific work in physics consists in
asking questions about nature in the language that we possess
and trying to get an answer from experiment by the means that
are at our disposal. In this way quantum theory reminds us, as
Bohr has put it, of the old wisdom that when searching for
harmony in life one must never forget that in the drama of
existence we are ourselves both players and spectators. It is
understandable that in our scientific relation to nature our own
activity becomes very important when we have to deal with
parts of nature into which we can penetrate only by using the
most elaborate tools.
