      192                                                     THEORY OF LIGHT PRODUCTION


                                          Doc. 34
                 ON THE THEORY OF LIGHT PRODUCTION AND LIGHT ABSORPTION
                                      by A. Einstein
                         [Annalen der Phy sik 20 (1906): 199-206]




            In a study published last year1 I showed that the Maxwell theory of
[2]   electricity in conjunction with the theory of electrons leads to results that
      contradict the evidence on black-body radiation. By a route described in that
      study, I was led to the view that light of frequency v can only be absorbed
      or emitted in quanta of energy [R/N)0v, where R denotes the absolute
      constant of the gas equation applied to one gram-molecule, N the number of
      actual molecules in one gram-molecule, 0 the exponential coefficient of
      Wien's (and Planck's) radiation formula, and v the frequency of the light in
      question. This relationship was developed for a range that corresponds to the
[3]   range of validity of Wien's radiation formula.
            At that time it seemed to me that in a certain respect Planck's theory
      of radiation2 constituted a counterpart to my work. New considerations, which
      are being reported in §1 of this paper, showed me, however, that the theore­
      tical foundation on which Mr. Planck's radiation theory is based differs from
      the one that would emerge from Maxwell's theory and the theory of electrons,
      precisely because Planck's theory makes implicit use of the aforementioned
      hypothesis of light quanta.
            In §2 of this paper I shall make use of the hypothesis of light quanta
      to derive a relationship between the Volta effect and photoelectric diffusion.



                  §1.   P l a n c k ’s theory of radiation and the light quanta

            In §1 of my paper cited above I have shown that the molecular theory of
      heat combined with the Maxwell theory of electricity and the theory of

[1]   lk. Einstein, Ann. d. Phys. 17 (1905): 132.
[4]   2M. Planck, Ann. d. Phys. 4 (1901): 561.
DOC. 34                                                                   193

electrons lead to a formula for black-body radiation that contradicts
experience

                                n _ R 8m>2 T .
(1 )                              ~ 7}

      Here p    denotes the density of radiation at temperature T and at a
frequency between v and v + 1.
      What is the reason that Mr. Planck did not arrive at the same formula,
but obtained instead the expression


(2)                                                                              [5]



      Mr. Planck derived1 the mean energy E v of a resonator of proper
frequency v situated in a space filled with disordered radiation as given by
the equation                                                                     [7]


(3)                                                                              [8 ]



This reduced the problem of black-body radiation to the problem of determining
E as a function of temperature. The latter problem will have been solved if
one can calculate the entropy of one of many similarly constituted, mutually
interacting resonators of proper frequency v that are in dynamic
equilibrium.
      Let us envision the resonators as ions that could perform rectilinear
sinusoidal vibrations about an equilibrium position. The fact that the ions
have electrical charges is irrelevant in the calculation of this entropy; we
simply have to conceive these ions as mass points (atoms) whose momentary
state is completely determined by their instantaneous deviation x from the
equilibrium position and by their instantaneous velocity dx/dt = £.



LM. Planck, Ann. d. Phys. 1 (1900): 99.                                          [6 ]
       194                                                   THEORY OF LIGHT PRODUCTION

             For the distribution of states of these resonators to be uniquely
       determined in thermodynamic equilibrium, one has to assume that there exists
       an arbitrarily small number of freely moving molecules besides the resonators,
       which by virtue of their collisions with the ions can transmit energy from
[9]    resonator to resonator; we will not take into account these molecules in our
       calculation of entropy.
             We could determine E y as a function of temperature from the Maxwell-
[10]   Boltzmann distribution law and would thereby obtain the invalid radiation
       formula (1). One arrives at the route taken by Mr. Planck in the following
       manner.
             Let P y - P n be appropriately chosen state variables1 that completely
       determine the state of a physical system (e.g., in our case the values x ar.:
       £ of all the resonators). At the absolute temperature T, the entropy S of
       this system is represented by the equation2




       where H denotes the energy of the system at temperature T, H denotes the
       energy as a function of p ^ , . . . p n< and the integral is to be extended over all
       possible combinations of the values of jP y . . . p .
             If the system consists of a very large number of molecular structures--
       and the formula has meaning and validity only in this case--then only those
[13]   combinations of values of the p ^ . . . p n whose // differs very little from B
       contribute significantly to the value of the integral appearing in S .3 If
       this is taken into account, it is easily seen that, except for negligible
       quantities, one can put
                                             ,//+A//
[14]                               S s irl6\B      dpV    dpn '


[11]   1A. Einstein, Ann. d. Phys. 11 (1903): 170.
       2loc. cit. §6.
       3Follows from §3 and §4 loc. cit.
DOC. 34                                                                                       195

where M l should be chosen very small, yet large enough to make R l g { M t ) / N
a negligible quantity. S is then independent of the value of Ml.
      If one substitutes the variables x Un and f fl of the resonators instead
of dp.,...dp
      1      fl in the equation and takes into account that the equation
holding for the a-th resonator is

                                fE + d E ,
                                 r        “ d xad Esft = const. dE a


(because JE is a quadratic, homogeneous function of                       and     £ft), one
obtains the following expression for S:

                                          Q R
(5)                                       b = If

where one has put
                                          r//+A#
(5a)                                V =
                                                    1

      If one would calculate S according to this formula, one would again
arrive at the invalid radiation formula (1). To arrive at Planck's formula,                         [15]
one has to postulate that, rather than assume any value whatsoever, the energy
Ea of a resonator can only assume values that are integral multiples of e,
where

                                           e = i^v •

      This is because, on setting M l = e, one immediately sees from equation
(5a) that, except for an inconsequential factor, V turns into the very
quantity that Mr. Planck named "the number of complexions."
      Hence, we must view the following proposition as the basis underlying
Planck's theory of radiation:
      The energy of an elementary resonator can only assume values that are
integral multiples of (R/N)0i>■, by emission and absorption, the energy of a
resonator changes by jumps of integral multiples of (R/N)()v.
          ( f v /M V A i %1/ m P S 6 e 7 V J tl5 \j e f lje y ie y i e y z fm ?
                       xevy?/y£^/es &&f=<rjL<r -pne't&Af. A to -h f
       196                                                    THEORY OF LIGHT PRODUCTION

             However, this assumption involves yet a second one, because it contra­
       dicts the theoretical basis from which equation (3) is developed. For if the
       energy of a resonator can only change in jumps, then the mean energy of a
       resonator in a radiation space cannot be obtained from the usual theory of
       electricity, because the latter does not recognize d i s t ingu ishe d energy values
       of a resonator. Thus, the following assumption underlies Planck's theory:
             Although Maxwell's theory is not applicable to elementary resonators,
       nevertheless the mea n energy of an elementary resonator in a radiation space
[17]   is equal to the energy calculated by means of Maxwell's theory of electricity.
             This proposition would be immediately plausible if, in all those parts
       of the spectrum that are relevant for observation, e = (R/N)f)v were small
       compared with the mean energy J      of a resonator; however, this is not at all
       the case, for within the range of validity of Wien's radiation formula, e^v^
       is large compared with 1. It is easy to prove that according to Planck's
       theory of radiation, within the range of validity of Wien's radiation formula,
       E J e has the value e~^v ^ , thus, E    is much smaller than e. Therefore
       only a few resonators have energies different from zero.
             In my opinion the above considerations do not at all disprove Planck's
       theory of radiation; rather, they seem to me to show that with his theory of
       radiation Mr. Planck introduced into physics a new hypothetical element: the
       hypothesis of light quanta.



              §£!. An expected quantitative rel ationship between pho toele ctri c
                               diffusion and the Volta effect

             It is well known that if metals are ordered according to their photo­
       electric sensitivity, one obtains the Volta electric potential series, in
[18]   which a metal is the more photosensitive the closer it is to the electro-
tig]   positive end of the electric potential series.
             To a certain degree, this fact can be understood by assuming only that
       the forces (which are not to be examined here) that produce the active double
       layers reside on the metal-gas interface rather than on the metal-metal
       interface.
DOC. 34                                                                   197


      Let these forces produce an electric double layer on the surface of a
piece of metal M that borders on a gas, and a corresponding potential
difference V between metal and gas, taken as positive when the metal has the
higher potential.
      Let Vi and ^ be the potential differences between metals           and
#2 in electrostatic equilibrium if they are insulated from each other. If
the two metals are brought into contact, the electric equilibrium is disturbed
and complete1 voltage equalization of the metals takes place. Thereby, simple
layers will be superposed on the aforementioned double layers at the metal-gas
interfaces; to these corresponds an electrostatic field in the air space whose
line integral equals the voltage difference.
      If Ve and Vf denote the electric potentials at points of the gas
                     t2
space directly adjacent to the metals in contact, and V' denotes the
potential in the interior of the metals, we have




      Thus, the electrostatically measurable Volta difference is numerically
equal to the difference of the potentials assumed by the metals in the gas if
they are insulated from each other.
      If one ionizes the gas, the electric forces present in the gas space
will cause a migration of the ions, to which there corresponds a current in
the metals which, at the place of contact of the metals, is directed from the
metal with the higher V (less electropositive) to the metal with the lower       [20]
V (more electropositive).                                                        [21]
      Suppose a metal M is insulated in a gas. Let V be its potential
difference with respect to the gas that corresponds to the double layer. In
order to move a unit of negative electricity from the metal into the gas, an
amount of work numerically equal to the potential V has to be performed.
Hence, the greater the V, i.e., the less electropositive the metal, the more     [22]

‘We disregard the effect of thermoelectric forces.
198                                                   THEORY OF LIGHT PRODUCTION

energy is needed for the photoelectric diffusion, i.e., the smaller the
photoelectric sensitivity of the metal.
      So far we have considered the facts without making assumptions about the
nature of photoelectric diffusion. However, the hypothesis of light quanta
also yields a quantitative relationship between the Volta effect and photo­
electric diffusion. Thus, to move a negative elementary quantum (charge c)
from the metal into the gas, it has to be supplied with at least an energy
Ve. Then, a light species will be able to remove negative electricity from
the metal only when the "light quantum" of that light species has at least the
value Ve. We thus obtain
                                     Ve i % flv
or
                                      V i \ 0v ,

where  A denotes the charge of one gram-molecule of a univalent ion.
      If we now assume that some of the absorbing electrons are able to leave
the metal as soon as the energy of the light quanta exceeds Ve1 — which is a
very plausible assumption — we obtain


                                      r ^ f v     ,

where  v denotes the lowest photoelectrically effective frequency.
      Thus, if v j and      are the lowest light frequencies acting on the
metals H^ and M 2 , the following equation will hold for the Volta potential
difference vn of the two metals:


                        - <12 " h -                             h -7      - »2>-

or, if   F12 is measured in volts:

                          F12 = 4.2 x 10 l5(u2 - vx) .



'The thermal energy of electrons is disregarded.
DOC. 34                                                                  199

      This formula contains the following, at least by and large valid,
proposition: The more electropositive a metal, the smaller the lowest light
frequency that is effective for that metal. It would be of great interest to   [23]
know whether this formula expresses the facts in a quantitative way as well.   [24]


      Bern, March 1906.   (Received on 13 March 1906)
