Reprinted from CERN-TH.4035/84, 1984
©CERN




              B e a b le s for Q u a n tu m F ie ld T h e o r y

                                      J. S. Bell
                                    CERN, Geneva


                           Dedicated to Professor D. Bohm

1. In tro d u ctio n
Bohm’s 1952 papers1,2 on quantum mechanics were for me a revelation. The elim­
ination of indeterminism was very striking. But more important, it seemed to me,
was the elimination of any need for a vague division of the world into “system” on
the one hand, and “apparatus” or “observer” on the other. I have always felt since
that people who have not grasped the ideas of those papers ... and unfortunately
they remain the majority ... are handicapped in any discussion of the meaning of
quantum mechanics.
    When the cogency of Bohm’s reasoning is admitted, a final protest is often this:
it is all nonrelativistic. This is to ignore that Bohm himself, in an appendix to
one of the 1952 papers,2 already applied his scheme to the electromagnetic field.
And application to scalar fields is straightforward.3 However until recently,4,5 to my
knowledge, no extension covering Fermi fields had been made. Such an extension
will be sketched here. The need for Fermi fields might be questioned. Fermions
might be composite structures of some kind.6 But also they might not be, or not
all. The present exercise will not only include Fermi fields, but even give them a
central role. The dependence on the ideas of de Broglie7 and Bohm,1,2 and also on
my own simplified extension to cover spin,8,9,10 will be manifest to those familiar
with these things. However no such familiarity will be assumed.
    A preliminary account of these notions5 was entitled “Quantum field theory
without observers, or observables, or measurements, or systems, or apparatus, or
wavefunction collapse, or anything like that”. This could suggest to some that the
issue in question is a philosophical one. But I insist that my concern is strictly pro­
fessional. I think that conventional formulations of quantum theory, and of quantum
field theory in particular, are unprofessionally vague and ambiguous. Professional
theoretical physicists ought to be able to do better. Bohm has shown us a way.
    It will be seen that all the essential results of ordinary quantum field theory
are recovered. But it will be seen also that the very sharpness of the reformulation
brings into focus some awkward questions. The construction of the scheme is not
at all unique. And Lorentz invariance plays a strange, perhaps incredible role.

                                           l
2. Local B eab les
The usual approach, centred on the notion of “observable”, divides the world some­
how into parts: “system” and “apparatus”. The “apparatus” interacts from time
to time with the “system”, “measuring” “observables”. During “measurement”
the linear Schrodinger evolution is suspended, and an ill-defined “wavefunction col­
lapse” takes over. There is nothing in the mathematics to tell what is “system” and
what is “apparatus”, nothing to tell which natural processes have the special sta­
tus of “measurements” . Discretion and good taste, born of experience, allow us to
use quantum theory with marvelous success, despite the ambiguity of the concepts
named above in quotation marks. But it seems clear that in a serious fundamental
formulation such concepts must be excluded.
    In particular we will exclude the notion of “observable” in favour of that of
 “heable”. The beables of the theory are those elements which might correspond
to elements of reality, to things which exist. Their existence does not depend on
 “observation”. Indeed observation and observers must be made out of beables.
    I use the term “beable” rather than some more committed term like “being”11
or “beer”12 to recall the essentially tentative nature of any physical theory. Such
a theory is at best a candidate for the description of nature. Terms like “being”,
 “beer”, “existent”,11,13 etc., would seem to me lacking in humility. In fact “beable”
is short for “maybe-able”.
    Let us try to promote some of the usual “observables” to the status of beables.
Consider the conventional axiom:

               the probability of observables (A, B , ...)                          (1)

               if observed at time t
               being observed to be                       (a, 6 ,...)
               is
                                    ^|(a,6,...g|t)|2

               where q denotes additional quantum numbers which
               together with the eigenvalues (a, b,...)
               form a complete set.

This we replace by

                       the probability of beables (A, B , ...)                      ( 2)
                       at time t
                       being                                    (■a , b , . . . )
                       is

                                   ] T | ( a , & , . . . 9 |f) |2




                                                 2
                                                                                        161


               where q denotes additional quantum numbers which
               together with the eigenvalues (a, b,...)
               form a complete set.

Not all “observables” can be given beable status, for they do not all have simulta­
neous eigenvalues, i.e. do not all commute. It is important to realize therefore that
most of these “observables” are entirely redundant. What is essential is to be able
to define the positions of things, including the positions of instrument pointers or
(the modern equivalent) of ink on computer output.
   In making precise the notion “positions of things” the energy density T00(x)
comes immediately to mind. However the commutator

                                   [T0o(a;),Too(2/)]

is not zero, but proportional to derivatives of delta functions. So the Too(x) do not
have simultaneous eigenvalues for all x. We would have to devise some new way of
specifying a joint probability distribution.
    We fall back then on a second choice - fermion number density. The distribution
of fermion number in the world certainly includes the positions of instruments,
instrument pointers, ink on paper,... and much much more.
    For simplicity we replace the three-space continuum by a dense lattice, keeping
time t continuous (and real!). Let the lattice points be enumerated by

                                    1 = 1,2, . ..L

where L is very large. Define lattice point fermion number operators



where summation over Dirac indices and over all Dirac fields is understood. The
corresponding eigenvalues are integers

                                 F{1) = 1,2,.. A N

where N is the number of Dirac fields. The fermion number configuration of the
world is a list of such integers

                             n = (F(l),F(2),...F(L))

We suppose the world to have a definite such configuration at every time t:

                                         n{t)

   The lattice fermion number are the local beables of the theory, being associated
with definite positions in space. The state vector |f) also we consider as a beable,

                                          3
although not a local one. The complete specification of our world at time t is then
a combination
                                   (|t),n(t))                                    (3)
     It remains to specify the time evolution of such a combination.

3. D y n a m ics
For the time evolution of the state vector we retain the ordinary Schrodinger
equation,
                              d/dt\t) = —iH\t)                            (4)
where H is the ordinary Hamiltonian operator.
   For the fermion number configuration we prescribe a stochastic development. In
a small time interval dt configuration m jumps to configuration n with transition
probability
                                      dtTnm                                    (5)
where

                       Tnrn = Jnm/Dm                                             (6)

                       Jnm ~         2 Re(t\nq)(nq\ - iH\mp)(mp\t)               (7)
                               qp


                       Dm=Yl\(m<l\t)\2                                           (8 )
                               <7

provided Jnm > 0, but
                                    Tnm = 0        if   Jnm   ^ 0                (9)
   From (5) the evolution of a probability distribution Pn over configurations n is
given by
                        d/dt Pn = YiT nm Pm TmnPn)                             ( 10)
                                   m
Compare this with a mathematical consequence of the Schrodinger equation (4):

                   d/dt\{nq\t)\2 = ^          2 Re(t|ng)(n 9 | - iH\mp)(mp\t)
                                        mp

or
                     d/dt Dn = Y                 = Y X TnmDm - TmnD„)           (11)
                                    m               m

If we assume that at some initial time

                                             Pn(0) = Dn(0)                      (12)

then from (11) the solution of (10) is

                                             Pn{t) = Dn(t)                      (13)

                                                   4
    Envisage then the following situation. In the beginning God chose 3-space and
1-time, a Hamiltonian H, and a state vector |0). Then She chose a fermion con­
figuration n(0). This She chose at random from an ensemble of possibilities with
distribution D(0) related to the already chosen state vector |0). Then She left the
world alone to evolve according to (4) and (5).
    It is notable that although the probability distribution P in (13) is governed by
D and so by |f), the latter is not to be thought of as just a way of expressing the
probability distribution. For us \t) is an independent beable of the theory. Otherwise
its appearance in the transition probabilities (5) would be quite unintelligible.
    The stochastic transition probabilities (5) replace here the deterministic guiding
equation of the de Broglie-Bohm “pilot wave” theory. The introduction of a stochas­
tic element, for beables with discrete spectra, is unwelcome, for the reversibility14
of the Schrodinger equation strongly suggests that quantum mechanics is not fun­
damentally stochastic in nature. However I suspect that the stochastic element
introduced here goes away in some sense in the continuum limit.

4. O Q FT and B Q F T
OQFT is “ordinary” “orthodox” “observable” quantum field theory, whatever that
may mean. BQFT is de Broglie-Bohm beable quantum field theory. To what
extent do they agree? The main difficulty with this question is the absence of any
sharp formulation of OQFT. We will consider two different ways of reducing the
ambiguity.
    In OQFT1 the world is considered as one big experiment. God prepared it
at the initial time t — 0, and let it run. At some much later time T She will
return to judge the outcome. In particular She will observe the contents of all
the physics journals. This will include of course the records of our own little
experiments — as distributions of ink on paper, and so of fermion number. From
(13) the OQFT1 probability D that God will observe one configuration rather than
another is identical with the BQFT probability P that the configuration is then
one thing rather than another. In this sense there is complete agreement between
OQFT1 and BQFT on the result of God’s big experiment — including the results
of our little ones.
    OQFT1, in contrast with BQFT, says nothing about events in the system in
between preparation and observation. However adequate this may be from an
Olympian point of view, it is rather unsatisfactory for us. We live in between
creation and last judgement — and imagine that we experience events. In this re­
spect another version of OQFT is more appealing. In OQFT2, whenever the state
can be resolved into a sum of two (or more) terms
                                  |t) = |*,l) + |t,2)                            (14)
which are “macroscopically different”, then in disregard for the Schrodinger equa­
tion the state “collapses” somehow into one term or the other:
                       |t) —>          1) with probability Ni
                                                                                 (15)
                       |t) —►AT2"’1/,2|f,2) with probability N2

                                           5
    where
                              N 1 =\(t,l\t,l)\   N2 = |(t,2|t,2)|                     (16)
    In this way the state is always, or nearly always, macroscopically unambiguous and
    defines a macroscopically definite history for the world. The words “macroscopic”
    and “collapse” and terribly vague. Nevertheless this version of OQFT is probably
    the nearest approach to a rational formulation of how we use quantum theory in
    practice.
        Will OQFT2 agree with OQFT1 and BQFT at the final time T? This is the
    main issue in what is usually called “the Quantum Measurement Problem” . Many
    authors, analyzing many models, have convinced themselves that the state vector
    collapse of OQFT2 is consistent with the Schrodinger equation of OQFT1 “for all
    practical purposes”.15 The idea is that even when we retain both components in
    (13), evolving as required by the Schrodinger equation, they remain so different as
    not to interfere in the calculation of anything of interest. The following sharper form
    of this hypothesis seems plausible to me: the macroscopically distinct components
    remain so different, for a very long time, as not to interfere in the calculation of D
    and        In so far as this is true, the trajectories of OQFT2 and BQFT will agree
    macroscopically.

    5. C on clu d in g R em ark s
    We have seen that BQFT is in complete accord with OQFT1 as regards the final
    outcome. It is plausibly consistent with OQFT2 in so far as the latter is unambigu­
    ous. BQFT has the advantage over OQFT1 of being relevant at all times, and not
    just at the final time. It is superior to OQFT2 in being completely formulated in
    terms of unambiguous equations.
        Yet even BQFT does not inspire complete happiness. For one thing there is
    nothing unique about the choice of fermion number density as basic local beable.
    We could have others instead, or in addition. For example the Higg’s fields of con­
    temporary gauge theories could serve very well to define “the positions of things”.
    Other possibilities have been considered by K. Baumann.4 I do not see how this
    choice can be made experimentally significant, so long as the final results of exper­
    iments are defined so grossly as by the positions of instrument pointers, or of ink
    on paper.
        And the status of Lorentz invariance is very curious. BQFT agrees with OQFT
    on the result of the Michelson-Morley experiment, and so on. But the formulation
    of BQFT relies heavily on a particular division of space-time into space and time.
    Could this be avoided?
        There is indeed a trivial way of imposing Lorentz invariance.4 We can imagine
    the world to differ from vacuum over only a limited region of infinite Euclidean
    space (we forget general relativity here). Then an overall centre of mass system
    is defined. We can simply assert that our equations hold in this centre of mass
    system. Our scheme is then Lorentz invariant. Many others could be made Lorentz
1   invariant in the same way ... for example Newtonian mechanics. But such Lorentz
    invariance would not imply a null result for the Michelsen-Morley experiment ...
which could detect motion relative to the cosmic mass centre. To be predictive,
Lorentz invariance must be supplemented by some kind of locality, or separability,
consideration. Only then, in the case of a more or less isolated object, can motion
relative to the world as a whole be deemed more or less irrelevant.
    I do not know of a good general formulation of such a locality requirement.
In classical field theory, part of the requirement could be formulation in terms of
differential (as distinct from integral) equations in 3 + 1 dimensional space-time.
But it seems clear that quantum mechanics requires a much bigger configuration
space. One can formulate a locality requirement by permitting arbitrary external
fields, and requiring that variation thereof have consequences only in their future
light cones. In that case the fields could be used to set measuring instruments,
and one comes into difficulty with quantum predictions for correlations related to
those of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen.18 But the introduction of external fields is
questionable. So I am unable to prove, or even formulate clearly, the proposition
that a sharp formulation of quantum field theory, such as that set out here, must
disrespect serious Lorentz invariance. But it seems to me that this is probably so.
    As with relativity before Einstein, there is then a preferred frame in the formu­
lation of the theory ... but it is experimentally indistinguishable.20,21,22 It seems
an eccentric way to make a world.

N o te s and R eferen ces
 1. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166 (1952).
 2. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 180 (1952).
 3. D. Bohm and B. Hiley, Found. Phys. 14, 270 (1984).
 4. K. Baumann, preprint, Graz (1984).
 5. J. S. Bell, Phys. Rep. 137, 49-54 (1986).
 6. T. H. R. Skyrme, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 260, 127 (1961); A. S. Goldhaber, Phys. Rev. Lett.
    36, 1122 (1976); F. Wilczek and A. Zee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 2250 (1983).
 7. L. de Broglie, Tentative d ’Interpretation Causale et Nonlineaire de la Mechanique
    Ondulatoire. Gauthier-Villars, Paris (1956).
 8. J. S. Bell, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 447 (1966).
 9. J. S. Bell, in Quantum Gravity, p. 611, Edited by Isham, Penrose and Sciama, Oxford
    (1981), (originally TH.1424-CERN, 1971 Oct 27).
10. J. S. Bell, Found. Phys. 12, 989 (1982).
11. A. Shimony, Epistemological Letters, Jan 1978, 1.
12. B. Zumino, private communication.
13. B. d’Espagnat, Phys. Rep. 110, 202-63 (1984).
14. I ignore here the small violation of time reversibility that has shown up in elementary
    particle physics. It could be of “spontaneous” origin. Moreover PCT remains good.
15. This is touched on in Refs. 9, 16, and 17, and in many papers in the anthology of
    Wheeler and Zurek Ref. 19.
16. J. S. Bell, Helv. Phys. Acta 48, 93 (1975).
17. J. S. Bell, Int. J. Quant. Chem.\ Quantum Chemistry Symposium 14, 155 (1980).
18. J. S. Bell, Journal de Physique, Colloque C2, suppl. au no. 3, Tome 42, p. C2-41, mars
    1981.
19. J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek (editors), Quantum Theory and Measurement. Prince­
    ton University Press, Princeton 1983.

                                            7
20. J. S. Bell, in Determinism, Causality, and Particles, p. 17. Edited by M. Flato et al.
    Dordrecht-Holland, D. Reidel (1976).
21. P. H. Eberhard, Nuovo Cimento B46, 392 (1978).
22. K. Popper, Found. Phys. 12, 971 (1982).
