D ated January 1924

                                                                        5
                                     THE Q U A N T U M THEORY
                                               OF R A D IA T I O N


                              N. BOHR, H.A. KRAMERS ANDJ. C. SLATER




Introduction
In the attempts to give a theoretical interpretation of the mechanism
of interaction between radiation and matter, two apparently contra­
dictory aspects of this mechanism have been disclosed. On the one
hand, the phenomena of interference, on which the action of all optical
instruments essentially depends, claim an aspect of continuity of the
same character as that involved in the wave theory of light, especially
developed on the basis of the laws of classical electrodynamics. On
the other hand, the exchange of energy and momentum between
matter and radiation, on which the observation of optical phenomena
ultimately depends, claims essentially discontinuous features. These
have even led to the introduction of the theory of light-quanta, which
in its most extreme form denies the wave constitution of light. At the
present state of science it does not seem possible to avoid the formal
character of the quantum theory which is shown by the fact that the
interpretation of atomic phenomena does not involve a description
of the mechanism of the discontinuous processes, which in the quantum
theory of spectra are designated as transitions between stationary
states of the atom. On the correspondence principle it seems never­
theless possible, as it will be attempted to show in this paper, to
arrive at a consistent description of optical phenomena by connecting
the discontinuous effects occurring in atoms with the continuous
radiation field in a somewhat different manner from what is usually
done. The essentially new assumption introduced in §2 that the atom,
even before a process of transition between two stationary states takes
Editor's note. This paper was published as Phil. Mag. [6] 47 (1924) 785-802.
It was signed 'Institute for Theoretical Physics, Copenhagen, January 1924.’
A German version appeared in Zs. f. Phys. 24 (1924) 69-87.
160              N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R   s
place, is capable of communication with distant atoms through a
virtual radiation field, is due to Slater.* Originally his endeavour
was in this way to obtain a harmony between the physical pictures
of the electrodynamical theory of light and the theory of light-quanta
by coupling transitions of emission and absorption of communicating
atoms together in pairs. It was pointed out by Kramers, however,
that instead of suggesting an intimate coupling between these pro­
cesses, the idea just mentioned leads rather to the assumption of a
greater independence between transition processes in distant atoms
than hitherto perceived. The present paper is the result of a mutual
discussion between the authors concerning the possible importance
of these assumptions for the elaboration of the quantum theory, and
may in various respects be considered as a supplement to the first
part of a recent treatise by Bohr, dealing with the principles of the
quantum theory, in which several of the problems dealt with here are
treated more fully.j-

1. Principles of the quantum theory
The electromagnetic theory of light not only gives a wonderfully
adequate picture of the propagation of radiation through free space,
but has also to a wide extent shown itself adapted for the inter­
pretation of the phenomena connected with the interaction of radiation
and matter. Thus a general description of the phenomena of emission,
absorption, refraction, scattering, and dispersion of light may be
obtained on the assumption that the atoms contain electrified particles
which can perform harmonic oscillations round positions of stable
equilibrium, and which will exchange energy and momentum with the
radiation fields according to the classical laws of electrodynamics. On
the other hand, it is well known that these phenomena exhibit a
number of features which are contradictory to the consequences of
the classical electrodynamical theory. The first phenomenon where
such contradictions were firmly established was the law of tempera-

* J. C. Slater, Nature, March 1st, 1924, p. 307.
f N. Bohr, Zs. f. Phys. 13 (1923) 117. An English translation has recently
appeared in the Publications of the Cambridge Philosophical Society under the
title: ‘
       On the application of the Quantum Theory to atomic structure. I: The
fundamental postulates of the quantum theory.’This treatise, which also
contains more detailed references to the literature, will in the following be
quoted as ‘ P.Q.T.’
5                T H E QU AN TU M T H E O R Y OF R A D IA T IO N     161
ture radiation. Starting from the classical conception of emission and
absorption of radiation by a particle performing harmonic oscillations,
Planck found that, in order to obtain agreement with the experiments
on temperature radiation, it was necessary to introduce the auxiliary
assumption that in a statistical distribution only certain states of the
oscillating particles have to be taken into account. For these dis­
tinguished states the energy was found to be equal to a multiple of the
quantum hw, where to is the natural frequency of the oscillator and h
is a universal constant. Independent of radiation phenomena, this
result obtained, as Einstein pointed out, a direct support from experi­
ments on the specific heat of solids. At the same time, this author put
forward his well-known theory of ‘     light-quanta’
                                                   , according to which
radiation should not be propagated through space as continuous
trains of waves in the classical theory of light, but as entities, each
of which contains the energy hv, concentrated in a minute volume,
where h is Planck’   s constant and v the quantity which in the classical
picture is described as the number of waves passing in unit time.
Although the great heuristic value of this hypothesis is shown by the
confirmation of Einstein’    s predictions concerning the photoelectric
phenomenon, still the theory of light-quanta can obviously not be
considered as a satisfactory solution of the problem of light propaga­
tion. This is clear even from the fact that the radiation ‘     frequency’
v appearing in the theory is defined by experiments on interference
phenomena which apparently demand for their interpretation a wave
constitution of light.
   In spite of the fundamental difficulties involved in the ideas of the
quantum theory, it has nevertheless been possible to a certain extent
to apply these conceptions, combined with information on the structure
of the atom derived from other sources, to the interpretation of the
results of investigations of the emission and absorption spectra of the
elements. This interpretation is based on the fundamental postulate:
that an atom possesses a number of distinguished states, the so-called
‘stationary states’   , which are supposed to possess a remarkable
stability, for which no interpretation can be derived from the concepts
of classical electrodynamics. This stability comes to light in the circum­
stance that any change of the state of the atom must consist of a
complete process of transition from one of these stationary states to
another. The postulate obtains a connection with optical phenomena
through the further assumption that when a transition between two
                 N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R    5

stationary states is accompanied by emission of radiation, this consists
of a train of harmonic waves, whose frequency is given by the relation
                                  hv = E\ — E%,                             (1)
where E\ and E 2 are the values of the energy of the atom in the
initial and in the final state of the process respectively. Inversely it is
assumed that the reversed process of transition can take place by
illumination with light with this same frequency. The applicability
of these assumptions to the interpretation of the spectra of the elements
is essentially due to the fact that it has been found possible in many
cases to fix the energy in the stationary states of an isolated atom
by means of simple rules referring to motions which with a high
approximation obey the ordinary laws of electrodynamics (P.Q.T.,
Ch. I, §2). The concepts of this theory, however, do not allow us to
describe the details of the mechanism underlying the process of
transition between the various stationary states.
   At the present state of science it seems necessary, as regards the
occurrence of transition processes, to content ourselves with con­
siderations of probability. Such considerations have been introduced
by Einstein,* who has shown how a remarkably simple deduction
of Planck’ s law of temperature radiation can be obtained by assuming
that an atom in a given stationary state may possess a certain proba­
bility of a ‘spontaneous’transition in unit time to a stationary state
of smaller energy content, and that in addition an atom, by illumina­
tion with external radiation of suitable frequency, may acquire a
certain probability of performing an ‘    induced’transition to another
stationary state with higher or smaller energy content. In connexion
with the conditions of thermal equilibrium between radiation and
matter, Einstein further arrived at the conclusion that the exchange
of energy by the transition process is accompanied by an exchange
of momentum of the amount hv/c, just as would be the case if the
transition were accompanied by the starting or stopping of a small
 entity moving with the velocity of light c and containing the energy hv.
 He concluded that the direction of this momentum for the induced
transitions is the same as the direction of propagation of the illumi­
nating light-waves, but that for the spontaneous transitions the
 direction of the impulse is distributed according to probability laws.
These results, which were considered as an argument for ascribing a
* A. Einstein, Phys. Zs. 18 (1917) 121.
5                 T H E QU A N TU M T H E O R Y OF R A D IA T IO N     163

certain physical reality to the theory of light-quanta, have recently
found an important application in explaining the remarkable pheno­
mena of the change of wave-length of radiation scattered by free
electrons brought to light by A. H. Compton’          s * investigation on
X-ray scattering. The application of probability considerations to
the problem of temperature equilibrium between free electrons and
radiation suggested by this discovery has recently been successfully
treated by Pauli, f and the formal analogy of his results with the laws
governing transition processes between stationary states of atoms has
been emphasized by Einstein and Ehrenfest.**
   In spite of the fundamental departure of the quantum theory of
atomic processes from a picture based on the ordinary concepts of
electrodynamics, the former must in a certain sense ultimately appear
as a natural generalization of the latter. This is evident from the
condition that in the limit, where we consider processes which depend
on the statistical behaviour of a large number of atoms, and which
involve stationary states where the difference between neighbouring
stationary states is comparatively little, the classical theory leads to
conclusions in agreement with the experiments. In the case of emission
and absorption of spectral lines, the connexion between the two
theories has led to the establishment of the ‘   correspondence principle’ ,
which postulates a general conjugation of each of the various possible
transitions between stationary states with one of the harmonic oscil­
lation components in which the electrical moment of the atom,
considered as a function of the time, can be resolved (P.Q.T., Ch. II,
 §2). This principle has afforded a basis for an estimation of probabilities
 of transition, and thereby for bringing the problem of intensities and
 polarization of spectral lines in close connexion with the motion of the
 electrons in the atom.
    The correspondence principle has led to comparing the reaction
 of an atom on a field of radiation with the reaction on such a field
 which, according to the classical theory of electrodynamics, should be
 expected from a set of ‘  virtual’harmonic oscillators with frequencies
 equal to those determined by the equation (1) for the various possible
 transitions between stationary states (P.Q.T., Ch. Ill, §3). Such a
* A. H. Compton, Phys. Rev. 21 (1923) 483. See also P. Debye, Phys. Zs. 24
(1923) 161.
t W. Pauli, Zs. f. Phys. 18 (1923) 272.
** A. Einstein and P. Ehrenfest, Zs. f. Phys. 14 (1923) 301.
                 N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R    5

picture has been used by Ladenburg * in an attempt to connect the
experimental results on dispersion quantitatively with considerations
on the probability of transitions between stationary states. Also in the
phenomenon of interaction between free electrons and radiation, the
possibility of applying similar considerations is suggested by the
analogy, emphasized by Compton, between the change of wave-length
of the scattered rays and the classical Doppler effect of radiation
from a moving source.
   Although the correspondence principle makes it possible through
the estimation of probabilities of transition to draw conclusions about
the mean time which an atom remains in a given stationary state,
great difficulties have been involved in the problem of the time-
interval in which emission of radiation connected with the transition
takes place. In fact, together with other well-known paradoxes of the
quantum theory, the latter difficulty has strengthened the doubt,
expressed from various sides, f whether the detailed interpretation of
the interaction between matter and radiation can be given at all in
terms of a causal description in space and time of the kind hitherto
used for the interpretation of natural phenomena (P.Q.T., Ch. Ill, §1).
Without in any way removing the formal character of the theory, it
nevertheless appears, as mentioned in the introduction, that a definite
advance as regards the interpretation of the observable radiation
phenomena may be made by connecting these phenomena with the
stationary states and the transitions between them in a way somewhat
different from that hitherto followed.

2. Radiation and transition processes
We will assume that a given atom in a certain stationary state will
communicate continually with other atoms through a time-spatial
mechanism which is virtually equivalent with the field of radiation
which on the classical theory would originate from the virtual harmonic
oscillators corresponding with the various possible transitions to other
stationary states. Further, we will assume that the occurrence of
transition processes for the given atom itself, as well as for the other
atoms with which it is in mutual communication, is connected with
* R. Ladeaburg, Zs. f. Phys. 4 (1921) 451. See also R. Ladenburg and P. Reicbe,
Naturwiss. 11 (1923) 584.
f Such a view has perhaps for the first time been clearly expressed by O. W.
Richardson, ‘
            The Electron Theory of Matter,’2nd ed. (Cambridge 1916) p. 507.
                                                                       165

this mechanism by probability laws which are analogous to those
which in Einstein’  s theory hold for the induced transitions between
stationary states when illuminated by radiation. On the one hand,
the transitions which in this theory are designated as spontaneous are,
on our view, considered as induced by the virtual field of radiation
which is connected with the virtual harmonic oscillators conjugated
with the motion of the atom itself. On the other hand, the induced
transitions of Einstein’ s theory occur in consequence of the virtual
radiation in the surrounding space due to other atoms.
  While these assumptions do not involve any change in the connexion
between the structure of the atom and the frequency, intensity, and
polarization of the spectral lines derived by means of the relation (1)
and of the correspondence principle, they lead to a picture as regards
the time-spatial occurrence of the various transition processes on
which the observations of the optical phenomena ultimately depend
which in an essential respect differs from the usual concepts. In fact,
the occurrence of a certain transition in a given atom will depend on
the initial stationary state of this atom itself and on the states of
the atoms with which it is in communication through the virtual
radiation field, but not on the occurrence of transition processes in
the latter atoms.
  On the one hand it will be seen that our view, in the limit where
successive stationary states differ only little from each other, leads to
a connexion between the virtual radiation field and the motion of the
particles in the atom which gradually merges into that claimed by
the classical radiation theory. In fact neither the motion nor the
constitution of the radiation field will in this limit undergo essential
changes through the transitions between stationary states. As regards
the occurrence of transitions, which is the essential feature of the
quantum theory, we abandon on the other hand any attempt at a
causal connexion between the transitions in distant atoms, and
especially a direct application of the principles of conservation of
energy and momentum, so characteristic for the classical theories.
The application of these principles to the interaction between individual
atomic systems is, on our view, limited to interactions which take place
when the atoms are so close that the forces which would be connected
with the radiation field on the classical theory are small compared with
the conservative parts of the fields of force originating from the electric
charges in the atom. Interactions of this type, which may be termed
                  N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R       5

‘collisions’
           , offer, as is well known, remarkable illustrations of the
stability of stationary states postulated in the quantum theory. In
fact, an analysis of the experimental results based on the theory of
conservation of energy and momentum is in agreement with the view
that the colliding atoms before as well as after the process will always
find themselves in stationary states (P.Q.T., Ch. I, §4)*. By interaction
between atoms at greater distances from each other, where according
to the classical theory of radiation there would be no question of
simultaneous mutual action, we shall assume an independence of the
individual transition processes, which stands in striking contrast to
the classical claim of conservation of energy and momentum. Thus
we assume that an induced transition in an atom is not directly caused
by a transition in a distant atom for which the energy difference
between the initial and the final stationary state is the same. On the
contrary, an atom which has contributed to the induction of a certain
transition in a distant atom through the virtual radiation field con­
jugated with the virtual harmonic oscillator corresponding with one
of the possible transitions to other stationary states, may nevertheless
itself ultimately perform another of these transitions.
   At present there is unfortunately no experimental evidence at hand
which allows to test these ideas, but it may be emphasized that the
degree of independence of the transition processes assumed here would

* These considerations hold obviously only in so far as the radiation connected
with the collisions can be neglected. Although in many cases the energy of this
radiation is very small, its occurrence might be of essential importance. This
has been emphasized by Franck in connexion with the explanation of Ram-
sauer’s important results regarding collisions between atoms and slow electrons
[Ann. d. Phys. Leipzig 64 (1922) 513; 66 (1922) 546], from which it seems to
follow that in certain cases the electron can pass freely through the atom,
without being influenced by its presence. In fact, if in these ‘collisions’a change
in the motion of the electron actually took place, the classical theory would
involve so large a radiation, that a rational conjugation of the radiation with the
possible transition processes, as claimed by the correspondence principle, could
hardly be established [compare F. Hund, Zs. f. Phys. 13 (1923) 241]. On the
view presented in this paper, such an explanation might on the one hand be
regarded as the more natural, since the origin of radiation is not directly sought
in the occurrence of transitions but in the motion of the electron. On the other
hand, it must be remembered that we are here dealing with a case where, on
account of the large magnitude of the classical reaction of radiation, the theory
does not allow a sharp distinction between stationary motion and transition
processes.
s                T H E Q U A N TU M T H E O R Y OF R A D IA T IO N   167

seem the only consistent way of describing the interaction between
radiation and atoms by a theory involving probability considerations.
This independence reduces not only conservation of energy to a
statistical law, but also conservation of momentum. Just as we
assume that any transition process induced by radiation is accompanied
by a change of energy of the atom of the amount hv, we shall assume,
following Einstein, that any such process is also accompanied by a
change of momentum of the atom of an amount hv/c. If the transition
is induced by virtual radiation fields from distant atoms, the direction
of this momentum is the same as that of the wave propagation in this
virtual field. In case of a transition by its own virtual radiation, we
shall naturally assume that the change of momentum is distributed
according to probability laws in such a way that changes of momentum
due to the transitions in other atoms are statistically compensated for
any direction in space.
   The cause of the observed statistical conservation of energy and
momentum we shall not seek in any departure from the electrodynamic
theory of light as regards the laws of propagation of radiation in free
space, but in the peculiarities of the interaction between the virtual
field of radiation and the illuminated atoms. In fact, we shall assume
that these atoms will act as secondary sources of virtual wave radiation
which interferes with the incident radiation. If the frequency of the
incident waves coincides closely with the frequency of one of the
virtual harmonic oscillators corresponding to the various possible
transitions, the amplitudes of the secondary waves will be especially
large, and these waves will possess such phase relations with the
incident waves that they will diminish or augment the intensity of the
virtual radiation field, and thereby weaken or strengthen its power of
inducing transitions in other atoms. Whether it is a diminishing or an
augmentation of the intensity which takes place, will depend on
whether the virtual harmonic oscillator, which is called into play by
the incident radiation, corresponds with a transition by which the
energy of the atom is increased or diminished respectively. It will be
seen that this view is closely related to the ideas which led Einstein
to introduce probabilities of two kinds of induced transitions between
stationary states corresponding with an increase or decrease of the
 energy of the atom respectively. In spite of the time-spatial separation
 of the processes of absorption and emission of radiation characteristic
 for the quantum theory, we may nevertheless expect, on our view,
168             N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R   5

a far-reaching analogy with the classical theory of electrodynamics
as regards the interaction of the virtual radiation field and the virtual
harmonic oscillators conjugated with the motion of the atom. It
seems actually possible, guided by this analogy, to establish a con­
sistent and fairly complete description of the general optical pheno­
mena accompanying the propagation of light through a material
medium, which accounts at the same time for the close connexion
of the phenomena with the spectra of the atoms of the medium.

3. Capacity of interference of spectral lines
Before we enter more closely on the general problem of the reaction
of atoms on a virtual radiation field, responsible for the phenomena
accompanying the propagation of light through material media, we
shall here briefly consider the properties of the field originating from
a single atom, as far as they are connected with the capacity of inter­
ference of light from one and the same source. The constitution of this
field must obviously not be sought in the peculiarities of the transition
processes themselves, the duration of which we shall assume at any
rate not to be large compared with the period of the corresponding
harmonic component in the motion of the atom. These processes will,
on our view, simply mark the termination of the time-interval in
which the atom will be able to communicate with other atoms through
the corresponding virtual oscillator. An upper limit of the capacity
of interference, however, will clearly be given by the mean time
interval in which the atom remains in the stationary state representing
the initial state of the transition under consideration. The estimation
of the time of duration pf states based on the correspondence principle
has obtained a general confirmation from the well-known beautiful
experiments on the duration of the luminosity of high speed atoms
emerging from a luminescent discharge into a high vacuum. (Compare
P.Q.T., Ch. II, §4.) On the present point of view these experiments
obtain a very simple interpretation. In fact it will be seen that on
this view the variation of the luminosity along the path of the atoms
will not depend on the peculiarity of the transitions, but only on the
relative number of atoms in the various stationary states in the
different parts of the path. If all the emerging atoms have the same
speed and are initially in the same state, we must thus expect that
for any spectral line conjugated with a transition from this state the
luminosity will decrease exponentially along the path at one and the
5

same rate. At present the experimental material at hand is hardly
sufficient to test these considerations.
   When we ask for the capacity of interference of spectral lines,
determined by optical apparatus, the mean time of duration of the
stationary states will certainly constitute an upper limit for this
capacity, but it must be remembered that the sharpness of a given
spectral line which is due to the statistical result of the action from a
large number of atoms will depend not only on the lengths of the
individual wave trains terminated by the transition processes, but
clearly also on any uncertainty in the definition of the frequency of
these waves. In view of the way this frequency through relation (1) is
related to the energy in the stationary states, it is of interest to note
that the above-mentioned upper limit of capacity of interference may
be brought in close connexion with the limit of definition of the
motion and of the energy in the stationary states. In fact, the postulate
of the stability of stationary states imposes an a priori limit to the
accuracy with which the motion in these states can be described by
means of classical electrodynamics, a limit which on our picture is
directly involved in the assumption that the virtual radiation field
is not accompanied by a continuous change in the motion of the atom,
but only acts by its induction of transitions involving finite changes
of the energy and the momentum of the atom (P.Q.T., Ch. II, §4).
In the limiting region where the motions in the two stationary states
involved in the transition process differ only comparatively little
from each other, the upper limit of capacity of interference of the
individual wave trains coincides with the limit of definition of the
frequency of the radiation determined by (1), if the influence of the
lack of definition of the energy in the two states is treated as indepen­
dent errors. In the general case where the motions in these states may
differ considerably from each other, the upper limit of the capacity
of interference of the wave trains is closely related with the definition
of the motion in the stationary state which forms the starting point
of the transition process. Also here we may, however, expect that the
observable sharpness of the spectral lines will be determined according
to relation (1) by adding the effect of any possible lack of definition
of the energy in the stationary state terminating the transition process
to the effect of the lack of definition in the starting state in a similar
way as independent errors. Just this influence of the lack of definition
of both stationary states on the sharpness of a spectral line makes it
170             N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R   5

possible to ensure the reciprocity which will exist between the con­
stitution of a line when appearing in an emission and in an absorption
spectrum, and which is claimed by the condition for thermal equi­
librium expressed by Kirchhoff’      s law. In this connexion it may be
remembered how the apparent deviations from this law exhibited by
the remarkable difference often shown by the structure of the emission
and the absorption spectra of an element as regards the number of
lines present are directly accounted for on the quantum theory when
account is taken of the difference in the statistical distributions of
the atoms over the various stationary states under different external
conditions.
   A problem closely related to the sharpness of spectral lines origi­
nating from atoms under constant external conditions, is the problem
of the spectrum to be expected from atoms under the influence of
external forces which vary considerably within a time-interval of the
same order of magnitude as the mean duration of the stationary states.
Such a problem is met with in certain of the experiments by Stark
on the influence of electric fields on spectral lines. In these experiments
the emitting atoms move with large velocities, and the time-intervals
in which they pass between two points where the intensity of the
electric field differs very much, are only a small fraction of the mean
time of.duration of the stationary states connected with the in­
vestigated spectral lines. Nevertheless Stark found that, except for
a Doppler effect of the usual kind, the radiation from the moving
 atoms was influenced by the electric field at any point of the path in
the same way as the radiation from resting atoms subject to the
 constant action of the field at this point. While, as emphasized by
various authors,* the intferpretation of this result obviously presents
 difficulty on the usual quantum theory description of the connexion
 between radiation and transition processes, it is clear that Stark’       s
 results are in conformity with the picture adopted in this paper. In
 fact, during the passing of the atoms through the field, the motion
 in the stationary states changes in a continuous way, and in conse­
 quence also the virtual harmonic oscillators corresponding with the
 possible transitions. The effect of the virtual radiation field originating
 from the moving atoms will therefore not be different from that
 which would occur if the atoms along their whole path had moved in
* Compare K. Forsterling, Zs. f. Phys. 10 (1922) 387; A. J. Dempster, Astro-
phys. Journ. 57 (1923) 193.
5                 T H E QU AN TU M T H E O R Y OF R A D IA T IO N     171

a field of constant intensity, at any rate if - as in Stark’
                                                           s experiments -
the radiation originating from the other parts of their paths is pre­
vented from reaching those parts of the apparatus on which the
observation of the phenomenon depends. In a problem of this kind it
will also be seen how a far reaching reciprocity in the observable
phenomena of emission and absorption is ensured on account of the
symmetry exhibited by our picture as regards the coupling of the
radiation field with the transition processes in the one or in the other
direction.

4. Quantum theory of spectra and optical phenomena
Although on the quantum theory the observation of the optical
phenomena ultimately depends on discontinuous transition processes,
an adequate interpretation of these phenomena must, as already
emphasized in the introduction, nevertheless involve an element of
continuity similar to that exhibited by the classical electrodynamical
theory of the propagation of light through material media. On this
theory the phenomena of reflexion, refraction, and dispersion are
attributed to a scattering of light by the atom due to the forced
vibratior in the individual electric particles, set up by the electro­
magnetic forces of the radiation field. The postulate of the stability
of stationary states might at first sight seem to involve a fundamental
difficulty on this point. The contrast, however, was to a certain extent
bridged over by the correspondence principle, which, as mentioned
in §1, led to comparing the reaction of an atom on a radiation field
with the scattering which, according to the classical theory, would
arise from a set of virtual harmonic oscillators conjugated with the
various possible transitions. It must still be remembered that the
analogy between the classical theory and the quantum theory as
formulated through the correspondence principle is of an essentially
formal character, which is especially illustrated by the fact that on
the quantum theory the absorption and emission of radiation are
coupled to different processes of transition, and thereby to different
virtual oscillators. Just this point, however, which is so essential for
the interpretation of the experimental results on emission and ab­
sorption spectra, seems to afford a guidance as regards the way in
which the scattering phenomena are related with the activity of the
 virtual oscillators concerning emission and absorption of radiation.
 In a later paper it is hoped to show how on the present view a quanti-
                 N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R     5

tative theory of dispersion resembling Ladenburg’     s theory can be
established.* Here we shall confine ourselves to emphasizing once
more the continuous character of the optical phenomena, which
seemingly does not permit an interpretation based on a simple causal
connexion with transition processes in the propagating medium.
   An instructive example of these considerations is offered by the
experiments on absorption spectra. In fact, the pronounced absorption
by monatomic vapours for light of frequencies coinciding with certain
lines in the emission spectra of the atoms strictly cannot be said,
as often done for brevity, to be caused by the transition processes
which take place in the atoms of the vapour induced by wave trains
in the incident radiation possessing the frequencies of the absorption
lines. The appearance of these lines in the spectroscope is due to the
decrease of the intensity of the incident waves in consequence of the
peculiarities of the secondary spherical wavelets set up by each of
the illuminated atoms, while the induced transitions appear only as
an accompanying effect by which a statistical conservation of energy
is ensured. The presence of the secondary coherent wave-trains is at
the same time responsible for the anomalous dispersion connected
with the absorption lines, and is especially clearly shown by the
phenomenon, discovered by W oodf, of selective reflexion from the
wall of a vessel containing metallic vapour under sufficiently high
pressure. The occurrence of included transitions between stationary
states is on the other hand directly observed in the fluorescent radi­
ation, which for an essential part originates from the presence of a
small number of atoms which through the illumination have been
transferred to a stationary state of higher energy. As is well known,
the fluorescent radiation can be suppressed through the admixture
of foreign gases. As regards the part played by atoms in the higher
stationary states this phenomenon is explained by collisions which
cause a considerable increase of the probability of the atoms to return
into their normal state. At the same time any part of the fluorescent
radiation due to the coherent wavelets will, through the admixture
of foreign gases, just as the phenomena of absorption, dispersion, and
reflexion, undergo such changes as can be brought in connexion with


* Note added during the proof. The outline of such a theory is briefly described
by Kramers in a letter to ‘Nature’published in April, 1925.
f R. W. Wood, Phil. Mag. 23 (1915) 689.
5                 T H E QU AN TU M T H E O R Y OF R A D IA T IO N     173
a broadening of the spectral lines*. It will be seen that a view on
absorption phenomena differing essentially from that just described
can hardly be maintained, if it can be shown that the selective ab­
sorption of spectral lines is a phenomenon qualitatively independent
of the intensity of the source of radiation, in a similar way to what
has already been found to be the case for the usual phenomena of
reflexion and refraction, whose transitions in the medium do not
occur to a similar extent (compare P.Q.T., Ch. Ill, §3).
   Another interesting example is offered by the theory of the scattering
of light by free electrons. As has been shown by Compton by means of
reflexion of X-rays from crystals, this scattering is accompanied by a
change of frequency, different in different directions, and corre­
sponding with the constitution of the radiation which on the classical
theory would be emitted by an imaginary moving source. As mention­
ed, Compton has reached a formal interpretation of this effect on the
theory of light-quanta by assuming that the electron may take up a
quantum of the incident light and simultaneously re-emit a light-
quantum in some other direction. By this process the electron acquires
a velocity in a certain direction, which is determined, just as the
frequency of the re-emitted light, by the laws of conservation of
energy and momentum, an energy of hv and a momentum hv/c being
ascribed to each light-quantum. In contrast to this picture, the
scattering of the radiation by the electrons is, on our view, considered
as a continuous phenomenon to which each of the illuminated electrons
contributes through the emission of coherent secondary wavelets.
Thereby the incident virtual radiation gives rise to a reaction from
each electron, similar to that to be expected on the classical theory
from an electron moving with a velocity coinciding with that of the
above-mentioned imaginary source and performing forced oscillations
under the influence of the radiation field. That in this case the virtual
oscillator moves with a velocity different from that of the illuminated
electrons themselves is certainly a feature strikingly unfamiliar to the
classical conceptions. In view of the fundamental departures from
the classical space-time description, involved in the very idea of virtual
oscillators, it seems at the present state of science hardly justifiable
to reject a formal interpretation as that under consideration as in­
adequate. On the contrary, such an interpretation seems unavoidable
in order to account for the effects observed, the description of which
* See for instancy, Chr. Fuchtbauer and G. Joos, Phys. Zs. 23 (1922) 73.
                 N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R      5

involves the wave-concept of radiation in an essential way. At the
same time, however, we shall assume, just as in Compton’        s theory,
that the illuminated electron possesses a certain probability of taking
up in unit time a finite amount of momentum in any given direction.
By this effect, which in the quantum theory takes the place of the
continuous transfer of momentum to the electrons which on the
classical theory would accompany a scattering of radiation of the
type described, a statistical conservation of momentum is secured in
a way quite analogous to the statistical conservation of energy in the
phenomena of absorption of light discussed above. In fact, the laws of
probability for the exchange of momentum by interaction of free
electrons and radiation derived by Pauli are essentially analogous to
the laws governing transition processes between well-defined states
of an atomic system. Especially the considerations of Einstein and
Ehrenfest, referred to in §1, are suited to bring out this analogy.
    A problem similar to that of the scattering of light by free electrons
 is presented by the scattering of light by an atom, even in the case
 where the frequency of the radiation is not large enough to induce
 transitions by which an electron is wholly removed from the atom.
 In fact, in order to secure statistical conservation of momentum, we
 must, as emphasized by various authors,* assume the occurrence of
 transition processes by which the momentum of the scattering atom
 changes by finite amounts without, however, the relative motion of
 the particles of the atom being changed, as in transition processes of
 the usual type considered in the spectral theory. It will also be seen,
 on our picture, that transition processes of the type mentioned will
 be closely connected with the scattering phenomena, in a way analo­
 gous with the connexion of the spectral phenomena with the transition
 processes by which the internal motion of the atom undergoes a change.
 Due to the large mass of the atomic nucleus the velocity change which
 the atom undergoes by these transitions is so small, that it will not
 have a perceptible effect on the energy of the atom and the frequency
 of the scattered radiation. Nevertheless, it is of principal importance
 that the transference of momentum is a discontinuous process, while
 the scattering itself is an essentially continuous phenomenon, in which
  all the illuminated atoms take part, independent of the intensity of the
 incident light. The discontinuous changes in momentum of the atoms,
  however, are the cause of the observable reactions on the atoms
* W. Pauli, Zs. f. Phys. 18 (1923) 272; A. Smekal, Naturwissensch. 11 (1923) 875.
5                 T H E QU AN TU M T H E O R Y OF R A D IA T IO N    175

described as radiation pressure. This view fulfils clearly the conditions
for thermal equilibrium between a (virtual) radiation field and a
reflecting surface, derived by Einstein * and considered as an argument
for the light-quantum theory. At the same time it needs hardly be
emphasized that it is also consistent with the apparent continuity
exhibited by actual observations on radiation pressure. In fact, if we
consider a solid, a change of hvjc in its total momentum will be totally
imperceptible, and for visible light even vanishingly small compared
with the irregular changes of this momentum of a body in thermal
equilibrium with the surroundings. In the discussion of the actual
experiments it may, however, be noted at the same time, that the
frequency of the occurrence of such processes may often be so large
that the problem arises whether the time involved in the transitions
themselves can be neglected, or, in other words, whether the limit has
been reached inside which the formulation of the principles of the
quantum theory can be maintained (compare P.Q.T., Ch. II, §5).
   The last considerations may illustrate how our picture of optical
phenomena offers a natural connexion with the ordinary continuous
description of macroscopic phenomena for the interpretation of which
Maxwell’  s theory has shown itself so wonderfully adapted. The
advantage in this respect of the present formulation of the principles
of the quantum theory over the usual representation of this theory
will perhaps be still more clearly illustrated if we consider the pheno­
menon of emission of electromagnetic waves, say from an antenna as
used in wireless telegraphy. In this case no adequate description of the
phenomenon is offered on the picture of emission of radiation during
separate successive transition processes between imaginary stationary
states of the antenna. In fact, when the smallness of the energy
changes by the transitions, and the magnitude of the energy radiation
from the antenna per unit time, are taken into account, it will be seen
that the duration of the individual transition processes can only be
 an exceedingly small fraction of the period of oscillation of the e-
lectricity in the antenna, so that there would be no justification in
 describing the result of one of these processes as the emission of a
 train of waves of this period. On the present view, however, we will
 describe the action of the oscillation of the electricity in the antenna
 as producing a (virtual) radiation field which through probability
 laws again induces changes in the motion of the electrons which may
* A. Einstein, Phys. Zs. 10 (1909) 817.
176              N. B O H R , H. A. K R A M E R S A N D J. C. S L A T E R   5

be regarded as continuous. In fact, even if a distinction between
different energy steps hv could be kept upright, the size of these steps
would be quite negligible compared with the energy associated with
the antenna. It will in this connexion be observed that the emphasizing
of the ‘virtual’character of the radiation field, which at the present
state of science seems so essential for an adequate description of
atomic phenomena, automatically loses its importance in a limiting
case like that just considered, where the field, as regards its observable
interaction with matter, is endowed with all the attributes of an
electromagnetic field in classical electrodynamics.


Related papers
5a J. C. Slater, Radiation and Atoms. Nature 113 (1924) 307.
5b H. Geiger und W. Bothe, Vber das Wesen des Comptoneffektes; ein experi-
menteller Beitrag zur Theorie der Strahlung. Z. Phys. 32 (1925) 639, received
April 25, 1925.
