                                7
          DISCUSSION W IT H E IN S T E IN ON
           EPIST EM O LO G IC A L PRO BLEM S
                IN A TO M IC PHYSICS

         H E N invited by the Editor of the series, “Living Philos­
W        ophers,” to write an article for this volume in which
<ontemporary scientists are honouring the epoch-making con-
li ibutions of Albert Einstein to the progress of natural philos-
"phy and are acknowledging the indebtedness of our whole
i'<-Deration for the guidance his genius has given us, I thought
much of the best way of explaining how much I owe to him for
inspiration. In this connection, the many occasions through the
v<irs on which I had the privilege to discuss with Einstein
rpisfemological problems raised by the modern development of
atomic physics have come back vividly to my mind and I have
I' It that I could hardly attempt anything better than to give
•ui account of these discussions which, even if no complete con-
  >1(1 has so far been obtained, have been of greatest value and
•.tunulus to me. I hope also that the account may convey to
wider circles an impression of how essential the open-minded
<xi hange of ideas has been for the progress in a field where new
• xperience has time after time demanded a reconsideration of
our views.

    I'Yom the very beginning the main point under debate has
I" ( ii the attitude to take to the departure from customary prin-
11ph s of natural philosophy characteristic of the novel develop-
imnt of physics which was initiated in the first year of this cen­
tury by Planck’s discovery of the universal quantum of action.
 I Ins discovery, which revealed a feature of atomicity in the laws
■■I nature going far beyond the old doctrine of the limited divis­
ibility of matter, has indeed taught us that the classical theories
                               201
202                             NIELS BOHR
of physics are idealizations which can be unambiguously applied
only in the limit where all actions involved are large compared
with the quantum. The question at issue has been whether the
renunciation of a causal mode of description of atomic processes
involved in the endeavours to cope with the situation should be
regarded as a temporary departure from ideals to be ultimately
revived or whether we are faced with an irrevocable step to­
wards obtaining the proper harmony between analysis and syn­
thesis of physical phenomena. To describe the background of
our discussions and to bring out as clearly as possible the argu­
ments for the contrasting viewpoints, I have felt it necessary
to go to a certain length in recalling some main features of the
development to which Einstein himself has contributed so
decisively.
   As is well known, it was the intimate relation, elucidated
primarily by Boltzmann, between the laws of thermodynamics
and the statistical regularities exhibited by mechanical systems
with many degrees of freedom, which guided Planck in his in­
genious treatment of the problem of thermal radiation, leading
him to his fundamental discovery. While, in his work, Planck
was principally concerned with considerations of essentially
statistical character and with great caution refrained from de­
finite conclusions as to the extent to which the existence of the
quantum implied a departure from the foundations of mechanics
and electrodynamics, Einstein’s great original contribution to
quantum theory (1905) was just the recognition of how physi­
cal phenomena like the photo-effect may depend directly on in­
dividual quantum effects.1 In these very same years when, in
developing his theory of relativity, Einstein laid a new founda­
tion for physical science, he explored with a most daring spirit
the novel features of atomicity which pointed beyond the whole
framework of classical physics.
   W ith unfailing intuition Einstein thus was led step by step
to the conclusion that any radiation process involves the emis­
sion or absorption of individual light quanta or “ photons” with
energy and momentum
                     E — hv and P = ho                        (0
  ‘ A . Einstein, Ann. d. Phys., zy, 132, (1 9 0 5 ).
              DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                       203
respectively, where h is Planck’s constant, while v and a are the
number of vibrations per unit time and the number of waves per
unit length, respectively. Notwithstanding its fertility, the idea
of the photon implied a quite unforeseen dilemma, since any
simple corpuscular picture of radiation would obviously be ir­
reconcilable with interference effects, which present so essential
an aspect of radiative phenomena, and which can be described
only in terms of a wave picture. The acuteness of the dilemma
is stressed by the fact that the interference effects offer our
only means of defining the concepts of frequency and wave­
length entering into the very expressions for the energy and
momentum of the photon.
   In this situation, there could be no question of attempting a ^<*7
causal analysis of radiative phenomena, but only, by a combined
use of the contrasting pictures, to estimate probabilities for the
occurrence of the individual radiation processes. However, it is
most important to realize that the recourse to probability laws
under such circumstances is essentially different in aim from the
familiar application of statistical considerations as practical
means of accounting for the properties of mechanical systems of
great structural complexity. In fact, in quantum physics we are
presented not with intricacies of this kind, but with the inability
of the classical frame of concepts to comprise the peculiar fea­
ture of indivisibility, or “ individuality,” characterizing the ele­
mentary processes.
   The failure of the theories of classical physics in accounting
for atomic phenomena was further accentuated by the progress
of our knowledge of the structure of atoms. Above all, Ruther­
ford’s discovery of the atomic nucleus (1911) revealed at once
the inadequacy of classical mechanical and electromagnetic con-^,
cepts to explain the inherent stability of the atom. H ere again4^ * ^
the quantum theory offered a clue for the elucidation of the
situation and especially it was found possible to account for the
atomic stability, as well as for the empirical laws governing the
spectra of the elements, by assuming that any reaction of the
atom resulting in a change of its energy involved a complete
transition between two so-called stationary quantum states and
that, in particular, the spectra were emitted by a step-like pro-
    204                           NIELS BOHR
    cess in which each transition is accompanied by the emission of
    a monochromatic light quantum of an energy just equal to that
    of an Einstein photon.
       These ideas, which were soon confirmed by the experiments
    of Franck and H ertz (1914) on the excitation of spectra by
    impact of electrons on atoms, involved a further renunciation
    of the causal mode of description, since evidently the interpreta­
    tion of the spectral laws implies that an atom in an excited state
    in general will have the possibility of transitions with photon
    emission to one or another of its lower energy states. In fact, the
    very idea of stationary states is incompatible with any directive
    for the choice between such transitions and leaves room only for
    the notion of the relative probabilities of the individual transi­
    tion processes. The only guide in estimating such probabilities
    was the so-called correspondence principle which originated in
    the search for the closest possible connection between the statisti­
    cal account of atomic processes and the consequences to be ex­
    pected from classical theory, which should be valid in the limit
    where the actions involved in all stages of the analysis of the
    phenomena are large compared with the universal quantum.
       At that time, no general self-consistent quantum theory was
    yet in sight, but the prevailing attitude may perhaps be illus­
    trated by the following passage from a lecture by the writer
    from 1913:2
    I hope that I have expressed myself sufficiently clearly so that you may
    appreciate the extent to which these considerations conflict with the ad­
    mirably consistent scheme of conceptions which has been rightly termed
    the classical theory of electrodynamics. On the other hand, I have tried
    to convey to you the impression that— just by emphasizing so strongly
P   this conflict— it may also be possible in course of time to establish a cer­
    tain coherence in the new ideas.

       Important progress in the development of quantum theory
    was made by Einstein himself in his famous article on radiative
    equilibrium in 1917/ where he showed that Planck’s law for
    thermal radiation could be simply deduced from assumptions
      1N. Bohr, Fysisk Tidsskrift, 12, 97, (1914). (English version in The
    Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitutiony Cambridge, University Press, 1922),
      *A. Einstein, Phys. Zs.y 18, 121, (1917).
                 DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                                205
conforming with the basic ideas of the quantum theory of atomic
constitution. To this purpose, Einstein formulated general
statistical rules regarding the occurrence of radiative transitions
between stationary states, assuming not only that, when the
atom is exposed to a radiation field, absorption as well as emis­
sion processes will occur with a probability per unit time pro­
portional to the intensity of the irradiation, but that even in the
absence of external disturbances spontaneous emission processes
will take place with a rate corresponding to a certain a 'priori
probability. Regarding the latter point, Einstein emphasized
the fundamental character of the statistical description in a
most suggestive way by drawing attention to the analogy be­
tween the assumptions regarding the occurrence of the spontane-
ous radiative transitions and the well-known laws governing
transformations of radioactive substances.              fa/TViftZft*
   In connection with a thorough examination of the exigencies
of thermodynamics as regards radiation problems, Einstein
stressed the dilemma still further by pointing out that the argu­
mentation implied that any radiation process was “undirected”
in the sense that not only is a momentum corresponding to a
photon with the direction of propagation transferred to an atom
in the absorption process, but that also the emitting atom will
receive an equivalent impulse in the opposite direction, although
there can on the wave picture be no question of a preference for
a single direction in an emission process. Einstein’s own attitude
to such startling conclusions is expressed in a passage at the end
of the article {loc. tit., p. 127 f.), which may be translated as
follows:
These features of the elementary processes would seem to make the
development of a proper quantum treatment of radiation almost unavoid­
able. T he weakness of the theory lies in the fact that, on the one hand,
no closer connection with the wave concepts is obtainable and that, on the
other hand, it leaves to chance (Z ufalV) the time and the direction of the
elementary processes; nevertheless, I have full confidence in the reliability
of the way entered upon.

   When I had the great experience of meeting Einstein for the
first time during a visit to Berlin in 1920, these fundamental
         ■7
         *s
         \
                        206                            NIELS BOHR
             f
                        questions formed the theme of our conversations. The discus­
                        sions, to which I have often reverted in my thoughts, added to
                        all my admiration for Einstein a deep impression of his detached




)
             r          attitude. Certainly, his favoured use of such picturesque phrases
                        as “ghost waves (Gesfensterfelder) guiding the photons” im­
                        plied no tendency to mysticism, but illuminated rather a pro­
                        found humour behind his piercing remarks. Yet, a certain dif­
                        ference in attitude and outlook remained, since, with his mastery
                        for co-ordinating apparently contrasting experience without
r                       abandoning continuity and causality, Einstein was perhaps more
             -i         reluctant to renounce such ideals than someone for whom re­
             *          nunciation in this respect appeared to be the only way open to
                        proceed with the immediate task of co-ordinating the multifari­
                 s.
                        ous evidence regarding atomic phenomena, which accumulated
                        from day to day in the exploration of this new field of knowl­
                        edge.

                           In the following years, during which the atomic problems at­
                        tracted the attention of rapidly increasing circles of physicists,
                        the apparent contradictions inherent in quantum theory were
                        felt ever more acutely. Illustrative of this situation is the dis­
                        cussion raised by the discovery of the Stern-Gerlach effect in
                        1922. On the one hand, this effect gave striking support to the
                        idea of stationary states and in particular to the quantum theory
                        of the Zeeman effect developed by Sommerfeld 5 on the other
                        hand, as exposed so clearly by Einstein and Ehrenfest,4 it pre­
                        sented with unsurmountable difficulties any attempt at forming a
                        picture of the behaviour of atoms in a magnetic field. Similar
                        paradoxes were raised by the discovery by Compton (1924) of
                        the change in wave-length accompanying the scattering of X-rays
                        by electrons. This phenomenon afforded, as is well known, a most
                        direct proof of the adequacy of Einstein’s view regarding the
                        transfer of energy and momentum in radiative processes; at the
    \J                  same time, it was equally clear that no simple picture of a
                        corpuscular collision could offer an exhaustive description of
                      I the  phenomenon. Under the impact of such difficulties, doubts
                           * A. Einstein and P. Ehrenfest, Zs. f. Phys., n , j i , (1922).
       g j ^ kj         w     ^           '

^                  DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                                  207
were for a time entertained even regarding the conservation of
energy and momentum in the individual radiation processes}5
a view, however, which very soon had to be abandoned in face
of more refined experiments bringing out the correlation be­
tween the deflection of the photon and the corresponding elec­
tron recoil.
   The way to the clarification of the situation was, indeed, first
to be paved by the development of a more comprehensive
quantum theory. A first step towards this goal was the recogni­
tion by de Broglie in 1925 that the wave-corpuscle duality was
not confined to the properties of radiation, but was equally
unavoidable in accounting for the behaviour of material par­
ticles. This idea, which was soon convincingly confirmed by ex­
periments on electron interference phenomena, was at once
greeted by Einstein, who had already envisaged the deep-going
analogy between the properties of thermal radiation and of
gases in the so-called degenerate state.8 The new line was pur­
sued with the greatest success by Schrodinger (1926) who, in
particular, showed how the stationary states of atomic systems
could be represented by the proper solutions of a wave-equation
to the establishment of which he wras led by the formal analogy,
originally traced by Hamilton, between mechanical and optical
problems. Still, the paradoxical aspects of quantum theory were
in no way ameliorated, but even emphasized, by the apparent
contradiction between the exigencies of the general superposi­
tion principle of the wave description and the feature of in­
dividuality of the elementary atomic processes.
   At the same time, Heisenberg (1925) had laid the foundation
of a rational quantum mechanics, which was rapidly developed
through important contributions by Born and Jordan as well as
by Dirac. In this theory, a formalism is introduced, in which the
kinematical and dynamical variables of classical mechanics are
replaced by symbols subjected to a non-commutative algebra.
Notwithstanding the renunciation of orbital pictures, Hamilton’s
canonical equations of mechanics are kept unaltered and
    *N. Bohr, H. A. Kramers and J. C. Slater, Phil. Mag.y 47, 785, (1924).
    *A. Einstein, Perl. Ber.f (1924), 261, and (1925), 3 and 18.
208                          NIELS BOHR
Planck’s constant enters only in the rules of commutation
                                     h
                   qp — pq — V—i —                    O)
                                                    23t
holding for any set of conjugate variables q and p. Through a
representation of the symbols by matrices with elements re­
ferring to transitions between stationary states, a quantitative
formulation of the correspondence principle became for the first
time possible. It may here be recalled that an important pre­
liminary step towards this goal was reached through the estab­
lishment, especially by contributions of Kramers, of a quantum
theory of dispersion making basic use of Einstein’s general rules
for the probability of the occurrence of absorption and emission
processes.
   This formalism of quantum mechanics was soon proved by
Schrodinger to give results identical with those obtainable by
the mathematically often more convenient methods of wave
theory, and in the following years general methods were
gradually established for an essentially statistical description of
atomic processes combining the features of individuality and the
requirements of the superposition principle, equally characteristic
of quantum theory. Among the many advances in this period, it
may especially be mentioned that the formalism proved capable
of incorporating the exclusion principle which governs the states
of systems with several electrons, and which already before the
advent of quantum mechanics had been derived by Pauli from
an analysis of atomic spectra. The quantitative comprehension
of a vast amount of empirical evidence could leave no doubt as
to the fertility and adequacy of the quantum-mechanical formal­
ism, but its abstract character gave rise to a widespread feeling of
uneasiness. An elucidation of the situation should, indeed, de­
mand a thorough examination of the very observational prob­
lem in atomic physics.                      {
   This phase of the development was, as is well known,
initiated in 1927 by Heisenberg,7 who pointed out that the
knowledge obtainable of the state of an atomic system will al­
ways involve a peculiar ‘‘indeterminacy.” Thus, any measure­
ment of the position of an electron by means of some device,
  ' W. Heisenbere. Zs. f. Phys., 43, 172, (1927).
                         DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                                   209
      like a microscope, making use of high frequency radiation, will,
      according to the fundamental relations (1 ), be connected with
      a momentum exchange between the electron and the measuring
      agency, which is the greater the more accurate a position meas­
      urement is attempted. In comparing such considerations with
      the exigencies of the quantum-mechanical formalism, Heisen­
      berg called attention to the fact that the commutation rule (2)
      imposes a reciprocal limitation on the fixation of two conjugate
      variables, q and p} expressed by the relation
                                      A? * &p ~ h,                                  (3)
      where Aq and Ap are suitably defined latitudes in the deter­
      mination of these variables. In pointing to the intimate con­
      nection between the statistical description in quantum mechanics
      and the actual possibilities of measurement, this so-called in­
      determinacy relation is, as Heisenberg showed, most important
      for the elucidation of the paradoxes involved in the attempts
      of analyzing quantum effects with reference to customary physi­
      cal pictures.
         The new progress in atomic physics was commented upon
      from various sides at the International Physical Congress held
      in September 1927, at Como in commemoration of Volta. In
      a lecture on that occasion,8 I advocated a point of view con­
      veniently termed “complementarity,” suited to embrace the
      characteristic features of individuality of quantum phenomena,
      and at the same time to clarify the peculiar aspects of the ob­
      servational problem in this field of experience. For this purpose,
      it is decisive to recognize that, however far the phenomena
      transcend the scope of classical physical explanation, the ac­
      count of all evidence must be expressed in classical terms. The
      argument is simply that by the word “experiment” we refer to
      a situation where we can tell others what we have done and
      what we have learned and that, therefore, the account of the
      experimental arrangement and of the results of the observations
      must be expressed in unambiguous language with suitable ap­
      plication of the terminology of classical physics.
         This crucial point, which was to become a main theme of the
         * Atti del Congresso Internazionale dei Fisici, Como, Settembre 1917 (reprinted
 V\   in Nature, 121, 78 and 580, 1928).
■\
210                       NIELS BOHR
discussions reported in the following, implies the impossibility
of any sharp separation between the behaviour of atomic ob­
jects and the interaction with the measuring instruments which
serve to define the conditions under which the phenomena ap­
pear. In fact, the individuality of the typical quantum effects
finds its proper expression in the circumstance that any attempt
of subdividing the phenomena will demand a change in the
experimental arrangement introducing new possibilities of in­
teraction between objects and measuring instruments which in
principle cannot be controlled. Consequently, evidence obtained
under different experimental conditions cannot be compre­
hended within a single picture, but must be regarded as com­
plementary in the sense that only the totality of the phenomena
exhausts the possible information about the objects.
   Under these circumstances an essential element of ambiguity
is involved in ascribing conventional physical attributes to
atomic objects, as is at once evident in the dilemma regarding
the corpuscular and wave properties of electrons and photons,
where we have to do with contrasting pictures, each referring
to an essential aspect of empirical evidence. An illustrative ex­
ample, of how the apparent paradoxes are removed by an ex­
amination of the experimental conditions under which the com­
plementary phenomena appear, is also given by the Compton
effect, the consistent description of which at first had presented
us with such acute difficulties. Thus, any arrangement suited to
study the exchange of energy and momentum between the
electron and the photon must involve a latitude in the space-
time description of the interaction sufficient for the definition of
wave-number and frequency which enter into the relation ( i ) .
Conversely, any attempt of locating the collision between the
photon and the electron more accurately would, on account of
the unavoidable interaction with the fixed scales and clocks de­
fining the space-time reference frame, exclude all closer account
as regards the balance of momentum and energy.
   As stressed in the lecture, an adequate tool for a complement­
ary way of description is offered precisely by the quantum-
mechanical formalism which represents a purely symbolic
scheme permitting only predictions, on lines of the correspond­
ence principle, as to results obtainable under conditions specified
               DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                         211
by means of classical concepts. It must here be remembered that
even in the indeterminacy relation (3) we are dealing with an
implication of the formalism which defies unambiguous expres­
sion in words suited to describe classical physical pictures. Thus,
a sentence like “we cannot know both the momentum and the
position of an atomic object” raises at once questions as to the
physical reality of two such attributes of the object, which can
be answered only by referring to the conditions for the un­
ambiguous use of space-time concepts, on the one hand, and
dynamical conservation laws, on the other hand. W hile the com­
bination of these concepts into a single picture of a causal chain
of events is the essence of classical mechanics, room for regulari­
ties beyond the grasp of such a description is just afforded by
the circumstance that the study of the complementary phenome­
na demands mutually exclusive experimental arrangements.
   The necessity, in atomic physics, of a renewed examination
of the foundation for the unambiguous use of elementary physi­
cal ideas recalls in some way the situation that led Einstein to
his original revision on the basis of all application of space-time
concepts which, by its emphasis on the primordial importance
of the observational problem, has lent such unity to our world
picture. Notwithstanding all novelty of approach, causal de­
scription is upheld in relativity theory within any given frame
of reference, but in quantum theory the uncontrollable inter­
action between the obj ects and the measuring instruments forces
us to a renunciation even in such respect. This recognition, how­
ever, in no way points to any limitation of the scope of the
quantum-mechanical description, and the trend of the whole
argumentation presented in the Como lecture was to show that
the viewpoint of complementarity may be regarded as a ra­
tional generalization of the very ideal of causality.          — 7
                                                                   t

   At the general discussion in Como, we all missed the pre­
sence of Einstein, but soon after, in October 1927, I had the
opportunity to meet him in Brussels at the Fifth Physical Con­
ference of the Solvay Institute, which was devoted to the theme
“ Electrons and Photons.” At the Solvay meetings, Einstein had
from their beginning been a most prominent figure, and several
212                            NIELS BOHR
of us came to the conference with great anticipations to learn
his reaction to the latest stage of the development which, to our
view, went far in clarifying the problems which he had himself
from the outset elicited so ingeniously. During the discussions,
where the whole subject was reviewed by contributions from
many sides and where also the arguments mentioned in the
preceding pages were again presented, Einstein expressed, how­
ever, a deep concern over the extent to which causal account in
space and time was abandoned in quantum mechanics.
   To illustrate his attitude, Einstein referred at one of the ses­
sions9 to the simple example, illustrated by Fig. I, of a particle
(electron or photon) penetrating through a hole or a narrow
slit in a diaphragm placed at some distance before a photo­
graphic plate. On account of the diffraction of the wave con-




                                                             A


                                                            (B)




                                     Fic. i

nected with the motion of the particle and indicated in the figure
by the thin lines, it is under such conditions not possible to
predict with certainty at what point the electron will arrive at
the photographic plate, but only to calculate the probability
that, in an experiment, the electron will be found within any
given region of the plate. The apparent difficulty, in this de­
scription, which Einstein felt so acutely, is the fact that, if in the
experiment the electron is recorded at one point A of the plate,
   ' Institut International de Physique Solvay, Rapport et discussions du j* Con-
seil, Paris 1928, 253ft.
                     DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                         213
     then it is out of the question of ever observing an effect of this
     electron at another point (B ), although the laws of ordinary
     wave propagation offer no room for a correlation between two
     such events.
        Einstein’s attitude gave rise to ardent discussions within a
     small circle, in which Ehrenfest, who through the years had
     been a close friend of us both, took part in a most active and
     helpful way. Surely, we all recognized that, in the above ex­
     ample, the situation presents no analogue to the application of
     statistics in dealing with complicated mechanical systems, but
     rather recalled the background for Einstein’s own early con­
 /
     clusions about the unidirection of individual radiation effects
     which contrasts so strongly with a simple wave picture (cf. p.
     205). The discussions, however, centered on the question of
     whether the quantum-mechanical description exhausted the pos­
     sibilities of accounting for observable phenomena or, as Einstein
     maintained, the analysis could be carried further and, especially,
s#   of whether a fuller description of the phenomena could be ob­
     tained by bringing into consideration the detailed balance of
     energy and momentum in individual processes.
        To explain the trend of Einstein’s arguments, it may be il­




                                                                             -/.HZ
     lustrative here to consider some simple features of the mo­
     mentum and energy balance in connection with the location of
     a particle in space and time. For this purpose, we shall examine
     the simple case of a particle penetrating through a hole in a
     diaphragm without or with a shutter to open and close the hole,
     as indicated in Figs. 2a and 2b, respectively. The equidistant
     parallel lines to the left in the figures indicate the train of plane
     waves corresponding to the state of motion of a particle which,
     before reaching the diaphragm, has a momentum P related to
     the wave-number a by the second of equations (1 ). In accord­
     ance with the diffraction of the waves when passing through the
     hole, the state of motion of the particle to the right of the
     diaphragm is represented by a spherical wave train with a suit­
     ably defined angular aperture § and, in case of Fig. 2b, also with
     a limited radial extension. Consequently, the description of this
     state involves a certain latitude Ap in the momentum component
     of the particle parallel to the diaphragm and, in the case of a
214                        NIELS BOHR
diaphragm with a shutter, an additional latitude AE of the
kinetic energy.
   Since a measure for the latitude Aq in location of the par­
ticle in the plane of the diaphragm is given by the radius a
of the hole, and since f t ~ ( i/o a ) , we get, using ( r ) , just
A-p ~ ftP ~ ( h / A q ) y in accordance with the indeterminacy rela­
tion (3). This result could, of course, also be obtained directly
by noticing that, due to the limited extension of the wave-field
at the place of the slit, the component of the wave-number
parallel to the plane of the diaphragm will involve a latitude
Ao ~ ( i / a ) ~ ( i / A q ) . Similarly, the spread of the frequencies




                                                  F ig. ab



of the harmonic components in the limited wave-train in Fig. 2b
is evidently Av ~ ( i / A / ) , where At is the time interval during
which the shutter leaves the hole open and, thus, represents the
latitude in time of the passage of the particle through the dia­
phragm. From (1 ), we therefore get
                            A E -A t^h,                            (4 )
again in accordance with the relation (3) for the two conjugated
variables E and t.
   From the point of view of the laws of conservation, the origin
of such latitudes entering into the description of the state of the
particle after passing through the hole may be traced to the pos­
sibilities of momentum and energy exchange with the diaphragm
               DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                         215

or the shutter. In the reference system considered in Figs. 2a and
2b, the velocity of the diaphragm may be disregarded and only
a change of momentum Ap between the particle and the dia­
phragm needs to be taken into consideration. The shutter, how­
ever, which leaves the hole opened during the time At, moves
with a considerable velocity v ~ ( a / A t ) , and a momentum
transfer Ap involves therefore an energy exchange with the par­
ticle, amounting to v A p ~ ( \ / A t ) Aq A p ~ ( h / A t ) , being
just of the same order of magnitude as the latitude AE given by
(4 ) and, thus, allowing for momentum and energy balance.
   The problem raised by Einstein was now to what extent a
control of the momentum and energy transfer, involved in a
location of the particle in space and time, can be used for a
further specification of the state of the particle after passing
through the hole. H ere, it must be taken into consideration that
the position and the motion of the diaphragm and the shutter
have so far been assumed to be accurately co-ordinated with the
space-time reference frame. This assumption implies, in the
description of the state of these bodies, an essential latitude as
to their momentum and energy which need not, of course,
noticeably affect the velocities, if the diaphragm and the shutter
are sufficiently heavy. However, as soon as we want to know
the momentum and energy of these parts of the measuring ar­
rangement with an accuracy sufficient to control the momentum
and energy exchange with the particle under investigation, we
shall, in accordance with the general indeterminacy relations,
lose the possibility of their accurate location in space and time.
W e have, therefore, to examine how far this circumstance will
affect the intended use of the whole arrangement and, as we
shall see, this crucial point clearly brings out the complementary
character of the phenomena.
    Returning for a moment to the case of the simple arrange­
ment indicated in Fig. 1, it has so far not been specified to what
use it is intended. In fact, it is only on the assumption that the
diaphragm and the plate have well-defined positions in space
that it is impossible, within the frame of the quantum-mechani­
cal formalism, to make more detailed predictions as to the point
2l6                       NIELS BOHR
of the photographic plate where the particle will be recorded.
If, however, we admit a sufficiently large latitude in the knowl­
edge of the position of the diaphragm it should, in principle, be
possible to control the momentum transfer to the diaphragm
and, thus, to make more detailed predictions as to the direction
of the electron path from the hole to the recording point. As
regards the quantum-mechanical description, we have to deal
here with a two-body system consisting of the diaphragm as
well as of the particle, and it is just with an explicit application
of conservation laws to such a system that we are concerned in
the Compton effect where, for instance, the observation of the
recoil of the electron by means of a cloud chamber allows us to
predict in what direction the scattered photon will eventually
be observed.
   The importance of considerations of this kind was, in the
course of the discussions, most interestingly illuminated by the
examination of an arrangement where between the diaphragm
with the slit and the photographic plate is inserted another




diaphragm with two parallel slits, as is shown in Fig. 3. If a
parallel beam of electrons (or photons) falls from the left on
the first diaphragm, we shall, under usual conditions, observe on
the plate an interference pattern indicated by the shading of
the photographic plate shown in front view to the right of the
figure. With intense beams, this pattern is built up by the ac­
cumulation of a large number of individual processes, each
giving rise to a small spot on the photographic plate, and the
distribution of these spots follows a simple law derivable from
               DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                        2x7
the wave analysis. The same distribution should also be found
in the statistical account of many experiments performed with
beams so faint that in a single exposure only one electron (or
photon) will arrive at the photographic plate at some spot
shown in the figure as a small star. Since, now, as indicated by
the broken arrows, the momentum transferred to the first
diaphragm ought to be different if the electron was assumed
to pass through the upper or the lower slit in the second dia­
phragm, Einstein suggested that a control of the momentum
transfer would permit a closer analysis of the phenomenon and,
in particular, to decide through which of the two slits the elec­
tron had passed before arriving at the plate.
    A closer examination showed, however, that the suggested
control of the momentum transfer would involve a latitude in
the knowledge of the position of the diaphragm which would
exclude the appearance of the interference phenomena in ques­
tion. In fact, if co is the small angle between the conjectured
paths of a particle passing through the upper or the lower slit,
the difference of momentum transfer in these two cases will, ac­
cording to (1), be equal to ham and any control of the mo­
mentum of the diaphragm with an accuracy sufficient to measure
this difference will, due to the indeterminacy relation, involve a
minimum latitude of the position of the diaphragm, comparable
with 1/am. If, as in the figure, the diaphragm with the two
slits is placed in the middle between the first diaphragm and
the photographic plate, it will be seen that the number of fringes
per unit length will be just equal to aco and, since an uncertainty
in the position of the first diaphragm of the amount of i/crco
will cause an equal uncertainty in the positions of the fringes,
it follows that no interference effect can appear. The same re­
sult is easily shown to hold for any other placing of the second
diaphragm between the first diaphragm and the plate, and
would also be obtained if, instead of the first diaphragm, an­
other of these three bodies were used for the control, for the
purpose suggested, of the momentum transfer.
   This point is of great logical consequence, since it is only the
circumstance that we are presented with a choice of either trac­
ing the path of a particle or observing interference effects, which
2l8                      NIELS BOHR
allows us to escape from the paradoxical necessity of concluding
that the behaviour of an electron or a photon should depend
on the presence of a slit in the diaphragm through which it
could be proved not to pass. We have here to do with a typical
example of how the complementary phenomena appear under
mutually exclusive experimental arrangements (cf. p. 210) and
are just faced with the impossibility, in the analysis of quantum
effects, of drawing any sharp separation between an independent
behaviour of atomic objects and their interaction with the meas­
uring instruments which serve to define the conditions under
which the phenomena occur.
   Our talks about the attitude to be taken in face of a novel
situation as regards analysis and synthesis of experience touched
naturally on many aspects of philosophical thinking, but, in
spite of all divergencies of approach and opinion, a most humor­
ous spirit animated the discussions. On his side, Einstein mock­
ingly asked us whether we could really believe that the pro­
vidential authorities took recourse to dice-playing (“ . . . ob
der liebe Gott wiirfelt” ), to which I replied by pointing at the
great caution, already called for by ancient thinkers, in ascribing
attributes to Providence in every-day language. I remember also
how at the peak of the discussion Ehrenfest, in his affectionate
manner of teasing his friends, jokingly hinted at the apparent
similarity between Einstein’s attitude and that of the opponents
of relativity theory; but instantly Ehrenfest added that he
would not be able to find relief in his own mind before concord
with Einstein was reached.

   Einstein’s concern and criticism provided a most valuable in­
centive for us all to reexamine the various aspects of the situa­
tion as regards the description of atomic phenomena. To me it
was a welcome stimulus to clarify still further the role played
by the measuring instruments and, in order to bring into strong
relief the mutually exclusive character of the experimental con­
ditions under which the complementary phenomena appear, I
tried in those days to sketch various apparatus in a pseudo-
realistic style of which the following figures are examples.
Thus, for the study of an interference phenomenon of the type
               DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                       219
indicated in Fig. 3, it suggests itself to use an experimental ar­
rangement like that shown in Fig. 4, where the solid parts of
the apparatus, serving as diaphragms and plate-holder, are




                              F ig . 4


firmly bolted to a common support. In such an arrangement,
where the knowledge of the relative positions of the diaphragms
and the photographic plate is secured by a rigid connection, it is
obviously impossible to control the momentum exchanged be­
tween the particle and the separate parts of the apparatus. The
only way in which, in such an arrangement, we could insure
that the particle passed through one of the slits in the second
diaphragm is to cover the other slit by a lid, as indicated in the
figure; but if the slit is covered, there is of course no question
of any interference phenomenon, and on the plate we shall
simply observe a continuous distribution as in the case of the
single fixed diaphragm in Fig. 1.
   In the study of phenomena in the account of which we are
dealing with detailed momentum balance, certain parts of the
whole device must naturally be given the freedom to move
independently of others. Such an apparatus is sketched in Fig.
5, where a diaphragm with a slit is suspended by weak springs
from a solid yoke bolted to the support on which also other
immobile parts of the arrangement are to be fastened. The scale
on the diaphragm together with the pointer on the bearings of
220                      NIELS BOHR
the yoke refer to such study of the motion of the diaphragm, as
may be required for an estimate of the momentum transferred
to it, permitting one to draw conclusions as to the deflection
suffered by the particle in passing through the slit. Since, how­
ever, any reading of the scale, in whatever way performed, will




involve an uncontrollable change in the momentum of the
diaphragm, there will always be, in conformity with the in­
determinacy principle, a reciprocal relationship between our
knowledge of the position of the slit and the accuracy of the
momentum control.
   In the same semi-serious style, Fig. 6 represents a part of an
arrangement suited for the study of phenomena which, in con­
trast to those just discussed, involve time co-ordination ex­
plicitly. It consists of a shutter rigidly connected with a robust
clock resting on the support which carries a diaphragm and on
which further parts of similar character, regulated by the same
clock-work or by other clocks standardized relatively to it, are
also to be fixed. The special aim of the figure is to underline
that a clock is a piece of machinery, the working of which can
completely be accounted for by ordinary mechanics and will be
               DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                       221

affected neither by reading of the position of its hands nor by
the interaction between its accessories and an atomic particle. In
securing the opening of the hole at a definite moment, an ap­
paratus of this type might, for instance, be used for an accurate
measurement of the time an electron or a photon takes to come
from the diaphragm to some other place, but evidently, it
would leave no possibility of controlling the energy transfer to




                              F ig . 6


the shutter with the aim of drawing conclusions as to the energy
of the particle which has passed through the diaphragm. If we
are interested in such conclusions we must, of course, use an
arrangement where the shutter devices can no longer serve as
accurate clocks, but where the knowledge of the moment when
the hole in the diaphragm is open involves a latitude connected
with the accuracy of the energy measurement by the general
relation (4).
   The contemplation of such more or less practical arrange­
ments and their more or less fictitious use proved most instruc­
tive in directing attention to essential features of the problems.
The main point here is the distinction between the objects under
investigation and the measuring instruments which serve to de­
fine, in classical terms, the conditions under which the
222                       NIELS BOHR
phenomena appear. Incidentally, we may remark that, for the
illustration of the preceding considerations, it is not relevant
that experiments involving an accurate control of the mo­
mentum or energy transfer from atomic particles to heavy
bodies like diaphragms and shutters would be very difficult to
perform, if practicable at all. It is only decisive that, in contrast
to the proper measuring instruments, these bodies together with
the particles would in such a case constitute the system to which
the quantum-mechanical formalism has to be applied. As re­
gards the specification of the conditions for any well-defined
application of the formalism, it is moreover essential that the
whole experimental arrangement be taken into account. In fact,
the introduction of any further piece of apparatus, like a mirror,
in the way of a particle might imply new interference effects
essentially influencing the predictions as regards the results to
be eventually recorded.
   The extent to which renunciation of the visualization of
atomic phenomena is imposed upon us by the impossibility of
their subdivision is strikingly illustrated by the following ex­
ample to which Einstein very early called attention and often
has reverted. If a semi-reflecting mirror is placed in the way
of a photon, leaving two possibilities for its direction of propaga­
tion, the photon may either be recorded on one, and only one,
of two photographic plates situated at great distances in the two
directions in question, or else we may, by replacing the plates
by mirrors, observe effects exhibiting an interference between
the two reflected wave-trains. In any attempt of a pictorial
representation of the behaviour of the photon we would, thus,
meet with the difficulty: to be obliged to say, on the one hand,
that the photon always chooses one of the two ways and, on the
other hand, that it behaves as if it had passed both ways.
   It is just arguments of this kind which recall the impossibility
of subdividing quantum phenomena and reveal the ambiguity
in ascribing customary physical attributes to atomic objects. In
particular, it must be realized that—besides in the account of
the placing and timing of the instruments forming the experi­
mental arrangement—all unambiguous use of space-time con­
cepts in the description of atomic phenomena is confined to the
                      DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                  223
recording of observations which refer to marks on a photo­
graphic plate or to similar practically irreversible amplification
effects like the building of a water drop around an ion in a
cloud-chamber. Although, of course, the existence of the
quantum of action is ultimately responsible for the properties
of the materials of which the measuring instruments are built
and on which the functioning of the recording devices depends,
this circumstance is not relevant for the problems of the ade­
quacy and completeness of the quantum-mechanical description
in its aspects here discussed.
   These problems were instructively commented upon from
different sides at the Solvay meeting,10 in the same session
where Einstein raised his general objections. On that occasion
an interesting discussion arose also about how to speak of the
appearance of phenomena for which only predictions of statisti­
cal character can be made. The question was whether, as to the
occurrence of individual effects, we should adopt a terminology
proposed by Dirac, that we were concerned with a choice on
the part of “nature” or, as suggested by Heisenberg, we should
say that we have to do with a choice on the part of the “ ob­
server” constructing the measuring instruments and reading
their recording. Any such terminology would, however, appear
dubious since, on the one hand, it is hardly reasonable to endow
nature with volition in the ordinary sense, while, on the other
hand, it is certainly not possible for the observer to influence the
events which may appear under the conditions he has arranged.
To my mind, there is no other alternative than to admit that,
in this field of experience, we are dealing with individual phe­
nomena and that our possibilities of handling the measuring in­
struments allow us only to make a choice between the different
complementary types of phenomena we want to study.
   The epistemological problems touched upon here were more
explicitly dealt with in my contribution to the issue of Natur-
wissenschajten in celebration of Planck’s 70th birthday in 1929.
In this article, a comparison was also made between the lesson
derived from the discovery of the universal quantum of action
    Ibid., z ^ iS .
224                       NIELS BOHR
and the development which has followed the discovery of the
finite velocity of light and which, through Einstein’s pioneer
work, has so greatly clarified basic principles of natural philos­
ophy. In relativity theory, the emphasis on the dependence of
all phenomena on the reference frame opened quite new ways
of tracing general physical laws of unparalleled scope. In quan­
tum theory, it was argued, the logical comprehension of hitherto
unsuspected fundamental regularities governing atomic phe­
nomena has demanded the recognition that no sharp separation
can be made between an independent behaviour of the objects
and their interaction with the measuring instruments which de­
fine the reference frame.
    In this respect, quantum theory presents us with a novel
situation in physical science, but attention was called to the very
close analogy with the situation as regards analysis and syn­
thesis of experience, which we meet in many other fields of
human knowledge and interest. As is well known, many of the
difficulties in psychology originate in the different placing of
the separation lines between object and subject in the analysis
of various aspects of psychical experience. Actually, words like
“ thoughts” and “ sentiments,” equally indispensable to illus­
trate the variety and scope of conscious life, are used in a simi­
lar complementary way as are space-time co-ordination and
dynamical conservation laws in atomic physics. A precise for­
mulation of such analogies involves, of course, intricacies of
terminology, and the writer’s position is perhaps best indicated
in a passage in the article, hinting at the mutually exclusive
relationship which will always exist between the practical use
of any word and attempts at its strict definition. The principal
aim, however, of these considerations, which were not least in­
spired by the hope of influencing Einstein’s attitude, was to
point to perspectives of bringing general epistemological prob­
lems into relief by means of a lesson derived from the study of
new, but fundamentally simple physical experience.

   At the next meeting with Einstein at the Solvay Conference
in 1930, our discussions took quite a dramatic turn. As an ob­
jection to the view that a control of the interchange of momen-
               DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                      225
turn and energy between the objects and the measuring in­
struments was excluded if these instruments should serve their
purpose of defining the space-time frame of the phenomena,
Einstein brought forward the argument that such control should
be possible when the exigencies of relativity theory were taken
into consideration. In particular, the general relationship be­
tween energy and mass, expressed in Einstein’s famous formula
                           E — me2                          (5)
should allow, by means of simple weighing, to measure the
total energy of any system and, thus, in principle to control
the energy transferred to it when it interacts with an atomic
object.
   As an arrangement suited for such purpose, Einstein pro­
posed the device indicated in Fig. 7, consisting of a box with




a hole in its side, which could be opened or closed by a shutter
moved by means of a clock-work within the box. If, in the be­
ginning, the box contained a certain amount of radiation and
the clock was set to open the shutter for a very short interval
at a chosen time, it could be achieved that a single photon was
released through the hole at a moment known with as great
accuracy as desired. Moreover, it would apparently also be
possible, by weighing the whole box before and after this event,
to measure the energy of the photon with any accuracy wanted,
226                      NIELS BOHR
in definite contradiction to the reciprocal indeterminacy of time
and energy quantities in quantum mechanics.
   This argument amounted to a serious challenge and gave rise
to a thorough examination of the whole problem. At the out­
come of the discussion, to which Einstein himself contributed
effectively, it became clear, however, that this argument could
not be upheld. In fact, in the consideration of the problem, it
was found necessary to look closer into the consequences of
the identification of inertial and gravitational mass implied in
the application of relation (5). Especially, it was essential to
take into account the relationship between the rate of a clock
and its position in a gravitational field—well known from the
red-shift of the lines in the sun’s spectrum— following from
Einstein’s principle of equivalence between gravity effects and
the phenomena observed in accelerated reference frames.
   Our discussion concentrated on the possible application of an
apparatus incorporating Einstein’s device and drawn in Fig. 8
in the same pseudo-realistic style as some of the preceding
figures. The box, of which a section is shown in order to ex­
hibit its interior, is suspended in a spring-balance and is fur­
nished with a pointer to read its position on a scale fixed to the
balance support. The weighing of the box may thus be per­
formed with any given accuracy Aw by adjusting the balance
to its zero position by means of suitable loads. The essential
point is now that any determination of this position with a given
accuracy Aq will involve a minimum latitude Ap in the control
of the momentum of the box connected with Aq by the rela­
tion (3). This latitude must obviously again be smaller than
the total impulse which, during the whole interval T of the
balancing procedure, can be given by the gravitational field to
a body with a mass Am, or
                    Ap ~ ---- < C T -g 'A m ,                 (6)
                          Aq
where g is the gravity constant. The greater the accuracy of the
reading q of the pointer, the longer must, consequently, be the
balancing interval T , if a given accuracy Am of the weighing of
the box with its content shall be obtained.
              DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                       227
   Now, according to general relativity theory, a clock, when
displaced in the direction of the gravitational force by an
amount of Aqy will change its rate in such a way that its reading




in the course of a time interval T will differ by an amount AT
given by the relation
                         AT      1                          . .
                        — = — gAq.                          (7)
                         1       C
By comparing (6) and (7) we see, therefore, that after the
weighing procedure there will in our knowledge of the adjust­
ment of the clock be a latitude
228                      NIELS BOHR
                                   h
                         AT >
                                   c'km
Together with the formula (5 ), this relation again leads to
                            AT-AE > h,
in accordance with the indeterminacy principle. Consequently,
a use of the apparatus as a means of accurately measuring the
energy of the photon will prevent us from controlling the
moment of its escape.
   The discussion, so illustrative of the power and consistency
of relativistic arguments, thus emphasized once more the neces­
sity of distinguishing, in the study of atomic phenomena, be­
tween the proper measuring instruments which serve to define
the reference frame and those parts which are to be regarded as
objects under investigation and in the account of which quantum
effects cannot be disregarded. Notwithstanding the most sug­
gestive confirmation of the soundness and wide scope of the
quantum-mechanical way of description, Einstein nevertheless,
in a following conversation with me, expressed a feeling of dis­
quietude as regards the apparent lack of firmly laid down prin­
ciples for the explanation of nature, in which all could agree.
From my viewpoint, however, I could only answer that, in
dealing with the task of bringing order into an entirely new
field of experience, we could hardly trust in any accustomed
principles, however broad, apart from the demand of avoiding
logical inconsistencies and, in this respect, the mathematical
formalism of quantum mechanics should surely meet all re­
quirements.
   The Solvay meeting in 1930 was the last occasion where,
in common discussions with Einstein, we could benefit from
the stimulating and mediating influence of Ehrenfest, but
shortly before his deeply deplored death in 1933 he told me
that Einstein was far from satisfied and with his usual acuteness
had discerned new aspects of the situation which strengthened
his critical attitude. In fact, by further examining the possibili­
ties for the application of a balance arrangement, Einstein had
perceived alternative procedures which, even if they did not
allow the use he originally intended, might seem to enhance
               DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                      229
the paradoxes beyond the possibilities of logical solution. Thus,
Einstein had pointed out that, after a preliminary weighing of
the box with the clock and the subsequent escape of the photon,
one was still left with the choice of either repeating the weigh­
ing or opening the box and comparing the reading of the clock
with the standard time scale. Consequently, we are at this stage
still free to choose whether we want to draw conclusions either
about the energy of the photon or about the moment when it
left the box. Without in any way interfering with the photon
between its escape and its later interaction with other suitable
measuring instruments, we are, thus, able to make accurate pre­
dictions pertaining either to the moment of its arrival or to the
amount of energy liberated by its absorption. Since, however,
according to the quantum-mechanical formalism, the specifica­
tion of the state of an isolated particle cannot involve both a
well-defined connection with the time scale and an accurate
fixation of the energy, it might thus appear as if this formalism
did not offer the means of an adequate description.
   Once more Einstein’s searching spirit had elicited a peculiar
aspect of the situation in quantum theory, which in a most strik­
ing manner illustrated how far we have here transcended cus­
tomary explanation of natural phenomena. Still, I could not
agree with the trend of his remarks as reported by Ehrenfest.
In my opinion, there could be no other way to deem a logically
consistent mathematical formalism as inadequate than by dem­
onstrating the departure of its consequences from experience or
by proving that its predictions did not exhaust the possibilities
of observation, and Einstein’s argumentation could be directed
to neither of these ends. In fact, we must realize that in the
problem in question we are not dealing with a single specified
experimental arrangement, but are referring to two different,
mutually exclusive arrangements. In the one, the balance to­
gether with another piece of apparatus like a spectrometer is
used for the study of the energy transfer by a photon; in the
other, a shutter regulated by a standardized clock together with
another apparatus of similar kind, accurately timed relatively
to the clock, is used for the study of the time of propagation of
a photon over a given distance. In both these cases, as also as-
230                      NIELS BOHR
sumed by Einstein, the observable effects are expected to be in
complete conformity with the predictions of the theory.
   The problem again emphasizes the necessity of considering
the whole experimental arrangement, the specification of which
is imperative for any well-defined application of the quantum-
mechanical formalism. Incidentally, it may be added that para­
doxes of the kind contemplated by Einstein are encountered also
in such simple arrangements as sketched in Fig. 5. In fact, after
a preliminary measurement of the momentum of the dia­
phragm, we are in principle offered the choice, when an elec­
tron or photon has passed through the slit, either to repeat the
momentum measurement or to control the position of the dia­
phragm and, thus, to make predictions pertaining to alternative
subsequent observations. It may also be added that it obviously
can make no difference as regards observable effects obtainable
by a definite experimental arrangement, whether our plans of
constructing or handling the instruments are fixed beforehand
or whether we prefer to postpone the completion of our plan­
ning until a later moment when the particle is already on its
way from one instrument to another.
   In the quantum-mechanical description our freedom of con­
structing and handling the experimental arrangement finds its
proper expression in the possibility of choosing the classically
defined parameters entering in any proper application of the
formalism. Indeed, in all such respects quantum mechanics ex­
hibits a correspondence with the state of affairs familiar from
classical physics, which is as close as possible when considering
the individuality inherent in the quantum phenomena. Just in
helping to bring out this point so clearly, Einstein’s concern
had therefore again been a most welcome incitement to explore
the essential aspects of the situation.

   The next Solvay meeting in 1933 was devoted to the prob­
lems of the structure and properties of atomic nuclei, in which
field such great advances were made just in that period due to
the experimental discoveries as well as to new fruitful applica­
tions of quantum mechanics. It need in this connection hardly
be recalled that just the evidence obtained by the study of arti-
                 DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                                 231
ficial nuclear transformations gave a most direct test of Ein­
stein’s fundamental law regarding the equivalence of mass and
energy, which was to prove an evermore important guide for re­
searches in nuclear physics. It may also be mentioned how Ein­
stein’s intuitive recognition of the intimate relationship between
the law of radioactive transformations and the probability rules
governing individual radiation effects (cf. p. 205) was confirmed
by the quantum-mechanical explanation of spontaneous nuclear
disintegrations. In fact, we are here dealing with a typical ex­
ample of the statistical mode of description, and the comple­
mentary relationship between energy-momentum conservation
and time-space co-ordination is most strikingly exhibited in the
well-known paradox of particle penetration through potential
barriers.
   Einstein himself did not attend this meeting, which took
place at a time darkened by the tragic developments in the
political world which were to influence his fate so deeply and
add so greatly to his burdens in the service of humanity. A few
months earlier, on a visit to Princeton where Einstein was then
guest of the newly founded Institute for Advanced Study to
which he soon after became permanently attached, I had, how­
ever, opportunity to talk with him again about the epistemologi­
cal aspects of atomic physics, but the difference between our
ways of approach and expression still presented obstacles to
mutual understanding. While, so far, relatively few persons
had taken part in the discussions reported in this article, Ein­
stein’s critical attitude towards the views on quantum theory
adhered to by many physicists was soon after brought to public
attention through a paper11 with the title “ Can Quantum-M e­
chanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Com­
plete?,” published in 1935 by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen.
   The argumentation in this paper is based on a criterion which
the authors express in the following sentence: “ If, without in
any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e.,
with probability equal to unity) the value of a physical quan­
tity, then there exists an element of physical reality correspond-
  “ A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev., 47, 777, (1935).
232                                   NIELS BOHR
ing to this physical quantity.” By an elegant exposition of the
consequences of the quantum-mechanical formalism as regards
the representation of a state of a system, consisting of two parts
which have been in interaction for a limited time interval, it is
next shown that different quantities, the fixation of which can­
not be combined in the representation of one of the partial sys­
tems, can nevertheless be predicted by measurements pertaining
to the other partial system. According to their criterion, the
authors therefore conclude that quantum mechanics does not
“ provide a complete description of the physical reality,” and
they express their belief that it should be possible to develop a
more adequate account of the phenomena.
   Due to the lucidity and apparently incontestable character of
the argument, the paper of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen cre­
ated a stir among physicists and has played a large role in gen­
eral philosophical discussion. Certainly the issue is of a very
subtle character and suited to emphasize how far, in quantum
theory, we are beyond the reach of pictorial visualization. It
will be seen, however, that we are here dealing with problems
of just the same kind as those raised by Einstein in previous
discussions, and, in an article which appeared a few months
later,12 I tried to show that from the point of view of comple­
mentarity the apparent inconsistencies were completely re­
moved. The trend of the argumentation was in substance the
same as that exposed in the foregoing pages, but the aim of re­
calling the way in which the situation was discussed at that time
may be an apology for citing certain passages from my article.
   Thus, after referring to the conclusions derived by Einstein,
Podolsky and Rosen on the basis of their criterion, I wrote:
Such an argumentation, however, would hardly seem suited to affect the
soundness of quantum-mechanical description, which is based on a co­
herent mathematical formalism covering automatically any procedure
of measurement like that indicated. T he apparent contradiction in fact
discloses only an essential inadequacy of the customary viewpoint of
natural philosophy for a rational account of physical phenomena of the
type with which we are concerned in quantum mechanics. Indeed the
f in ite in te r a c tio n b e tw e e n o b je c t a n d m e a s u r in g a g e n c ie s conditioned

    ” N. Bohr, Phys. Rev., 48, 696, (1935).
    I             DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                               233
by the very existence of the quantum of action entails— because of the
impossibility of controlling the reaction of the object on the measuring
instruments, if these are to serve their purpose— the necessity of a final re­
nunciation of the classical ideal of causality and a radical revision of our
attitude towards the problem of physical reality. In fact, as we shall see,
a criterion of reality like that proposed by the named authors contains—
however cautious its formulation may appear— an essential ambiguity
when it is applied to the actual problems with which we are here con­
cerned.

    As regards the special problem treated by Einstein, Podolsky
 and Rosen, it was next shown that the consequences of the for­
 malism as regards the representation of the state of a system
 consisting of two interacting atomic objects correspond to the
 simple arguments mentioned in the preceding in connection
 with the discussion of the experimental arrangements suited for
 the study of complementary phenomena. In fact, although any
 pair q and p, of conjugate space and momentum variables obeys
 the rule of non-commutative multiplication expressed by (2 ),
 and can thus only be fixed with reciprocal latitudes given by
 (3 ), the difference qx — q2 between two space-co-ordinates re­
 ferring to the constituents of the system will commute with the
 sum px -\- p2 of the corresponding momentum components, as
 follows directly from the commutability of qx with p2 and q2
with px. Both qx — q2 and px -)- p2 can, therefore, be accurately
fixed in a state of the complex system and, consequently, we can
 predict the values of either qx or px if either q2 or p2, respec­
tively, are determined by direct measurements. If, for the two
parts of the system, we take a particle and a diaphragm, like
that sketched in Fig. 5, we see that the possibilities of specifying
the state of the particle by measurements on the diaphragm just
correspond to the situation described on p. 220 and further
discussed on p. 230, where it was mentioned that, after the
particle has passed through the diaphragm, we have in princi­
ple the choice of measuring either the position of the diaphragm
or its momentum and, in each case, to make predictions as to
subsequent observations pertaining to the particle. As repeatedly
stressed, the principal point is here that such measurements de­
mand mutually exclusive experimental arrangements.
234                                      NIELS BOHR
  The argumentation of the article was summarized in the
following passage:
From our point of view we now see that the wording of the above-
mentioned criterion of physical reality proposed by Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen contains an ambiguity as regards the meaning of the expres­
sion ‘without in any way disturbing a system.’ O f course there is in a
case like that just considered no question of a mechanical disturbance of
the system under investigation during the last critical stage of the measur­
ing procedure. But even at this stage there is essentially the question of
a n in flu e n c e o n th e v e r y c o n d itio n s w h ic h d e fin e th e possible ty p e s o f
                                                                  Since these
p re d ic tio n s r e g a r d in g th e f u tu r e b e h a v io u r o f th e s y s te m .
conditions constitute an inherent element of the description of any phe­
nomenon to which the term “physical reality” can be properly attached,
we see that the argumentation of the mentioned authors does not justify
their conclusion that quantum-mechanical description is essentially incom­
plete. On the contrary, this description, as appears from the preceding
discussion, may be characterized as a rational utilization of all pos­
sibilities of unambiguous interpretation of measurements, compatible with
the finite and uncontrollable interaction between the objects and the
measuring instruments in the field of quantum theory. In fact, it is only
the mutual exclusion of any two experimental procedures, permitting
the unambiguous definition of complementary physical quantities, which
provides room for new physical laws, the coexistence of which might at
first sight appear irreconcilable with the basic principles of science. It is
just this entirely new situation as regards the description of physical
phenomena that the notion of c o m p le m e n ta r ity aims at characterizing.

   Rereading these passages, I am deeply aware of the ineffi­
ciency of expression which must have made it very difficult to
appreciate the trend of the argumentation aiming to bring out
the essential ambiguity involved in a reference to physical at­
tributes of objects when dealing with phenomena where no
sharp distinction can be made between the behaviour of the
objects themselves and their interaction with the measuring in­
struments. I hope, however, that the present account of the dis­
cussions with Einstein in the foregoing years, which contributed
so greatly to make us familiar with the situation in quantum
physics, may give a clearer impression of the necessity of a
radical revision of basic principles for physical explanation in
order to restore logical order in this field of experience.
                 DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                               235
   Einstein’s own views at that time are presented in an article
“ Physics and Reality,” published in 1936 in the Journal of the
Franklin Institute.™.” Starting from a most illuminating exposi­
tion of the gradual development of the fundamental principles
in the theories of classical physics and their relation to the
problem of physical reality, Einstein here argues that the quan­
tum-mechanical description is to be considered merely as a
means of accounting for the average behaviour of a large num­
ber of atomic systems and his attitude to the belief that it
should offer an exhaustive description of the individual phe­
nomena is expressed in the following words: “To believe this
is logically possible without contradiction; but it is so very con­
trary to my scientific instinct that I cannot forego the search for
a more complete conception.”
   Even if such an attitude might seem well-balanced in itself,
it nevertheless implies a rejection of the whole argumentation
exposed in the preceding, aiming to show that, in quantum me­
chanics, we are not dealing with an arbitrary renunciation of a
more detailed analysis of atomic phenomena, but with a recog­
nition that such an analysis is in 'principle excluded. The peculiar
individuality of the quantum effects presents us, as regards the
comprehension of well-defined evidence, with a novel situation
unforeseen in classical physics and irreconcilable with conven­
tional ideas suited for our orientation and adjustment to or­
dinary experience. It is in this respect that quantum theory has
called for a renewed revision of the foundation for the unam­
biguous use of elementary concepts, as a further step in the de­
velopment which, since the advent of relativity theory, has been
so characteristic of modern science.

   In the following years, the more philosophical aspects of the
situation in atomic physics aroused the interest of ever larger
circles and were, in particular, discussed at the Second Interna­
tional Congress for the Unity of Science in Copenhagen in
July 1936. In a lecture on this occasion,14 I tried especially to
   “ A. Einstein, Journ. Frankl. Inst., t i t , 349, (1936).
   u N. Bohr, Erkenntnis, 6, 293, (1937), and Philosophy of Science, 4, 289,
<1937) .
236                          NIELS BOHR
stress the analogy in epistemological respects between the limi­
tation imposed on the causal description in atomic physics and
situations met with in other fields of knowledge. A principal
purpose of such parallels was to call attention to the necessity
 in many domains of general human interest to face problems of
a similar kind as those which had arisen in quantum theory and
thereby to give a more familiar background for the apparently
extravagant way of expression which physicists have developed
to cope with their acute difficulties.
    Besides the complementary features conspicuous in psychol­
ogy and already touched upon (cf. p. 224), examples of such
relationships can also be traced in biology, especially as regards
the comparison between mechanistic and vitalistic viewpoints.
Just with respect to the observational problem, this last question
had previously been the subject of an address to the Interna­
tional Congress on Light Therapy held in Copenhagen in
 193 2,15 where it was incidentally pointed out that even the
psycho-physical parallelism as envisaged by Leibniz and Spin­
oza has obtained a wider scope through the development of
atomic physics, which forces us to an attitude towards the prob­
lem of explanation recalling ancient wisdom, that when search­
ing for harmony in life one must never forget that in the drama
of existence we are ourselves both actors and spectators.
    Utterances of this kind would naturally in many minds evoke
the impression of an underlying mysticism foreign to the spirit
of science; at the above mentioned Congress in 1936 I there­
fore tried to clear up such misunderstandings and to explain
that the only question was an endeavour to clarify the condi­
tions, in each field of knowledge, for the analysis and synthesis
of experience.14 Yet, I am afraid that I had in this respect only
little success in convincing my listeners, for whom the dissent
among the physicists themselves was naturally a cause of scepti­
cism as to the necessity of going so far in renouncing customary
demands as regards the explanation of natural phenomena. Not
least through a new discussion with Einstein in Princeton in
1937, where we did not get beyond a humourous contest con-
  11II* Congres international de la Lumiere, Copenhague 1932 (reprinted in
Nature, 131, 421 and 457, 1933).
                 DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                     *37
 cerning which side Spinoza would have taken if he had lived
 to see the development of our days, I was strongly reminded of
 the importance of utmost caution in all questions of terminology
and dialectics.
    These aspects of the situation were especially discussed at a
meeting in Warsaw in 1938, arranged by the International In­
stitute of Intellectual Co-operation of the League of Nations.1®
The preceding years had seen great progress in quantum phy­
sics due to a number of fundamental discoveries regarding the
constitution and properties of atomic nuclei as well as due to
important developments of the mathematical formalism taking
the requirements of relativity theory into account. In the last
respect, Dirac’s ingenious quantum theory of the electron of­
fered a most striking illustration of the power and fertility of
the general quantum-mechanical way of description. In the phe­
nomena of creation and annihilation of electron pairs we have
in fact to do with new fundamental features of atomicity, which
are intimately connected with the non-classical aspects of quan­
tum statistics expressed in the exclusion principle, and which
have demanded a still more far-reaching renunciation of ex­
planation in terms of a pictorial representation.
    Meanwhile, the discussion of the epistemological problems
in atomic physics attracted as much attention as ever and, in
commenting on Einstein’s views as regards the incompleteness
of the quantum-mechanical mode of description, I entered more
directly on questions of terminology. In this connection I
warned especially against phrases, often found in the physical
literature, such as “disturbing of phenomena by observation” or
“creating physical attributes to atomic objects by measure­
ments.” Such phrases, which may serve to remind of the ap­
parent paradoxes in quantum theory, are at the same time apt
to cause confusion, since words like “ phenomena” and “ obser­
vations,” just as “attributes” and “measurements,” are used in
a way hardly compatible with common language and practical
definition.
   As a more appropriate way of expression I advocated the ap-
   Ne<w Theories in Physics (Paris 1938), i t .
238                         NIELS BOHR
plication of the word -phenomenon exclusively to refer to the
observations obtained under specified circumstances, including
an account of the whole experimental arrangement. In such
terminology, the observational problem is free of any special
intricacy since, in actual experiments, all observations are ex­
pressed by unambiguous statements referring, for instance, to
the registration of the point at which an electron arrives at a
photographic plate. Moreover, speaking in such a way is just
suited to emphasize that the appropriate physical interpretation
of the symbolic quantum-mechanical formalism amounts only
to predictions, of determinate or statistical character, pertain­
ing to individual phenomena appearing under conditions de­
fined by classical physical concepts.
    Notwithstanding all differences between the physical prob­
lems which have given rise to the development of relativity
theory and quantum theory, respectively, a comparison of
purely logical aspects of relativistic and complementary argu­
mentation reveals striking similarities as regards the renuncia­
tion of the absolute significance of conventional physical attri­
butes of objects. Also, the neglect of the atomic constitution of
the measuring instruments themselves, in the account of actual
 experience, is equally characteristic of the applications of rela­
tivity and quantum theory. Thus, the smallness of the quantum
of action compared with the actions involved in usual experi­
ence, including the arranging and handling of physical ap­
 paratus, is as essential in atomic physics as is the enormous
number of atoms composing the world in the general theory
 of relativity which, as often pointed out, demands that dimen­
sions of apparatus for measuring angles can be made small com­
 pared with the radius of curvature of space.
    In the Warsaw lecture, I commented upon the use of not
 directly visualizable symbolism in relativity and quantum
theory in the following way:
Even the formalisms, which in both theories within their scope offer ade­
quate means of comprehending all conceivable experience, exhibit deep­
going analogies. In fact, the astounding simplicity of the generalization of
classical physical theories, which are obtained by the use of multidimen­
sional geometry and non-commutative algebra, respectively, rests in both
                 DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                             239
cases essentially on the introduction of the conventional symbol V — 1.
T he abstract character of the formalisms concerned is indeed, on closer
examination, as typical of relativity theory as it is of quantum mechanics,
and it is in this respect purely a matter of tradition if the former theory
is considered as a completion of classical physics rather than as a first
fundamental step in the thoroughgoing revision of our conceptual means
of comparing observations, which the modern development of physics has
forced upon us.

   It is, of course, true that in atomic physics we are confronted
with a number of unsolved fundamental problems, especially
as regards the intimate relationship between the elementary
unit of electric charge and the universal quantum of action;
but these problems are no more connected with the epistemo­
logical points here discussed than is the adequacy of relativistic
argumentation with the issue of thus far unsolved problems of
cosmology. Both in relativity and in quantum theory we are
concerned with new aspects of scientific analysis and synthesis
and, in this connection, it is interesting to note that, even in the
great epoch of critical philosophy in the former century, there
was only question to what extent a priori arguments could
be given for the adequacy of space-time co-ordination and
causal connection of experience, but never question of rational
generalizations or inherent limitations of such categories of
human thinking.
   Although in more recent years I have had several occasions
of meeting Einstein, the continued discussions, from which I
always have received new impulses, have so far not led to a
common view about the epistemological problems in atomic
physics, and our opposing views are perhaps most clearly stated
in a recent issue of Dialectical bringing a general discussion of
these problems. Realizing, however, the many obstacles for
mutual understanding as regards a matter where approach and
background must influence everyone’s attitude, I have wel­
comed this opportunity of a broader exposition of the develop­
ment by which, to my mind, a veritable crisis in physical science
has been overcome. The lesson we have hereby received would
seem to have brought us a decisive step further in the never-
   " N. Bohr, Dialectica, /, 31* (1948).
140                      NIELS BOHR
ending struggle for harmony between content and form, and
taught us once again that no content can be grasped without a
formal frame and that any form, however useful it has hitherto
proved, may be found to be too narrow to comprehend new ex­
perience.
   Surely, in a situation like this, where it has been difficult to
reach mutual understanding not only between philosophers and
physicists but even between physicists of different schools, the
difficulties have their root not seldom in the preference for a
certain use of language suggesting itself from the different lines
of approach. In the Institute in Copenhagen, where through
those years a number of young physicists from various countries
came together for discussions, we used, when in trouble, often to
comfort ourselves with jokes, among them the old saying of the
two kinds of truth. To the one kind belong statements so sim­
ple and clear that the opposite assertion obviously could not be
defended. The other kind, the so-called “ deep truths,” are
statements in which the opposite also contains deep truth. Now,
the development in a new field will usually pass through stages
in which chaos becomes gradually replaced by order; but it is
not least in the intermediate stage where deep truth prevails
that the work is really exciting and inspires the imagination to
search for a firmer hold. For such endeavours of seeking the
proper balance between seriousness and humour, Einstein’s own
personality stands as a great example and, when expressing my
belief that through a singularly fruitful co-operation of a whole
generation of physicists we are nearing the goal where logical
order to a large extent allows us to avoid deep truth, I hope
that it will be taken in his spirit and may serve as an apology for
several utterances in the preceding pages.

   The discussions with Einstein which have formed the theme
of this article have extended over many years which have wit­
nessed great progress in the field of atomic physics. W hether
our actual meetings have been of short or long duration, they
have always left a deep and lasting impression on my mind,
and when writing this report I have, so-to-say, been arguing
with Einstein all the time even when entering on topics ap-
                  DISCUSSION WITH EINSTEIN                        241
parently far removed from the special problems under debate
at our meetings. As regards the account of the conversations I
am, of course, aware that I am relying only on my own memory,
just as I am prepared for the possibility that many features of
the development of quantum theory, in which Einstein has
played so large a part, may appear to himself in a different
light. I trust, however, that I have not failed in conveying a
proper impression of how much it has meant to me to be able
to benefit from the inspiration which we all derive from every
contact with Einstein.
                                               N ie l s B o h r
U niversitetets I nstitut
for T eoretisk F ysik
Copenhagen , D enmark
