194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                            THE STEADY-STATE THEORY OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

                                                             H. Bondi and T. Gold

                                                              (Received 1948 July 14)

                                                                    Summary
                                      The applicability of the laws of terrestrial physics to cosmology is examined
                                  critically. It is found that terrestrial physics can be used unambiguously only
                                  in a stationary homogeneous universe. Therefore a strict logical basis for
                                  cosmology exists only in such a universe. The implications of assuming these
                                  properties are investigated.
                                       Considerations of local thermodynamics show as clearly as astronomical
                                  observations that the universe must be expanding. Hence, there must be
                                  continuous creation of matter in space at a rate which is, however, far too low
                                  for direct observation. The observable properties of such an expanding
                                  stationary homogeneous universe are obtained, and all the observational tests
                                  are found to give good agreement.
                                       The physical properties of the creation process are considered in some
                                  detail, and the possible formulation of a field theory is critically discussed.


                                                     I. The perfect cosmological principle
                                1.1. The unrestricted repeatability of all experiments is the fundamental
                            axiom of physical science. This implies that the outcome of an experiment is
                            not affected by the position and the time at which it is carried out.       A system
                            of cosmology must be principally concerned with this fundamental assumption
                            and, in turn, a suitable cosmology is required for its justification. In laboratory
                            physics we have become accustomed to distinguish between conditions whick
                            can be varied at will and the inherent laws which are immutable.
                                 Such a distinction between the “accidental” conditions and the “inherent”
                            laws and constants of nature is justifiable so long as we have control over
                            the “accidental”, and can test the validity of the distinction by a further
                            experiment. In astronomical observations we do not have this control, and we
                            can hence never prove which is “accidental” and which “inherent”. This-
                            difficulty, though logically a very real one, need not concern us in an interpretation
                        *   of the dynamics of the solar system. We may be satisfied when we discover that
                            the solar system with all its numerous orbits is accurately one of the many systems-
                            permitted by our “inherent” laws.
                                 But when we wish to consider the behaviour of the entire universe, then the
                            logical basis for a distinction between “inherent” laws and “accidental” condi-
                             tions disappears. Any observation of the structure of the universe will give a&
                            unique a result as, for instance, a determination of the velocity of light or the
                             constant of gravitation. And yet, if we were to contemplate a changing universe
                             we should have to assume some such observations to represent “accidental”
                             conditions and others “inherent” laws.
                                 Such assumptions were in fact implied in all theories of evolution of the uni-
                             verse ; they were necessary to specify the problem. Without them, there would be
                             no rules and hence unlimited freedom in any extrapolation into the future or into
                             the past. Some such sets of assumptions may be intellectually much more




                            © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                           No. 3, 1948      The Steady-state Theory of the Expanding Universe                 253,

                              satisfying than others, and accordingly they are adopted. We may place much
                              reliance in such aesthetic judgments, but we cannot claim any logical foundation
                              for them.
                                   1.2. Let us take an example to demonstrate the point of this criticism. Present
                              observations indicate that the universe is expanding. This suggests that the mean
                              density in the past has been greater than it is now. If we are now to make any
                              statement regarding the behaviour of such a denser universe, and the way in which
                              it is supposed to have reached its present condition, then we have to know
                              the physical laws and constants applicable in denser universes. But we have no
                           ' determinations for those. An assumption which is commonly made is to say that
                              those physical laws which we have learnt to regard as uintrinsic,, because they
                              are unaffected by any changes of conditions which we may produce, are in fact
                              not capable of any change. It is admitted that such a change of the density of
                              the universe would have slight local effects ; there would be more or less light
                              arriving here from distant galaxies. But, it is assumed, there would be no
                              change in the physical laws which an observer would deduce in a laboratory.
                                   Such a philosophy may be intellectually very agreeable : it gives permanence
                              to the abstract things, the physical laws, whilst it regards the present condition of
                              the universe as merely a particular demonstration of the consequences of such laws.
                              There are, however, grave difficulties inherent in such a view. The most striking
                              of those is concerned with the absolute state of rotation of a body. Mach (1)
                              examined this problem very thoroughly and all the advances in theory which have
                              been made have not weakened the force of his argument. According to “ Mach’s
                              Principle ” inertia is an influence exerted by the aggregate of distant matter which
                              determines the state of motion of the local frame of reference by means of which
                              rotation or acceleration is measured. A particular rotational state which is
                              described as unon-rotating” can be found by a purely local experiment (a Foucault
                              pendulum, for instance). This rotational state is always found to coincide
                              accurately with the rotational state of the distant stars around the observer.
                              Mach’s principle is the recognition that this coincidence must in fact be due to a
                              causal relation. If, as is now widely agreed, we adopt Mach’s principle, then
                              we imply that the nature of any local dynamical experiment is fundamentally
                         ;   affected   by distant matter. We can hence not contemplate a laboratory which is
                             shielded so as to exclude all influence from outside ; and for the same reason we
                             cannot have any logical basis for choosing physical laws and constants and assigning
                             to them an existence independent of the structure of the universe.
                                  Any interdependence of physical laws and large-scale structure of the universe
                             might lead to a fundamental difficulty in interpreting observations of light emitted
                             by distant objects. For if the universe, as seen from those objects, presented a
                             different appearance, then we should not be justified in assuming familiar processes
                             to be responsible for the emission of the light which we analyse. This difficulty is
                             partly removed by the “ cosmological principle ”. According to this principle all
                             large-scale averages of quantities derived from astronomical observations (i. e.
                             determination of the mean density of space, average size of galaxies, ratio of con-
                             densed to uncondensed matter, etc.) would tend statistically to a similar value
                             independent of the positions of the observer, as the range of the observation is
                             increased ; provided only that the observations from different places are carried
                             out at equivalent times. This principle would mean that there is nothing
                        - outstanding about any place in the universe, and that those differences which do-




                             cs) Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        ^54                   H. Bondi and T. Gold, The Steady-state                  Vol. 108
                          exist are only of local significance ; that seen on a large scale the universe is
                          homogeneous.
                               This principle is widely recognized, and the observations of distant nebulae
                          have contributed much evidence in its favour. An analysis of these observations
                          indicates that the region surveyed is large enough to show us a fair sample of the
                          universe, and that this sample is homogeneous.
                               But in the sense in which the principle came to be adopted there is the quali-
                          fication regarding the time of the observation. The universe is still presumed to
                          be capable of altering its large-scale structure, but only in such a way as not to
                          upset its homogeneity. The result of a large-scale observation may hence be a
                          measure pf a universal time.
                               We might have looked to the cosmological principle for a justification of the
                          assumption of the general validity of physical laws ; but whilst the principle
                          supplies the justification with respect to changes of place, it still leaves the possi-
                          bility of a change of physical laws with universal time. Any system of cosmology
                          must still involve a speculation about this dependence as one of its basic assump-
                           tions. Indeed, we are not even in a position to interpret observations of very
                          distant objects without such an assumption, for the light which we receive from
                          them was emitted at a different instant in this scale of universal time, and accord-
                          ingly the processes responsible for its emission may be unfamiliar to us.
                               The systems of cosmology may well be classified according to the assumption
                          made or implied at this stage of the argument. While one school of thought
                           considers all the results of laboratory physics to be always applicable, without
                           regard to the state of the universe, another starts from the narrow cosmological
                           principle and with the aid of a number of intellectually agreeable assumptions
                           arrives at the conclusion that laboratory physics is qualitatively permanently
                           valid, though some of its “ constants ” are changing. There are yet other schools
                           of thought which attempt to distinguish the changeable from the permanent
                           constants by their magnitudes.
                                We shall proceed quite differently at this point. As the physical laws caniiot
                          Jbe assumed to be independent of the structure of the universe, and as conversely
                         / the structure of the universe depends upon the physical laws, it follows that there
                        [ may be a stable position. We shall pursue the possibility that the universe is in
                            such a stable, self-perpetuating state, without making any assumptions regarding
                           the particular features which lead to this stability. We regard the reasons for
                            pursuing this possibility as very compelling, for it is only in such a universe that
                            there is any basis for the assumption that the laws of physics are constant ; and
                            without such an assumption our knowledge, derived virtually at one instant of
                            time, must be quite inadequate for an interpretation of the universe and the
                            dependence of its laws on its structure, and hence inadequate for any extrapolation
                            into the future or the past.
                                Our course is therefore defined not only by the usual cosmological principle
                            hut by that extension of it which is obtained on assuming the universe to be not
                            only homogeneous but also unchanging on the large scale. This combination of
                         * the usual cosmological principle and the stationary postulate we shall call the
                            perfect cosmological principle, and all our arguments will be based on it. The
                            universe is postulated to be homogeneous and stationary in its large-scale
                            appearance as well as in its physical laws.




                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
                                         i
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        No. 3, 1948              Theory of the Expanding Universe                         255

                           We do not claim that this principle must be true, but we say that if it does not
                        hold, one's choice of the variability of the physical laws becomes so wide that
                        cosmology is no longer a science. One can then no longer use laboratory physics
                        without relying on some arbitrary principle for their extrapolation.
                            But if the perfect cosmological principle is satisfied in our universe then we can
                        base ourselves confidently on the permanent validity of all our experiments and
                        observations and explore the consequences of the principle. Unless and until any
                        disagreement appears we therefore accept the principle, since this is the only
                        assumption on the basis of which progress is possible without further hypothesis.
                        As will be seen later many conclusions can be drawn which can be compared with
                        experiment. It would be most fortuitous if no contradictions arose, although
                        the perfect cosmological principle was not valid.

                                         2. Application of the perfect cosmological principle
                             2.1. Although the perfect cosmological principle states that the universe is
                        homogeneous and stationary on the large scale no statement is made about spatial
                        isotropy. This is usually assumed together with homogeneity for mathematical
                        convenience, but in our view the position of the two assumptions is quite different.
                        Homogeneity and the stationary property are vital to the very existence of the
                        subject. There may be similarly strong arguments for isotropy, but those so-
                        far advanced do not seem to us to be equally compelling. Further considerations
                        of the nature of the stable self-perpetuating state referred to above can be made,
                        which suggest but do not prove isotropy.
                             We shall therefore introduce spatial isotropy as an assumption which is strongly
                        suggested both by local and by astronomical observations and which is simplest.
                             We must now apply the perfect cosmological principle to laboratory physics
                         and to astronomical observations. We regard the principle as of such funda*
                         mental importance that we shall be willing if necessary to reject theoretical
                         extrapolations from experimental results if they conflict with the perféct cosmo-
                         logical principle even if the theories concerned are generally accepted. Of course
                        we shall never disregard any direct observational or experimental evidence and
                         we shall see that we can easily satisfy all such requirements.
                              2.2. For the perfect cosmological principle to apply, one might at first sight
                         expect that the universe would have to be static, i. e. to possess no consistent large-
                         scale motion. This, however, would conflict with the observations of distant
                         galaxies, and it would also conflict with the thermodynamic state which we
                         observe. For such a static universe would be very different indeed from the uni-
                         verse we know. A static universe would clearly reach thermodynamical equili-
                         brium after some time. An infinitely old universe would certainly be in this state.
                         There would be complete equilibrium between matter and radiation, and (apart
                         possibly from some slight variations due to gravitational potentials) everything
                         would be at one and the same temperature. There would be no evolution, no
                          distinguishing features, no recognizable direction of time. That our universe is
                         not of this type is clear not only from astronomical observations but from local
                          physics and indeed from our very existence. Accordingly there must be large-
                          scale motions in our universe. The perfect cosmological principle permits only
                          two types of motion, viz. large-scale expansion with a velocity proportional to
                          distance, and its reverse, large-scale contraction.




                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                         256                   H. Bondi and T. Gold, The Steady-state                Vol. 108

                              In a contracting universe there would be even more radiation compared with
                         matter than in a static universe. Therefore we reject this possibility and confine
                          our attention to an expanding universe.
                              2.3. The observations of distant galaxies, which are now capable of a more
                          rigorous interpretation by means of the perfect cosmological principle, inform us
                         of the motion of expansion. This motion in which the velocity is proportional to
                         the distance (apart from a statistical scatter) is well known to be of the only type
                         compatible with homogeneity; but the compatibility with the hypothesis of a
                          stationary property requires investigation. If we considered that the principle of
                         hydrodynamic continuity were valid over large regions and with perfect accuracy
                         then it would follow that the mean density of matter was decreasing, and this would
                          contradict the perfect cosmological principle. It is clear that an expanding
                         universe can only be stationary if matter is continuously created within it. The
                         required rate of creation, which follows simply from the mean density and the rate
                         of expansion, can be estimated as at most one particle of proton mass per litre per
                         109 years. In interpreting the universe as stationary we have to assume that such a
                         process of creation is operative ; we have to infringe the principle of hydrodynamic
                         continuity. But this principle is not capable of experimental verification to such
                         a precision, and this infringement does not constitute a contradiction with obser-
                         vational evidence. It is true that hydrodynamic continuity has been regarded as
                         an unqualified truth and not as an approximation to physical laws, but this was
                         merely a bold simplifying extrapolation from evidence. Hydrodynamic con-
                         tinuity is no doubt approximately true but this does not compel us to assume that it
                         holds without any deviation whatever. In the conflict with another principle
                         which is much more far-reaching and capable of making many more statements
                         about the nature of the universe and the applicability of physical laws, there is no
                         reason for upholding the principle of continuity to an indefinite accuracy, far
                         beyond experimental evidence.
                             We have referred to the principle infringed by the creation process as the
                         principle of hydrodynamic continuity ; as we shall see later it is by no means clear
                        whether we can regard any principle of conservation of energy as infringed.
                             2.4. Much of the structure of the universe is closely defined by the perfect
                        cosmological principle and the knowledge of the velocity-distance law of expansion.
                         As we shall see later such a universe must be described by a de Sitter metric. The
                        universe is therefore spatially as well as temporarily infinite, but the effect of
                        distant matter on an observer tends to zero as its velocity of recession approaches
                        the velocity of light.
                             The motion of matter in such a universe follows a particular pattern ; though
                        in the actual case there are fluctuations, there is a preferred motion defined at each
                        place. Any observer equipped with a sufficiently good telescope can make
                        observations of the velocity-distance law in different directions, and from such
                        observations he can deduce any deviation that he may have from this preferred
                        motion in his locality. If he follows this motion without any deviation then he
                        will see symmetry around him ; although all the objects which he observes may
                        have some deviations from the preferred motions in their localities, a statistical
                        averaging method can serve to specify the preferred motion at the observer exactly.
                        (It is not necessary to specify the averaging method at this point beyond stating
                        that it must give sufficient weight to distant matter.) At any rate there is not
                        much latitude. Such a preferred motion could be established by an observer at any
                        place, and the resulting pattern forms a vector field in a four dimensional space-


                        © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        îio. 3, 1948              Theory of the Expanding Universe                          257

                        time. Much physical significance must be attached to this vector-field, for the
                        motion of all matter appears to be closely dictated by it. What deviations there
                        are, are statistically distributed around the preferred motion, and these deviations
                        are quite small compared with the velocity of light.
                             An interesting problem connected with the preferred direction is that of the
                         existence of a “cosmic time”. In the cosmologies of general relativity the
                         existence of a cosmic time is deduced from Weyl’s postulate (2). As observations
                         show, there are irregularities and deviations from uniformity. These are only
                        small, but if they are such that there are no surfaces orthogonal to the world lines
                         of all the nebulae, then there is no cosmic time. The existence of a cosmic time in
                        the presence of these irregularities has not been proved and seems improbable.
                        The ambiguities in cosmic time arising from such a breakdown are only small in
                        any region, but over the universe as a whole they completely undermine the
                         logical structure on which a homogeneous but not stationary theory rests. Our
                        position is very different. Owing to the stationary character of the universe,
                        homogeneity can be defined in the absence of cosmic time. Whether or not there
                         are surfaces orthogonal to the preferred direction is therefore of no importance for
                         our theory. On general grounds one would not expect these surfaces to exist,
                        so that an unambiguous definition of cosmic time is impossible. In the simplified
                        smoothed-out model it will of course exist, but probably not in the actual universe
                         with its irregularities.
                              The stationary property implies that the factor of the velocity-distance law
                        must stay constant. This would not be fulfilled if matter moved such that the
                         velocity between two particular masses remained constant; the velocity has to
                        increase as the distance increases. Accordingly, there must be relative acceleration
                         between matter.
                             We can now examine the requirements which the perfect cosmological principle
                         places on the evolution of stars and galaxies. The mean ratio of condensed to un-
                         condensed matter has to stay constant, and for this reason new galaxies have to be
                         formed as older ones move away from each other. We take the perfect cosmo-
                         logical principle to imply that no feature of the universe is subject to any consistent
                         change, and no observer hence capable of any unique definition of a universal time.
                         This will be satisfied only if the ages of galaxies in any sufficiently large volume
                         follow a certain statistical distribution. With such a distribution it is of course
                         possible for any particular volume to contain a very old galaxy; but very old
                         galaxies are thinly scattered, as they have had time to move far apart in the general
                         expansion. The characteristic time in this age distribution must of course be
                         related to the characteristic time of expansion of the universe. In opposition to
                         most other theories we should hence expect to find much diversity in the appear-
                         ance of galaxies, as they will be of greatly different ages ; and much diversity is in
                         fact observed. Furthermore the age distribution of galaxies in any volume will
                         be independent of the time of observation, and it will hence be the same for distant
                         galaxies as for near ones, although in the former case the light has taken long to
                         reach us. This is a property of great importance, for it is in practice the only basis
                         on which we can construct any interpretation of the observations of distant
                         galaxies.
                              2.5. The next point to discuss is the thermodynamic state of the universe. It
                        is known that this state is very far from any equilibrium. Very much more energy
                         is in the form of matter than in radiation ; and very much more energy is radiated
                         away than is absorbed by matter.


                           © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                            258                   H. Bondi and T. Gold, The Steady-state                  Vol. 108

                                 The disequilibrium is very great indeed, and we have grown so used to it that
                            we take its existence to be self-evident. Such statements as “ A hydrogen atom
                            in an excited state returns quickly to its ground state, since this has less energy”,
                            do not indicate any lack of faith in the principle of conservation of energy but merely
                            an awareness of the paucity of radiation in the universe which makes the reverse
                            process so very unlikely.
                                 This disequilibrium is such a marked and characteristic feature of our universe
                            that its explanation must be one of the main tasks of cosmology. The connection
                            between this phenomenon and cosmology ways noticed by Olbers (3), who pointed
                            out that in an infinite homogeneous static Newtonian universe the mean radiation
                            density would be as high as it is on the surface of a star ! In the present case,
                            however, this disequilibrium is the direct consequence of the motion of expansion.
                            Any photon emitted by a star has a very large probable free path, owing to the
                            tenuous distribution of opaque matter in the universe. The most likely career for
                            such a photon is that it will travël on into regions where the local motion of matter is
                            very different from the motion of the star which caused its emission. When such a
                            photon is finally absorbed, then it will, as seen by an observer on the absorbing
                            matter, be subject to a Doppler-shift which reduces its frequency by a large factor.
                            The thermal energy it will supply to the intercepting matter will hence be only a
                            small fraction of the energy it removed from the emitting star. It is not necessary 10
                            consider here whether the difference in energy can be regarded as being supplied
                            to the expansion process of the universe ; but it is clear that the universe provides in
                            this way a sink for radiative energy, and that this sink is in fact available to the
                             majority of photons produced at the surface of stars. The process of getting rid
                            of both matter and radiation from any fixed volume is by pushing both across the
                             surface bounding this volume ; and both are replenished from within.
                                  It is of course important for any theory of cosmology that it should not predict
                             thermodynamic equilibrium, and this is possible only by supposing either that
                            insufficient time has been available since the commencement of radiation by stars,
                             or, and this is the view we take, by suggesting that the bulk of the energy radiated
                             does not again become available as heat.
                                  A thermodynamic disequilibrium is a requirement for any local thermo-
                             dynamical evolution, and in this sense it is necessary in order that any physical
                             significance should be attached to the passage of time. In a stationary universe
                             this condition can be fulfilled only if there is a motion of expansion, and if the mean
                             free path of a photon is at least comparable with the dimension defined by the
                             velocity-distance law and the velocity of light. (The radius of a de Sitter universe.)
                             Expressing the same consideration differently : the perfect cosmological principle
                             and the knowledge of the thermodynamic disequilibrium require that the universe
                             should be expanding. The experimental evidence of the recession of nebulae is
                             hence a good indication that this specific requirement of the perfect cosmological
                             principle is in fact satisfied. The narrow cosmological principle would have
                             resulted in no such requirement, for there the disequilibrium would result simply
                             if the luminosity of all stars was a suitable function of universal time.
                                  Let us now consider the question of the overall conservation of mass (energy) in
                             such a universe. An observer attempting to estimate the quantity of matter in the
                             universe will find that his result depends on the threshold intensities and wave-
                             lengths of his apparatus. Keeping these fixed, he will always observe a finite
                             amount of matter and this will be constant in time. At a great range matter is




                        © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        No. 3, 1948               Theory of the Expanding Universe                           259

                        drifting into an unobservable state by approaching the velocity of light, and without
                        a process of creation this would not allow any principle of conservation of energy to
                        be applied to the sum total of all observable matter.
                            A further point to be mentioned in relation to the stationary property of the
                        universe is the coincidence of numbers pointed out by Eddington (4). Two
                        non-dimensioñal numbers which can be constructed from observation are both
                        found to be of the order 1039 ; one is the ratio of the characteristic length defining
                        the expansion of the universe to the classical radius of the electron (e2/mc2)y and
                        the other is the ratio of the electric to the gravitational force between a proton and
                        an electron. The coincidence is striking, and though we have no causal connec-
                        tion to offer we feel that one exists. This and some other coincidences cannot be
                        ignored by a system of cosmology to the extent of suggesting that they occur only
                        in a fleeting phase. It is satisfactory that according to the theory presented here
                        such coincidences are permanent.

                                                      3. The Observational Tests
                            3.1. Our observations of the universe depend on the interactions between the
                        rest of the universe and ourselves. These interactions are of two kinds : dynamical
                        and electromagnetic. Dynamically, the rest of the universe affects us primarily
                        through the long-range force of inertia, i. e. it defines inertial frames of reference in
                        our neighbourhood. This dynamical interaction is strong and arises almost
                        certainly from the whole of the observable universe, but it is ill-understood and is
                        discussed in other parts of this paper. Therefore, in this section we shall confine
                        ourselves to a discussion of the electromagnetic interactions, which are more
                        easily interpreted.
                            Light reaches us in observable intensities from large numbers of extra-
                        galactic nebulae, and a considerable amount of information has been gathered.
                        In particular the distribution over the sky and the number of nebulae of given
                        apparent magnitude is quite well known, and the radial velocities have been
                        determined (from the Doppler shift) for many nebulae.
                            In trying to interpret these data, we must first decide whether the observations
                        extend over a sufficiently large region to have any bearing on cosmology, or whether
                        they must be taken to refer to a purely local district.
                            There are two strong arguments (isotropy and homogeneity of nebular
                        distribution and magnitude of the radial velocities), for assuming that the obser-
                        vations cover a fair sample of the universe and there is no evidence against it. In
                        common with most writers on the subject we assume therefore that the observations
                        refer to a sufficiently large region to be of relevance to cosmology.
                            3.2. We must now see whether our theory, at this stage of its development,
                        can make any statements about the aspect of the universe which can be compared
                        with observation. The mathematical apparatus we can use is strictly limited, since
                        the field equations of the general theory of relativity with their insistence on
                        conservation of mass are clearly not acceptable to us. In fact we must rely largely
                        on kinematical arguments and on the generally accepted results of laboratory
                        physics dealing with the propagation of light (special theory of relativity). The
                        power of these kinematical arguments was demonstrated by the pioneer work of
                        Milne and by the papers of Walker and Robertson.
                            A simplified model of the universe can be obtained by assuming the conditions
                        of homogeneity and isotropy to be absolutely (instead of only on a large scale)
                                                                                                      19


                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        2Ö0                    H. Bondi and T. Gold, The Steady-state                     Vol. 108

                        satisfied. There seems to be good reason to believe that the features amenable
                        to long distance observation are nearly the same in this simplified model as in the
                        actual universe with all its irregularities. In common with most authors we shall
                        assume that this representation of the universe is sufficient for comparison with
                        the observations of extragalactic nebulae.
                            The mathematical properties of such a model have been studied in great detail
                        by Robertson (5) and by Walker (6). These authors adopt a narrower cosmo-
                        logical principle and they do not assume a stationary property. They do, however,
                        assume that the particle paths do not intersect except that possibly they all intersect
                        at one singular point in the past (origin of universe). Although we do not wish to
                        make this assumption in general it is clear that in the simple model we are now
                        discussing the assumption will be satisfied. For if there were an intersection at a
                        point P, then the isotropy condition would show that this point had to be a focus,
                        and the homogeneity condition would then lead us to a universe in which every
                        point is a focus. Such a universe is evidently so different from the one we know
                        that we need not hesitate to reject this possibility.
                            Accordingly, the work of Robertson and Walker is applicable to our theory,
                        except that we have to specialize their results by the stationary condition. In
                        this way the following theorem can be established * :
                            In a non-static stationary universe the light-paths are the null geodesics of the
                        metric
                                                ds2 = dt2 — {dx2 + dy2 + dz2) exp (2t¡ T),

                        where the (x,y, z) coordinates of any particle partaking of the general motion of the
                        universe are constant and t measures the proper time of any observer travelling
                        with such a particle. T is a universal constant and the velocity of light has been
                        put equal to unity. This metric is very well known, having been discovered by de
                        Sitter (7) in 1917. It is the simplest of all metrics of the Robertson type, but
                        could not be used in general relativity, since the field equations imply that it
                        describes empty space only.
                            The geometrical properties of the de Sitter universe are very simple. If we
                        change from Cartesians {x, y, z) to spherical polars (r, 6, <j>) in the usual way, then an
                        observer at the origin would find that the spectral lines of a source of light of
                        luminosity L at (r,6,(j>) received by him at time t = o would show a red shift


                                               i +8=                = exp ( - tJT) = i +r/r,
                                                        ''emitted
                        while the intensity of light received would be

                                                                         L
                                                                         47rr2(i + r/T’)2'                       (2)

                            These results are well known (8) and apply equally in general relativity and
                        in our theory. An important difference occurs, however, when we consider
                        the third observable quantity, the number of nebulae in a given magnitude class.
                        In general relativity it is assumed that the density of nebulae was greater in the past
                        than it is now, owing to the expansion of the universe. The theory here presented
                        assumes that the density was the same in the past as it is now. Accordingly, if n
                           * Another way of proving the theorem is to assume the existence of a Riemannian metric and
                        then to apply the conditions demanded by our postulates.



                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        No. 3,1948                 Theory of the Expanding Universe                           261

                        is the numbèr of nebulae per unit volume, the number of nebulae between r and
                        r + dr is
                                              Avr2ndr exp {3teJT) = ^ndr^ + r/ T)~3.               (3)

                            The comparison with observation consists in checking that the interdependence
                        of the functions (i), (2), (3) is the same in observation as in theory. This process is
                        familiar from relativistic cosmology, but there is another difference not yet referred
                        to. In our theory the average nebular luminosity L must be constant by virtue
                        of our fundamental assumption. This is not so in any other cosmology, where the
                        distant nebulae, from which light reaches us only after a long time, must be
                        assumed to have been in an earlier stage of development when the light observed
                        was emitted. Owing to the likely variation of nebular luminosities the measure-
                        ment of distances becomes very inaccurate just at the ranges where space curvature
                        begins to be important. The theory here presented is therefore the only one which
                        can be compared with observation without having to make any assumptions about
                        nebular evolution.
                             3.3. In all comparisons between theory and observation difficulties arise
                        owing to the fact that we always measure photographic luminosities, while the
                        theory is concerned with bolomenic luminosities. The difference between the
                        two quantities depends on the nebular spectrum and is a function of the red shift.
                        This so-called nebular K term is not very precisely known. A recalculation was
                        carried out giving results in good agreement with (though slightly lower than)
                        Hubble’s results (9).
                             The velocity shift can only be measured for fairly bright nebulae (^<17-5)
                        and is found to be
                                                             logi08 = o-2m-Z,                               (4)

                        where m is the magnitude (defined as const. — 2*5log10 (apparent luminosity)).
                        AT is a constant which Hubble and Humason (10) gave as 4*967 in 1931, while
                        Hubble (11) deduced the value 4*707 in 1935. ten Bruggencate (12) considers
                        4-907 to be the most probable value. The difficulty in the determination of X is
                        due to the paucity of measurements in the middle region (i4<?/z<i7-5) and the
                        obscuring effects of the peculiar motions in the near region (m <14).
                            The surveys* of the number of nebulae brighter than a given limiting magnitude
                        constitute the principal information for the fainter nebulae. The following
                        table gives the results of the surveys (13). N{ni) is the number brighter than
                        magnitude m over the whole sky, extrapolated from the samples taken.

                        m                           12*78    18*2     18*47      19*0     19*4     20-0     21*03
                        logio N(m)                   3*233    6-328    6-502      6-774   6-955     7*301    7*777
                        o-6m—log10N(w)—const,        o        0-157    0*145      0*189    0*250    0*264    0*406

                            The theoretical relations derived from (2), (3) and (4) are

                                               w = ^+5-^+5               +<>)>                                 (5)

                                              JV
                                                 -^[log.(I+8)-îf8-i(ÎTjp]'                                     <6)

                        where K is the term previously referred to and ^4 is a constant. The expression
                        o*6m —log10 AT(m) is the most sensitive indication of the departures from apparent
                        uniformity (which are due to the recessional velocities).
                                                                                                19*


                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
2Ö2                  H. Bondi and T. Gold, The Steady-state                  Vol. 108

    The theoretical curvès of o-ówz —log10 V(w) against m are plotted for various
values of X and the observational results are indicated by crosses in Fig. i. It
will be seen that the agreement between theory and observation is extremely
good if the larger value of X is adopted, but is only moderately good for the lower
value of X.




                                        Fig. i.
     Before proceeding to an examination of the implications of these data we must
contrast the purpose of these comparisons in our theory and in general relativity.
In general relativity a very wide range of models is available and the comparisons
merely attempt to find which of these models fits the facts best. The number of
free parameters is so much larger than the number of observational points that a
fit certainly exists and not even all the parameters can be fixed.
     In our theory, on the other hand, the parameters are determined by observations
of near nebulae. The counts of distant nebulae serve merely as a check on the
theoretical forecast.                                                   *
     It is clear from the figure that this agreement is as good as can be expected from
the uncertainty of the data. The possibihty of systematic errors in the deter-
mination of the limiting magnitudes and the uncertainty in the K term may easily
account for the slight systematic divergence which a confirmation of the lower X
value could otherwise suggest. A confirmation of the higher X value on the other
hand gives in any case perfect agreement.
     We see therefore that our theory agrees with observation at least as well as the
relativistic models do when their numerous free parameters have been adjusted.
Hubble^ original deduction that his data suggested, on a relativistic interpretation^
an improbably small universe is quahtatively in good agreement with our theory :
the paucity of faint nebulae, which in relativity must be ascribed to positive space
curvature, is on the basis of our theory simply explained as being due to a density
of nebulae which is constant in time, instead of decreasing as hitherto assumed.
     3.4. A difficulty which occurs in other cosmological theories is absent in ours :
the problem of the time-scale. It will be useful to discuss at some length the
difficulties associated with the time-scale in other theories.




  © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1948MNRAS.108..252B



                      No. 3, 1948               Theory of the Expanding Universe                         263
                           The reciprocal of Hubble’s constant, which is a time (T), defined by the
                      observations of the velocity-distance law, is between 1800 and 2000 million years.
                      It is clear that this time must be of fundamental importance in any theory.
                        . Terrestrial observations of radioactive decay in rocks indicate an age of these
                      rocks of at least 2 x 109 years, and some samples seem to imply an age of more than
                      3 x 109 years. Astrophysical considerations tend to indicate an age of the stars in
                      our galaxy of about 5 x 109 years.
                           How do these results affect cosmology ? If the continuous creation of matter
                      is denied then the following two possibilities exist :
                           (i) The rate of expansion of the universe in the past was the same as now or
                               greater. Then the origin of the universe must have been catastrophic and
                               took place less than 2 x 109 years ago. This clearly contradicts the
                               terrestrial and astrophysical evidence referred to above. A distinction
                               between a udynamical” and a “cosmic” time, as suggested by Milne,
                               removes only part of the difficulty. It makes some of the astrophysical
                               evidence inadmissible but, since atoms and nuclei must be supposed to
                               follow the cosmic time, the terrestrial evidence remains.
                          (ii) The rate of expansion was slower in the past than it is now. Then some
                               disruptive force must have been responsible for the acceleration. Such a
                               force is described by the hypothetical and much debated cosmological
                               term in general relativity. A general criticism of any model based on such
                               a disruptive force can be made, but it will be useful to discuss a special
                               example, viz. the famous model due to Lemaître (14). In this model the
                               universe is supposed to have been for an arbitrary long time in the unstable
                               Einstein state in which À repulsion exactly balanced gravitational attraction.
                               The formation of condensations led to an expansion proceeding at an
                               exponentially increasing speed.
                           Much more attention has been paid to the attractive formal features of this
                      model than to the severe objections to which it is open on physical grounds.
                           Although its past is mathematically infinite it must be taken to be entirely
                      featureless and void of any physical development. For any physical process such
                      as the formation of a condensation would have upset its equilibrium. In fact in its
                       “ pre-historical ” state (before the first condensation) circumstances were such that
                      the formation of a condensation was only just possible, though very unlikely, since
                      otherwise it would have occurred earlier. However, as soon as the physical history
                      of the model started expansion began and so the mean density decreased. Very
                      early on in the expansion this decrease would have been sufficient to make the
                      previously improbable formation of condensations quite impossible. Therefore
                      the period of physical evolution of this model is brief in spite of its infinitely long
                      mathematical existence.
                           The unsatisfactory features of this model are shared by the other accelerating
                      models of general relativity. The theory presented here differs from all these
                      models very profoundly. Although the universe is accelerating in the sense that the
                      speed of each particular nebula is increasing, the mean density remains constant.
                      Therefore conditions for the condensation of new nebulae are always the same and
                      may be taken to be always moderately favourable. The probability of the form-
                      ation of condensations is presumably determined by the important non-dimensional
                      quantity ypT2. In our theory this is a constant, since all three factors are constant.




                        © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B



                             264                   H. Bondi and T. Gold, The Steady-state                 Vol. io8

                             (In general relativity it is variable, but in kinematical relativity it is constant,
                             although all the factors vary.) Observations indicate that the value of this constant
                             is between io“3 and i, probably nearer i.
                                 The time T is an important constant of nature in our theory, but it has little to
                             do with the age of our own galaxy. The development of the galaxies and their
                             motions are sketched in Fig. 2.




                                                                    Fig. 2.

                                  The time-axis is drawn vertically, T being taken as unit of time. The abscissa
                             represents distance suitably defined. The observer is taken to be on the old
                             galaxy 00', which follows the time-axis.
                                  At t = —T the galaxy represented by the world line AA' was O’s nearest
                             neighbour. By t — o it has drifted far away, but new galaxies (represented by
                              BB', CC', etc.) have sprung up in the meantime. Occasionally galaxies capture
                             each other gravitationally (FF', GG') and then, owing to their combined mass, are
                             likely to capture many more (HH', KK'). All the time, however, this cluster is
                             moving away from O.
                                  The ages of the nebulae follow therefore a merely statistical law and there is no
                             reason to suppose that a particular nebula (such as our Milky Way) is of some age
                             rather than another. In our theory there is therefore no difficulty whatever in
                             taking the age of our galaxy to be anything indicated by local observations (such as
                            say 5-8 x 109 years), although T is much shorter.
                                  The statistics of such a system are difficult, but very tentatively the course of
                            evolution may be pictured as going from the single field nebula to systems such as
                             our own with a dozen or two members and ending up as the great clusters, with a
                            population of hundreds. The older the system the more likely it is to be far away
                            from any other old galaxy, so that at any time only a limited number of great
                            clusters should be within regions which can be explored with a telescope of given
                            size.


                        © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
                                                                                                                 c
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        No, 3, 1948                 Theory of the Expanding Universe                                 265

                            Although this view of nebular evolution does not form an integral part of the
                        theory,*we should mention why we do not follow the view that clusters are evapor-
                        ating rather than condensing. The time constant for gravitational capture is
                        (yM/J3)"^, where Mis the mass of a nebula and d the internebular distance.*
                        This time is therefore only about io10 years, compared with the period of 1012 years
                        required for evaporation by dynamical friction (15). Furthermore, the presence
                        of even a very tenuous intergalactic gas would not allow nebulae to acquire the
                         “accidentally” high velocities required for evaporation. Therefore we expect
                        that in general the tendency for evaporation will be negligible compared with the
                        gravitational clustering tendency.
                            If we assign to our galaxy, on the astrophysical evidence, an age of between
                        5 x io9 and io10 years, it follows that there should be a moderate degree of clustering
                        such as is actually observed.

                                                        4. The Physics of Creation
                            4.1. We shall now attempt to consider some of the details of the physical
                        process of creation. The discussion must necessarily be somewhat speculative
                        but some deductions can be made which limit the range of the possibilities. The
                        average rate of creation is determined by the rate of expansion and the density of
                        the universe (16) and is approximately io-43 g. per sec. per cm.3. We now must
                        discuss how this creation rate is distributed in space. Will it be roughly the same
                        everywhere or will it be very much greater in some regions than in others ? In
                        particular will it be as concentrated as the existing matter is (in which case it would
                        be more appropriate to speak of creation per unit mass per unit time) ?
                            The answer to this question is intimately connected with the theory of evolution.
                        There are, roughly speaking, at present two schools of thought in this matter :
                             (i) One body of astronomers is of the opinion that the main line of develop-
                                 ment is centrifugal. For example, they consider that nebulae evaporate
                                 from clusters and so form the general field, that far more matter is ejected
                                 by stars than is accreted by them, so that interstellar space is populated
                                 primarily by matter which once was stellar, etc.
                            (ii) Another body of astronomers considers that centripetal development is
                                 predominant. In their view, accretion is far more important for stellar
                                 evolution than the ejection of matter from stars ; they consider the gradual
                                 condensation of stars in the interstellar material (which is taken to con-
                                 stitute the bulk of the mass of a nebula) to be the main process of nebular
                                 evolution, etc.
                            Now it is clear from the discussion in Section 1, that in order to ensure the
                        stationary aspect of the universe, the new material must be created in the form
                        from which evolution starts. For, if evolution turns matter from state A into
                        state B, then the proportion of matter in state A will be diminished unless the
                        newly created matter is in state A. Therefore the created matter must start at the
                        beginning of the evolutionary chain to replenish the reservoir that would otherwise
                        dry up. Accordingly if we assume that creation is by unit mass, then we have to
                        assume that the centrifugal line of thought is correct over an even wider field than
                        its adherents claim, while" if we assume the rate of creation per unit volume to be
                        about the same everywhere, then we have to follow the centripetal school.

                            * Two equal nebulae of mass M originally at rest relatively to each other at distance d would
                        collide after a time t=:±Tr(yM¡cP)~$



                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B




                        266                    H. Bondi and T. Gold, The Steady-state                          Vol. 108

                            In our opinion the first view is untenable. For if matter were created mainly
                        in the stellar interior it would have to boil off or be ejected in explosions to a dis-
                        tance and at a rate sufficient to supply intergalactic space with enough material
                        for the required rate of formation of new galaxies. This implies that on an
                        average each star loses its entire mass, by such a process of evaporation or explosion,
                        in iTloge2=4 x io8 years ! The known rate of occurrence of novae and super-
                        novae shows that these phenomena can only make an insignificant contribution to
                        this. This calculation given here does not allow for the necessary recondensation of
                        the ejected material in its original galaxy, so that the period would be even shorter.
                        This conclusion seems to be so absurd that we take it to prove that the rate of
                        creation per unit volume per unit time is roughly constant and that evolution
                        proceeds mainly in the centripetal direction.* It must be clearly understood
                        that some variation of the rate of creation is still permitted, it is only necessary that
                        far more matter is created in space than in the stars.
                            Accordingly we assume that the rate of creation is everywhere about io-43 g.
                        per sec. per cm.3, although variations by a factor of, say 100, are quite permissible.
                        This rate corresponds to one new atom of hydrogen per cubic metre per 3 x io5
                        years. Accordingly we cannot expect the process to be directly observable.
                            4.2. We have seen that the process of creation will take place everywhere
                        and that most of the matter will be created in the vast intergalactic spaces. The
                        next question to engage our attention will be the initial motion of the created
                        matter.
                            It is evident that this velocity vector associated with creation cannot be
                        relativistically invariant, nor can invariance be introduced by assuming a random
                        distribution of velocities, since the only invariant distribution diverges.
                            It follows, therefore, that there will be a preferred time-like direction at each
                        point of space-time, and that the initial motion of newly created matter will be
                        either along this direction (in the 4-dimensional sense) or will be distributed about
                        it in a non-invariant way. The question of this distribution will be discussed
                        later; for the moment it will be assumed that the matter is actually created along
                        the preferred direction.
                             The adoption of a non-invariant law of creation may at first sight seem
                        surprising ; but are we entitled to demand invariance of creation when the resulting
                        movement of matter is well known not to be invariant? Even in the cos-
                        mologies of general relativity the existence of a preferred direction is explicitly
                        recognized in WeyFs postulate. General relativity demands that the laws of
                        cosmology should be invariant while admitting that the one and only application
                        is not invariant. We can see no reason why the laws of nature determining the
                        structure of our universe should be invariant, although the universe is unique and
                         does not bear an invariant aspect.
                             The identification of the preferred direction defined by the creation of matter
                        with the preferred direction defined by the motion of matter (as discussed in 2.4)
                        is compelling. It is most satisfactory that our theory can connect the direction
                         defined everywhere by the motion of matter with another phenomenon, while in
                        other theories no such connection exists.
                             It should be realized that the existence of this preferred state of motion not only
                        conflicts with general relativity, but also with restricted (and even with Galilean)
                        relativity. However, this lack of invariance is nothing new. As we have seen in
                              * This conclusion has already been anticipated in the discussion on clusters in 3.4.

                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        INTo. 3, 1948             Theory of the Expanding Universe                         267

                         Section 2 it is an immediate consequence of the law of the recession of nebulae.
                            4.3. We must now consider the problem of the probability distribution of the
                        initial velocity about the preferred direction. If the spread of velocities were
                        great, then this would lead either to large amounts of radiation from intergalactic
                        space or to high temperatures of intergalactic matter.
                            The amount of radiation observed and the postulated intergalactic conden-
                        sation limit the velocity spread to at most io7cm./sec., corresponding to a temper-
                        ature of at most 50,000 deg.
                            There do not seem to be any arguments setting a lower limit to the temperature
                        and the arguments limiting the temperature from above all depend on the absence
                        of any effects of the temperature. If one wishes to have a definite and simple
                        picture of the process, one can therefore assume that matter is created without
                        random velocities (i. e. at zero temperature), although this is not a necessary
                        conclusion.
                            4.4. The next question we must discuss is the electric charge of the created
                        matter. Now it is clear that an average excess charge of either sign would lead
                        to forces of repulsion tending to remove the excess charge to infinity. The speed
                        with which the excess charge is repelled to infinity depends on the ratio of excess
                        charge to mass. It can be shown (17) that if this ratio is greater than about
                         io~19 x electron charge/electron mass, then this repulsion of excess charge would
                        take place at a speed greater than the speed of expansion of the material universe.
                         But such a rapidly “expanding universe of excess charge” cannot be present
                        together with a slowly expanding “universe of matter” without violating the
                        principle of homogeneity. Accordingly we can conclude that if there is any
                        average charge excess of the created matter, the average charge-mass ratio must not
                        exceed the very low limit mentioned above.
                             These results give us some indication of what the created matter may be. If
                        we reject as far-fetched the possibility of the creation of dust, etc., and concentrate
                        on the simplest building material, then we are left with the following possibilities :
                               (i) Protons and electrons, created separately but at identical (or very nearly
                                   identical) rates. The radiation arising from collisions or captures would
                                   be just within the limits laid down in 4.3.
                              (ii) Neutrons. The energy released by the disintegraton of the neutrons
                                   would (within a few hours of creation) lead to velocities and radiation
                                   somewhat in excess of the limits mentioned. Nevertheless, this possibility
                                   is so attractive that it should not be ruled out without further examination.
                             (iii) Hydrogen atoms.
                             The last possibility seems to agree best with the view adopted in 4.3, although
                        (i) cannot be excluded. Since (i) would, but for the necessarily small amount of
                        radiation, also lead to the formation of hydrogen in the ground state, we can for
                        simplicity and definiteness adopt (iii).
                             In agreement with the widely held view that the building-up of the elements is a
                        complex stellar process and that the traces of elements other than hydrogen in
                        interstellar space are due to explosion and ejection of matter from stars, we have
                        assumed here that all matter starts its career as hydrogen.      This seems to us to be
                         very plausible, but is a separate subject not directly connected with the creation
                        theory.
                             4.5. We finally have to consider where in space-time matter is created and it
                        seems to be most reasonable to assume that it is created in a random manner.




                           © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        268                   H. Bondi and T. Gold, The Steady-state                   Vol. io&

                        According to this view the probability of creation taking place in any particular
                        four-dimensional element of volume (spatial volume element x element of time) is
                        simply proportional to its (four-dimensional) volume, the factor of proportionality^
                        being a function of position.
                            By our argument in 4.1. this factor cannot vary very much from point to point.
                            Accordingly randomness would be introduced by the random origin of
                        particles, but not necessarily by any initial random motion.

                                                 5. The Function of a Field Theory
                             5.1. We have now completed that part of the development of our theory which
                        deals with the motion of the universe as a whole and with the physical character of
                        the new concepts introduced. The next step must be a more detailed formtilation
                        of the theory in terms of which it is possible to discuss the motion of individual
                        particles not necessarily following the general expansion of the universe. Two*
                        methods of attack on this problem are possible. One can either follow the methods
                        of kinematical relativity in order to examine the consequences of the perfect
                        cosmological principle, or one can try to build up a field theory. The first
                        possibility has been well explored for a less stringent cosmological principle by
                        Milne, Walker and their school. Our perfect cosmological principle should make
                        progress easier and additional assumptions less necessary.
                             It is, however, known from kinematical relativity that the application of this
                        technique is by no means easy unless the cosmological principle is assumed to apply
                        to every detail of world structure. This is of course not true ; the cosmological
                        principle is a purely statistical law in the universe, applyingsonly to large-scale
                        averages. The need to make this additional and unwarranted assumption makes
                        the interpretation of the theory difficult and its applicability somewhat doubtful.
                             We must stress here that in our view the difference between statistical and
                        complete homogeneity imposes a serious requirement on any theory of cosmology.
                        While it is quite legitimate to consider first a completely homogeneous universe for
                        reasons of mathematical convenience, great care must be taken to see that the
                        introduction of fluctuations affects only the mathematical detail and not the logical
                        structure of the theory. This requirement is not fulfilled by a number of the
                        models of general relativity.
                             The development of a field theory is therefore of particular importance. We
                        wish to stress that in our view general relativity cannot be satisfactorily adapted to
                         our theory, in spite of its great attractiveness. Though general relativity is
                        presumably correct in stating that the fight cone, together with space and time
                         measurements, defines a tensor field throughout space-time, we reject entirely the
                         claim that this is the only fundamental covariant field universally defined. An
                         equally fundamental vector field is defined by the state of motion in which an
                         observer must be in order to see isotropy in the universe around him. This
                         universally defined vector field exists in every cosmology, but it is of particular
                        importance in the theory presented here. This was discussed in detail in 3.1. In
                         our opinion, this field should play as important a part in the theory as the tensor
                         field.
                             As a consequence of general relativity’s neglect of this vector field, it is far toe
                         wide a theory, i. e. it covers a far greater range of possibilities than actually exist
                         This is frankly recognized in relativistic cosmology and Weyl’s postulate is used tc
                         narrow it down sufficiently. To us this narrowing-down of the theory in its fina




                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        ; No. 3, 1948                Theory of the Expanding Universe                             269

                                form seems to be utterly unsatisfactory, these restrictions should enter the theory
                                at the beginning and not at the end.
                                    Another fundamental objection to general relativity is that it does not satisfy
                             ■ Mach’s principle completely. Finally, the strict conservation of mass implied by
                               the field equations conflicts with the very basis of our theory. This has already
                                been pointed out in Section 2.
                            ;       5.2. The authors wish to express their gratitude to Mr F. Hoyle for many
                               helpful discussions they had with him on the question of a field theory formulation
                               of the perfect cosmological principle. His early appreciation of the significance of
                               the continuous creation of matter has been a great encouragement to us. He is
                               publishing (18) a most interesting adaptation of the field equations of general
                           ¡ relativity which does not conflict with the idea of creation and has the de Sitter
                           I universe with constant density and zero pressure as a solution.
                           ,        This formulation has a number of attractive features, chief amongst which is
                               the smallness of the change in the field equations. This permits the use of the
                              whole apparatus of general relativity. Nevertheless, we feel that this formulation
                              is unsatisfactory and unacceptable.
                          I         A field theory is only required to deal with deviations from perfect uniformity,
                              since, as was shown in this paper, the case of uniformity can be dealt with easily
                              without field theory. But the insertion of non-uniformities raises very serious
                              objections to Hoyle’s theory. For every concentration of mass will deflect the
                              pencil of geodesics corresponding, in his theory, to the particles before they are
                              created. This will create multiplicities in the C field, which a very long time after
                              the occurrence of his event O, will be of very high order. At first sight one would
                              expect this to imply an impossibly high temperature of the created particles, far in
                              excess of the limits laid down in 4.3. Mr Hoyle has however very kindly informed
                              us that this is not the case. He has found that the effect of his C field is to deflect
                             the orbits of particles so that they are no longer geodesics. The deflection i&
                             always such as to increase uniformity, i.e. relative velocities are diminished.
                             Furthermore, massive bodies are far less strongly affected than a tenuous gas.
                             Therefore this u C force” has little effect on stars, but it strongly deflects newly
                             created particles which form a gas of very low density, so strongly in fact that by
                             the time the first collisions are likely to occur the kinetic temperature is already low.
                                   While this argument shows that the theory survives the temperature test, it
                           largely destroys at the same time its attractiveness. The geodesic postulate plays,
                           a great part in the development of general relativity. In Hoyle’s theory it is*
                           dropped in such a way as to infringe even Galileo’s principle that all bodies fall
                           equally fast. However, the infringement is far too small to be detected by practical
                           astronomy. The direct physical reality given to space itself by the C field is.
                          therefore very great indeed. Hence thfc C field exerts forces on material bodies.
                          While this is necessary to give reality to the vector field discussed in 2.4, it seems,
                          unsatisfactory to us that the C field is only partly determined by the existing motion,
                          of matter and is largely determined by Hoyle’s event O in the infinite past.
                                   Some of the objections made here against relativity can be made equally well
                          against Hoyle’s theory. In particular Mach’s principle is satisfied no more and no
                          less than in general relativity.
                        ,         In view of these objections we have no hesitation in rejecting Hoyle’s theory,,
                         although it is the first and at the moment only field theory formulation of the
                        hypothesis of continuous creation of matter.




                           © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
194 8MNRAS.108. .252B

                        270             The Steady-state Theory of the Expanding Universe              VoL io!

                            5.3. We hope to present soon in another paper a field theory formulation fre<
                        from these objections. It may however be advantageous to state here already why
                        in our view, the principles laid down in the present paper should enable one t<
                        reformulate the entire problem of inertia and the associated acceleration of th<
                        galaxies. The need to explain the self-perpetuating character of the universe
                        rather than the “force” responsible for its expansion will presumably dispense
                        with the necessity for such an artificial concept as the À force of general relativity
                        Furthermore, in all field theories hitherto presented, the interaction between 2
                        particle and the bulk of the universe had to be assumed to be weak and indirect
                        because of the need to have permanent intrinsic laws of nature in a supposedly
                        changing universe. There is no such restriction in our case. The stationary
                        character of the universe permits us to assume very strong interactions and yet tc
                        have permanent laws of nature. Only in this way can Mach’s principle b<
                        truly satisfied and only such a theory can establish satisfactory connections
                        between cosmology and laboratory physics.
                          Trinity Collegey
                            Cambridge :
                          1948 Jwiv 13*

                                                              References
                         {1) Mach, E., The Science of Mechanics, London, 1893, pp. 229-238.
                         <2) Weyl, H., Phys. Z., 24, 230-232, 1923; Phil. Mag., Series 7, 9, 936-943, 1930.
                          (3) Olbers, Bode's Jahrbuch, 10, 1826.
                          (4) Eddington, A. S., Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 133, 605, 1931; M.N., 92, 3, 1932.
                         <5) Robertson, H. P., Ap. J., 82, 284, 1935.
                         {6) Walker, A. G., Proc. Lond. Math, Soc., Series 2, 42, 90, 1936.
                         {7) dé Sitter, W., Proc. Akad. Wetensch. Amst., 19, 1217, 1917.
                          (8) Robertson, H. P., Rev. Mod. Phys., 5, 71, 1933.
                          (9) Hubble, E., Ap. J., 84, 537, 1936.
                        (10) Hubble, E. and Humason, M. L., Ap. J., 74, 43, 1931.
                        (11) Hubble, E., Ap. J., 84, 270, 1936.
                        {12) ten Bruggencate, P., Naturwiss, 25, 561, 1937.
                        {13) Hubble, E., Ap.J., 84, 517, 1936. Shapley, H., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei., 24, 148, 1938
                                Shapley, H. and Ames, A., Ann. Harv. Coll. Obs., 88, No. 2, 1932. The treatmen
                                given here is adapted from McVittie, G. C., Proc. Phys. Soc., 51, 529, 1939.
                        <14) Lemaître, G., M.N., 91, 483, 1931.
                        <15) Tuberg, M., Ap. J., 98, 501, 1943.
                        {16) Cf. Hubble, É., The Realm of the Nebulae, Oxford, 1936, p. 189.
                        (17) Unpublished theorem of Newtonian Cosmology.
                        {18) Hoyle, F., M.N., 108, No. 5, 1948 (in press).




                          © Royal Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
