XfW
        EIN STEIN ’S STATISTICAL THEORIES

      N E of the most remarkable volumes in the whole of scien­
       tific literature seems to me Vol. 17 (4th series) of A nnalen
der        Physik, 1905. It contains three papers by Einstein, each
dealing with a different subject, and each to-day acknowledged
to be a masterpiece, the source of a new branch of physics.
These three subjects, in order of pages, are: theory of photons,
Brownian motion, and relativity.
   Relativity is the last one, and this shows that Einstein’s
mind at that time was not completely absorbed by his ideas on
space and time, simultaneity and electro-dynamics. In my
opinion he would be one of the greatest theoretical physicists
of all times even if he had not written a single line on rela­
tivity—an assumption for which I have to apologise, as it is
rather absurd. For Einstein’s conception of the physical world
cannot be divided into watertight compartments, and it is im­
possible to imagine that he should have by-passed one of the
fundamental problems of the time.
   H ere I propose to discuss Einstein’s contributions to statis­
tical methods in physics. H is publications on this subject can
be divided into two groups: an early set of papers deals with
classical statistical mechanics, whereas the rest is connected with
quantum theory. Both groups are intimately connected with
Einstein’s philosophy of science. H e has seen more clearly than
anyone before him the statistical background of the laws of
physics, and he was a pioneer in the struggle for conquering
the wilderness of quantum phenomena. Yet later, when out of
his own work a synthesis of statistical and quantum principles
emerged which seemed to be acceptable to almost all physicists,
he kept himself aloof and sceptical. Many of us regard this as
a tragedy—for him, as he gropes his way in loneliness, and for
                                    163
164                                MAX BORN
us who miss our leader and standard-bearer. I shall not try to
suggest a resolution of this discord. We have to accept the fact
that even in physics fundamental convictions are prior to rea­
soning, as in all other human activities. It is my task to give
an account of Einstein’s work and to discuss it from my own
philosophical standpoint.
    Einstein’s first paper of 1902, “ Kinetische Theorie des
Warmegleichgewichtes und des zweiten Hauptsatzes der
Thermodynamik”1 is a remarkable example of the fact that
when the time is ripe important ideas are developed almost
simultaneously by different men at distant places. Einstein says
in his introduction that nobody has yet succeeded in deriving the
conditions of thermal equilibrium and of the second law of
thermodynamics from probability considerations, although
Maxwell and Boltzmann came near to it. W illard Gibbs is
not mentioned. In fact, Einstein’s paper is a re-discovery of
all essential features of statistical mechanics and obviously
written in total ignorance of the fact that the whole matter
had been thoroughly treated by Gibbs a year before (1901).
The similarity is quite amazing. Like Gibbs, Einstein investi­
gates the statistical behaviour of a virtual assembly of equal
mechanical systems of a very general type. A state of the single
 system is described by a set of generalised co-ordinates and
velocities, which can be represented as a point in a 2«-dimen-
sional “ phase-space;” the energy is given as function of these
 variables. The only consequence of the dynamical laws used
 is the theorem of Liouville according to which any domain in
 the 2«-dimensional phase-space of all co-ordinates and momenta
 preserves its volume in time. This law makes it possible to de­
 fine regions of equal weight and to apply the laws of prob­
 ability. In fact, Einstein’s method is essentially identical with
 Gibb’s theory of canonical assemblies. In a second paper, of
 the following year, entitled “ Eine Theorie der Grundlagen der
 Thermodynamik,”2 Einstein builds the theory on another basis
 not used by Gibbs, namely on the consideration of a single sys­
 tem in course of time (later called “Zeit-Gesammtheit” time
  1 Annalen der Physik (4 ) , 9, p. 477, (1 9 0 2 ).
  * Annalen der Physik (4 ) ,       p. 170, (1 9 0 3 ).
           EINSTEIN’S STATISTICAL THEORIES                            165

assembly), and proves that this is equivalent to a certain virtual
assembly of many systems, Gibb’s micro-canonical assembly.
Finally, he shows that the canonical and micro-canonical distri­
bution lead to the same physical consequences.
    Einstein’s approach to the subject seems to me slightly less
abstract than that of Gibbs. This is also confirmed by the fact
that Gibbs made no striking application of his new method,
while Einstein at once proceeded to apply his theorems to a case
of utmost importance, namely to systems of a size suited for
demonstrating the reality of molecules and the correctness of
the kinetic theory of matter.
    This was the theory of Brownian movement. Einstein’s papers
on this subject are now easily accessible in a little volume edited
and supplied with notes by R. Fiirth, and translated into Eng­
lish by A. D. Cowper.3 In the first paper (1905) he sets out to
show “that, according to the molecular-kinetic theory of heat,
bodies of microscopically visible size suspended in a liquid will
perform movements of such magnitude that they can be easily
observed in a microscope, on account of the molecular motion
of heat,” and he adds that these movements are possibly identi­
cal with the “ Brownian motion” though his information about
the latter is too vague to form a definite judgment.
    The fundamental step taken by Einstein was the idea of raising
the kinetic theory of matter from a possible, plausible, useful
hypothesis to a matter of observation, by pointing out cases
where the molecular motion and its statistical character can be
made visible. It was the first example of a phenomenon of
thermal fluctuations, and his method is the classical paradigma^
for the treatment of all of them. H e regards the movement ^
of the suspended particles as a process of diffusion under the
action of osmotic pressure and other forces, among which
 friction due to the viscosity of the liquid is the most important
one. The logical clue to the understanding of the phenomenon
 consists in the statement that the actual velocity of the suspended
 particle, produced by the impacts of the molecules of the liquid
 on it, is unobservable; the visible effect in a finite interval of
  'Investigations on the Theory of the Brownian M ovem ent; Methuen & Co.,
London, (1926).
166                      MAX BORN
time t consists of irregular displacements, the probability of
which satisfies a differential equation of the same type as the
equation of diffusion. The diffusion coefficient is nothing but
the mean square of the displacement divided by 2T . In this
way Einstein obtained his celebrated law expressing the mean
square displacement for t in terms of measurable quantities
(temperature, radius of the particle, viscosity of the liquid)
and of the number of molecules in a gramme-molecule (Avo-
gadro’s number TV). By its simplicity and clarity this paper is
a classic of our science.
   In the second paper (1906) Einstein refers to the work of
Siedentopf (Jena) and Gouy (Lyons) who convinced them­
selves by observations that the Brownian motion was in fact
caused by the thermal agitation of the molecules of the liquid,
and from this moment on he takes it for granted that the
“irregular motion of suspended particles” predicted by him is
identical with the Brownian motion. This and the following
publications are devoted to the working out of details (e.g.,
rotatory Brownian motion) and presenting the theory in other
forms; but they contain nothing essentially new.
   I     think that these investigations of Einstein have done more
than any other work to convince physicists of the reality of
atoms and molecules, of the kinetic theory of heat, and of the
fundamental part of probability in the natural laws. Reading
these papers one is inclined to believe that at that time the
statistical aspect of physics was preponderant in Einstein’s
mind; yet at the same time he worked on relativity where
rigorous causality reigns. His conviction seems always to have
been, and still is to-day, that the ultimate laws of nature are
causal and deterministic, that probability is used to cover our
ignorance if we have to do with numerous particles, and that
only the vastness of this ignorance pushes statistics into the
 fore-front.
    Most physicists do not share this view to-day, and the reason
 for this is the development of quantum theory. Einstein’s con­
tribution to this development is great. His first paper of 1905,
 mentioned already, is usually quoted for the interpretation
 of the photo-electric effect and similar phenomena (Stokes law
                           >


/       (        E IN S T E IN ’S S T A T IS T IC A L T H E O R IE S   167

    of photo-luminescence, photo-ionisation) in terms of light-
    quanta (light-darts, photons). As a matter of fact, the main             /
    argument of Einstein is again of a statistical nature, and the
    phenomena just mentioned are used in the end for confirmation.
    This statistical reasoning is very characteristic of Einstein, and
    produces the impression that for him the laws of probability
    are central and by far more important than any other law. H e
    starts with the fundamental difference between an ideal gas and
    a cavity filled with radiation: the gas consists of a finite number
    of particles, while radiation is described by a set of functions
    in space, hence by an infinite number of variables. This is the
    root of the difficulty of explaining the law of black body radia­
    tion; the monochromatic density of radiation turns out to be
    proportional to the absolute temperature (later known as the
    law of Rayleigh-Jeans) with a factor independent of frequency,
    and therefore the total density becomes infinite. In order to
    avoid this, Planck (1900) had introduced the hypothesis that
    radiation consists of quanta of finite size. Einstein, however,
    does not use Planck’s radiation law, but the simpler law of Wien,
    which is the limiting case for low radiation density, expecting
    rightly that here the corpuscular character of the radiation will
    be more evident. H e shows how one can obtain the entropy S
    of black body radiation from a given radiation law (mono­
    chromatic density as function of frequency) and applies then
    Boltzmann’s fundamental relation between entropy S and
    thermodynamic probability W
                               S = k log W
    where k is the gas constant per molecule, for determining W .
    This formula was certainly meant by Boltzmann to express
    the physical quantity S in terms of the combinatory quantity
    W , obtained by counting all possible configurations of the
    atomistic elements of the statistical ensemble. Einstein inverts
    this process: he starts from the known function S in order to
    obtain an expression for the probability which can be used as
    a clue to the interpretation of the statistical elements. (The
    same trick has been applied by him later in his work on fluctua­
    tions;4 although this is of considerable practical importance,
      * Annalen der Physik ( 4 ) , ig , p. 373, ( 1 9 0 6 ) .
i68                          MAX BORN
I shall only mention it, since it introduces no new fundamental
concept apart from that “ inversion.” )
   Substituting the entropy derived from Wien’s law into Boltz­
mann’s formula, Einstein obtains for the probability of finding
the total energy E by chance compressed in a fraction aV of the
total volume V                                   ..    . ,
                              W — aE/by      <C4 tl     dh '
that means, the radiation behaves as if it consisted of independ­
ent quanta of energy of size and number n = E /h v . It is ob­
vious from the text of the paper that this result had an over­
whelming power of conviction for Einstein, and that it led
him to search for confirmation of a more direct kind. This he
found in the physical phenomena mentioned above (e.g., photo­
electric effect) whose common feature is the exchange of energy
between an electron and light. The impression produced on
the experimentalists by these discoveries was very great. For
the facts were known to many, but not correlated. At that time
Einstein’s gift for intuiting such correlations was almost uncanny.
It was based on a thorough knowledge of experimental facts
combined with a profound understanding of the present state
of theory, which enabled him to see at once where something
strange was happening. H is work at that period was essentially
empirical in method, though directed to building up a con­
sistent theory—in contrast to his later work when he was more
and more led by philosophical and mathematical ideas.
   A second example of the application of this method is the
work on specific heat.5 It started again with a theoretical con­
sideration of that type which provided the strongest evidence
in Einstein’s mind, namely on statistics. H e remarks that
Planck’s radiation formula can be understood by giving up the
continuous distribution of statistical weight in the phase-space
which is a consequence of Liouville’s theorem of dynamics; in­
stead, for vibrating systems of the kind used as absorbers and
emitters in the theory of radiation most states have a vanish­
ing statistical weight and only a selected number (whose
energies are multiples of a quantum) have finite weights.
  ‘ “Die Planck’sche Theorie der Strahlung und die Theorie der specifischen
W arme,” Annalen der Phystk (4 ) , 22, p. 180, (1 907).
           EINSTEIN’S STATISTICAL THEORIES                      169
    Now if this is so, the quantum is not a feature of radiation
but of general physical statistics, and should therefore appear
in other phenomena where vibrators are involved. This argu­
ment was obviously the moving force in Einstein’s mind, and
it became fertile by his knowledge of facts and his unfailing
judgment of their bearing on the problem. I wonder whether
he knew that there were solid elements for which the specific
heat per mole was lower than its normal value 5.94 calories,
given by the law of Dulong-Petit, or whether he first had the
theory and then scanned the tables to find examples. The law
of Dulong-Petit is a direct consequence of the law of equiparti-
tion of classical statistical mechanics, which states that each
co-ordinate or momentum contributing a quadratic term to the
energy should carry the same average energy, namely Yi R T
per mole where R is the gas constant} as R is a little less than
2 calories per degree and an oscillator has 3 co-ordinates and
3 momenta, the energy of one mole of a solid element per
degree of temperature should be 6 X Y zR T , or 5.94 calories.
If there are substances for which the experimental value is
essentially lower, as it actually is for carbon (diamond), boron,
silicon, one has a contradiction between facts and classical theory.
Another such contradiction is provided by some substances with
poly-atomic molecules. Drude had proved by optical experi­
ments that the atoms in these molecules were performing oscil­
lations about each other; hence the number of vibrating units
per molecule should be higher than 6 and therefore the specific
heat higher than the Dulong-Petit value—but that is not always
the case. Moreover Einstein could not help wondering about
the contribution of the electrons to the specific heat. At that time
vibrating electrons in the atom were assumed for explaining the
ultra-violet absorption; they did apparently not contribute to
the specific heat, in contradiction to the equipartition law.
   All these difficulties were at once swept away by Einstein’s
suggestion that the atomic oscillators do not follow the equi­
partition law, but the same law which leads to Planck’s radia­
tion formula. Then the mean energy would not be proportional
to the absolute temperature but decrease more quickly with
falling temperature in a way which still depends on the fre-
    170                       MAX BORN
    quencies of the oscillators. H igh frequency oscillators like the
    electrons would at ordinary temperature contribute nothing
    to the specific heat, atoms only if they were not too light and
    not too strongly bound. Einstein confirmed that these conditions
    were satisfied for the cases of poly-atomic molecules for which
    Drude had estimated the frequencies, and he showed that the
    measurements of the specific heat of diamond agreed fairly
    well with his calculation.
        But this is not the place to enter into a discussion of the
    physical details of Einstein’s discovery. The consequences with
    regard to the principles of scientific knowledge were far reach­
    ing. It was now proved that the quantum effects were not a
    specific property of radiation but a general feature of physical
    systems. The old rule “natura non facit saltus” was disproved:
    there are fundamental discontinuities, quanta of energy, not
    only in radiation but in ordinary matter.
        In Einstein’s model of a molecule or a solid these quanta
    are still closely connected with the motion of single vibrating
    particles. But soon it became clear that a considerable generalisa­
    tion was necessary. The atoms in molecules and crystals are not
$
    independent but coupled by strong forces. Therefore the mo­
    tion of an individual particle is not that of a single harmonic
    oscillator, but the superposition of many harmonic vibrations.
    The carrier of a simple harmonic motion is nothing material at
    a ll; it is the abstract “normal mode,” well known from ordi­
    nary mechanics. For crystals in particular each normal mode is
    a standing wave. The introduction of this idea opened the way
    to a quantitative theory of thermodynamics of molecules and
    crystals and demonstrated the abstract character of the new
    quantum physics which began to emerge from this work. It
    became clear that the laws of micro-physics differed funda­
    mentally from those of matter in bulk. Nobody has done more
    to elucidate this than Einstein. I cannot report all his contribu­
    tions, but shall confine myself to two outstanding investigations
    which paved the way for the new micro-mechanics which
    physics at large has accepted to-day—while Einstein himself
    stands aloof, critical, sceptical, and hoping that this episode may
    pass by and physics return to classical principles.
           EINSTEIN’S STATISTICAL THEORIES                           171
    The first of these two investigations has again to do with
the law of radiation and statistics.6There are two ways of tackling
problems of statistical equilibrium. The first is a direct one,
which one may call the combinatory method: After having
established the weights of elementary cases one calculates the
number of combinations of these elements which correspond
to an observable state; this number is the statistical probability
W , from which all physical properties can be obtained (e.g.
the entropy by Boltzmann’s formula). The second method
consists in determining the rates of all competing elementary
processes, which lead to the equilibrium in question. This is, of
course, much more difficult; for it demands not only the count­
ing of equally probable cases but a real knowledge of the
mechanism involved. But, on the other hand, it carries much
further, providing not only the conditions of equilibrium but
also of the time-rate of processes starting from non-equilibrium
configurations. A classical example of this second method is
Boltzmann’s and Maxwell’s formulation of the kinetic theory
of gases; here the elementary mechanism is given by binary
encounters of molecules, the rate of which is proportional to
the number-density of both partners. From the “ collision equa­
tion” the distribution function of the molecules can be deter­
mined not only in statistical equilibrium, but also for the case
of motion in bulk, flow of heat, diffusion etc. Another example
is the law of mass-action in chemistry, established by Guldberg
and Waage; here again the elementary mechanism is provided                 a/
by multiple collisions of groups of molecules which combine,
split, or exchange atoms at a rate proportional to the number-
density of the partners. A special case of these elementary
processes is the monatomic reaction, where the molecules of one
type spontaneously explode with a rate proportional to their
number-density. This case has a tremendous importance in
nuclear physics: it is the law of radio-active decay. Whereas
in the few examples of ordinary chemistry, where monatomic
reaction has been observed, a dependence of reaction velocity
on the physical conditions (e.g. temperature) could be as­
sumed or even observed, this was not the case for radio-activity:
 *“Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung,” Phys. Z. 18, p. 121, (1917).
             7)ij{


                          MAX BORN
The decay constant seemed to be an invariable property of the
nucleus, unchangeable by any external influences. Each in­
dividual nucleus explodes at an unpredictable moment} yet if
a great number of nuclei are observed, the average rate of dis­
integration is proportional to the total number present. It looks
as if the law of causality is put out of action for these processes.
    Now what Einstein did was to show that Planck’s law of radia­
tion can just be reduced to processes of a similar type, of a more
or less non-causal character. Consider two stationary states of
an atom, say the lowest state i and an excited state 2. Einstein
assumes that if an atom is found to be in the state 2 it has a
certain probability of returning to the ground state I, emitting
a photon of a frequency which, according to the quantum law,
corresponds to the energy difference between the two states}
i.e. in a big assembly of such atoms the number of atoms in state
2 returning to the ground state I per unit time is proportional
to their initial number— exactly as for radio-active disintegra­
tion. The radiation, on the other hand, produces a certain prob­
ability for the reverse process I -» 2 which represents absorp­
tion of a photon of frequency v12 and is proportional to the
radiation density for the frequency.
    Now these two processes alone balancing one another would
not lead to Planck’s formula} Einstein is compelled to introduce
a third one, namely an influence of the radiation on the emis­
sion process 2 -» I, “induced emission,” which again has a prob­
ability proportional to the radiation density for vi2.
    This extremely simple argument together with the most
elementary principle of Boltzmann’s statistics leads at once to
Planck’s formula without any specification of the magnitude
of the transition probabilities. Einstein has connected it with
a consideration of the transfer of momentum between atom and
radiation, showing that the mechanism proposed by him is not
consistent with the classical idea of spherical waves but only with
a dart-like behaviour of the quanta. H ere we are not concerned
with this side of Einstein’s work, but with its bearing on his
attitude to the fundamental question of causal and statistical
laws in physics. From this point of view this paper is of particu­
lar interest. For it meant a decisive step in the direction of non-
               EINSTEIN’S STATISTICAL THEORIES                     173
   causal, indeterministic reasoning. O f course, I am sure that
   Einstein himself was—and is still— convinced that there are
   structural properties in the excited atom which determine the
   exact moment of emission, and that probability is called in
 J only because of our incomplete knowledge of the pre-history
 / of the atom. Yet the fact remains that he has initiated the
 I spreading of indeterministic statistical reasoning from its
   original source, radio-activity, into other domains of physics.
                                                                         J
      Still another feature of Einstein’s work must be mentioned
   which was also of considerable assistance to the formulation
   of indeterministic physics in quantum mechanics. It is the fact
   that it follows from the validity of Planck’s law of radiation
   that the probabilities of absorption (1 -> 2) and induced emis­
   sion (2     1) are equal. This was the first indication that inter­
   action of atomic systems always involves two states in a sym­
   metrical way. In classical mechanics an external agent like
   radiation acts on one definite state, and the result of the action
   can be calculated from the properties of this state and the ex­
   ternal agent. In quantum mechanics each process is a transition
   between two states which enter symmetrically into the laws of
   interaction with an external agent. This symmetrical property
   was one of the deciding clues which led to the formulation of
                                                                         i
   matrix mechanics, the earliest form of modern quantum me­
   chanics. The first indication of this symmetry was provided by
I Einstein’s discovery of the equality of up- and down-ward
I transition probabilities.
      The last of Einstein’s investigations which I wish to discuss
   in this report is his work on the quantum theory of monatomic
   ideal gases.7 In this case the original idea was not his but came
   from an Indian physicist, S. N. Bose; his paper appeared in a
   translation by Einstein8 himself who added a remark that he re­
   garded this work as an important progress. The essential point
   in Bose’s procedure is that he treats photons like particles of
   a gas with the method of statistical mechanics but with the dif­
   ference that these particles are not distinguishable. H e does not
   distribute individual particles over a set of states, but counts
    1 Berl. Ber. 1924, p. 261, 1925, p. 318.
    # S. N. Bose, Zeitschrijt fu r Physik, 26, 178, (1 924).
      *74                        MAX BORN
      the number of states which contain a given number of particles.
      This combinatory process together with the physical conditions
      (given number of states and total energy) leads at once to
    . Planck’s radiation law. Einstein added to this idea the sug­
      gestion that the same process ought to be applied to material
      atoms in order to obtain the quantum theory of a monatomic
      gas. The deviation from the ordinary gas laws derived from
s'    this theory is called “ gas degeneracy.” Einstein’s papers ap-
    v peared just a year before the discovery of quantum mechanics;
      one of them contains moreover (p. 9 of the second paper) a
      reference to de Broglie’s celebrated thesis, and the remark that
      a scalar wave field can be associated with a gas. These papers
      of de Broglie and Einstein stimulated Schroedinger to develop
      his wave mechanics, as he himself confessed at the end of his
      famous paper.9 It was the same remark of Einstein’s which a
      year or two later formed the link between de Broglie’s theory
      and the experimental discovery of electron diffraction; for,
      when Davisson sent me his results on the strange maxima found
      in the reflexion of electrons by crystals, I remembered Ein­
      stein’s hint and directed Elsasser to investigate whether those
      maxima could be interpreted as interference fringes of de
       Broglie waves. Einstein is therefore clearly involved in the
      foundation of wave mechanics, and no alibi can disprove it.
          I cannot see how the Bose-Einstein counting of equally prob­
       able cases can be justified without the conceptions of quantum
       mechanics. There a state of equal particles is described not by
      noting their individual positions and momenta, but by a sym­
       metric wave function containing the co-ordinates as arguments;
P '— this represents clearly only one state and has to be counted once.
       A group of equal particles, even if they are perfectly alike, can
      still be distributed between two boxes in many ways—you may
       not be able to distinguish them individually but that does not
       affect their being individuals. Although arguments of this kind
      are more metaphysical than physical, the use of a symmetric
       wave function as representation of a state seems to me prefer­
       able. This way of thinking has morover led to the other case of
         ’ “Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem,” Annalcn der Physik ( 4 ) , 70, p. 361,
       <19*6)5 «. p. 373.
              EINSTEIN’S STATISTICAL THEORIES                        175
gas degeneracy, discovered by Fermi and Dirac, where the
wave function is skew, and to a host of physical consequences
confirmed by experiment.
   The Bose-Einstein statistics was, to my knowledge, Ein­
stein’s last decisive positive contribution to physical statistics.
H is following work in this line, though of great importance
by stimulating thought and discussion, was essentially critical.
H e refused to acknowledge the claim of quantum mechanics
to have reconciled the particle and wave aspects of radiation.
This claim is based on a complete re-orientation of physical
principles: causal laws are replaced by statistical ones, deter­
minism by indeterminism. I have tried to show that Einstein
himself has paved the way for this attitude. Yet some principle
of his philosophy forbids him to follow it to the end. W hat is
this principle?
   Einstein’s philosophy is not a system which you can read in
a book 5 you have to take the trouble to abstract it from his
papers on physics and from a few more general articles and
pamphlets. I have found no definite statement of his about
the question “W hat is Probability?” ; nor has he taken part in
the discussions going on about von Mises’ definition and other
such endeavours. I suppose he would have dismissed them as
metaphysical speculation, or even joked about them. From the
beginning he has used probability as a tool for dealing with
nature just like any scientific device. H e has certainly very
strong convictions about the value of these tools. His attitude
toward philosophy and epistemology is well described in his
obituary article on Ernst Mach:10
Nobody who devotes himself to science from other reasons than super­
ficial ones, like ambition, money making, or the pleasure of brain-sport,
can neglect the questions, what are the aims of science, how far are its
general results true, what is essential and what based on accidental
features of the development?
Later in the same article he formulates his empirical creed
in these words:
Concepts which have been proved to be useful in ordering things easily
acquire such an authority over us that we forget their human origin
  10Phys. Zeitschr. 17, p. 101, (1 9 1 6 ).
176                          MAX BORN
and accept them as invariable. Then they become “necessities of
thought,” “given a ■priori,” etc. T he path of scientific progress is then,
by such errors, barred for a long time. It is therefore no useless game
if we are practising to analyse current notions and to point out on what
conditions their justification and usefulness depends, how they have
grown especially from the data of experience. In this way their exag­
gerated authority is broken. They are removed, if they cannot properly
legitimate themselves; corrected, if their correspondence to the given
things was too negligently established; replaced by others, if a new system
can be developed that we prefer for good reasons.

That is the core of the young Einstein, thirty years ago. I am sure
the principles of probability were then for him of the same kind
as all other concepts used for describing nature, so impressively
formulated in the lines above. The Einstein of to-day is
changed. I translate here a passage of a letter from him which
I received about four years ago (7th November, 1944): “ In
our scientific expectation we have grown antipodes. You be­
lieve in God playing dice and I in perfect laws in the world
of things existing as real objects, which I try to grasp in a
wildly speculative way.” These speculations distinguish in­
deed his present work from his earlier writing. But if any man
has the right to speculate it is he whose fundamental results
stand like rock. W hat he is aiming at is a general field-theory
which preserves the rigid causality of classical physics and re­
stricts probability to masking our ignorance of the initial condi­
tions or, if you prefer, of the pre-history, of all details of the
system considered. This is not the place to argue about the
possibility of achieving this. Yet I wish to make one remark,
using Einstein’s own picturesque language: If God has made
the world a perfect mechanism, he has at least conceded so much
to our imperfect intellect that, in order to predict little parts
of it, we need not solve innumerable differential equations but
can use dice with fair success. That this is so I have learned,
with many of my contemporaries, from Einstein himself. I
think, this situation has not changed much by the introduction
of quantum statistics 5 it is still we mortals who are playing
dice for our little purposes of prognosis— God’s actions are as
mysterious in classical Brownian motion as in radio-activity and
quantum radiation, or in life at large.
               E IN S T E IN ’S S T A T IS T IC A L T H E O R IE S        177

   Einstein’s dislike of modern physics has not only been ex­
pressed in general terms, which can be answered in a similarly
general and vague way, but also in very substantial papers in
which he has formulated objections against definite statements
of wave mechanics. The best known paper of this kind is one
published in collaboration with Podolsky and Rosen.11 That
it goes very deep into the logical foundations of quantum me­
chanics is apparent from the reactions it has evoked. Niels Bohr
has answered in detail; Schroedinger has published his own
sceptical views on the interpretation of quantum mechanics;
Reichenbach deals with this problem in the last chapter of his
excellent book, Philosophic Foundations of Quantum Mechan­
ics, and shows that a complete treatment of the difficulties
pointed out by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen needs an overhaul
of logic itself. H e introduces a three-valued logic, in which
apart from the truth-values “ true” and “ false,” there is an
intermediate one, called “indeterminate,” or, in other words, he
rejects the old principle of “tertium non d a t u r as has been
proposed long before, from purely mathematical reasons, by
Brouwer and other mathematicians. I am not a logician, and
in such disputes always trust that expert who last talked to me.
M y attitude to statistics in quantum mechanics is hardly affected
by formal logics, and' I venture to say that the same holds for
Einstein. That his opinion in this matter differs from mine is
regrettable, but it is no object of logical dispute between us.
It is based on different experience in our work and life. But
in spite of this, he remains my beloved master.
                                                             M ax B o rn
  D epa r t m e n t of M a t h e m a t ic a l P hysics
  U n iversity of E dinbu rg h
  E d in bu rg h , Scotland

   11 A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, N. Rosen: “ Can Quantum Mechanical Description
of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?” Phys. Rev. 47, p. 777, (1 935).

                                            V
