Causality and Complementarity
Author(s): Niels Bohr
Source: Philosophy of Science, Vol. 4, No. 3 (Jul., 1937), pp. 289-298
Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Philosophy of Science Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/184445 .
Accessed: 07/05/2013 16:28

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.




                The University of Chicago Press and Philosophy of Science Association are collaborating with JSTOR to
                digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophy of Science.




http://www.jstor.org




                             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
phitosophi
        of Science
             VOL. 4                    July,             I937                       NO-       3




   Causality and Complementarity'
                                                   BY

                                        NIELS BOHR
                    N SEVERAL occasions2 I have pointed out that the
                     lesson taught us by recent developments in physics
                     regarding the necessity of a constant extension of
                     the frame of concepts appropriate for the classifica-
                     tion of new experiences leads us to a general epis-
                     temological attitude which might help us to avoid
                     apparent conceptual difficulties in other fields of
science as well. Since, however, the opinion has been expressed from
various sides that this attitude would appear to involve a mysticism
incompatible with the true spirit of science, I am very glad to use the
present opportunity of addressing this assembly of scientists working in
quite different fields but united in their striving to find a common
ground for our knowledge, to come back to this question, and above all
to try to clear up the misunderstandings which have arisen.
   Before entering into the problems to be discussed, I need recall only
briefly how often the development of physics has taught us that a con-
sistent application even of the most elementary concepts indispensable
for the description of our daily experience, is based on assumptions
initially unnoticed, the explicit consideration of which is, however,
   1Address delivered before the Second International
                                                      Congress for the Unity of Science,
Copenhagen, June, I936.
   2 "Atomic
              Theory and Description of Nature", four essays and an introductory sur-
vey; Cambridge, 1934; quoted in the text as AI, AII, AIII, AIV, and AE; further,
"Light and Life" Nature I31, 421; 457, I933; and "Can Quantum Mechanical Descrip-
tion of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?" Physical Review LXVIII, 696, 1935;
quoted as B and C respectively.
                                          289




                 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
290         Causality and Complementarity
 essential if we wish to obtain a classification of more extended domains
 of experience as clear and as free from arbitrariness as possible. I also
 hardly need to emphasize how much this development has contributed
 to the general philosophical clarification of the presuppositions under-
lying human knowledge. Even though these acquisitions are in many
 respects of a lasting character, we have nevertheless received only
 recently an incisive admonition that the analysis of new experiences is
liable to disclose again and again the unrecognized presuppositions for
 an unambiguous use of our most simple concepts, such as space-time
description and causal connection.
    It was in fact the clarification of the paradoxes connected with the
finite velocity of propagation of light and the judgment of events by
observers in relative motion which first disclosed the arbitrariness con-
tained even in the concept of simultaneity, and thereby created a freer
attitude toward the question of space-time co6rdination which finds
expression in the theory of relativity. As is well known, this has made
possible a unified formulation of the phenomena appearing in different
frames of reference, and through this brought to light the fundamental
equivalence of hitherto separate physical regularities. The recognition
of the essential dependence of any physical phenomenon on the system
of reference of the observer, which forms the characteristic feature of
relativity theory, implies, however-as especially Einstein himself has
emphasized-no abandonment whatever of the assumption underlying
the ideal of causality, that the behavior of a physical object relative to a
given system of co6rdinates is uniquely determined, quite independently
of whether it is observed or not.
   However, a still further revision of the problem of observation has
since been made necessary by the discovery of the universal quantum of
action, which has taught us that the whole mode of description of classi-
cal physics, including the theory of relativity, retains its adequacy only
as long as all quantities of action entering into the description are large
compared to Planck's quantum. When this is not the case, as in the
region of atomic physics, there appear new uniformities which cannot
be fitted into the frame of the ordinary causal description (A,). This
circumstance, at first sight paradoxical, finds its elucidation in the
recognition that in this region it is no longer possible sharply to dis-
tinguish between the autonomous behavior of a physical object and its
inevitable interaction with other bodies serving as measuring instru-
ments, the direct consideration of which is excluded by the very nature
of the concept of observation in itself (An).




               This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                               All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                      N. Bohr                                              291
    Indeed this circumstance presents us with a situation concerning the
 analysis and synthesis of experience which is entirely new in physics
 and forces us to replace the ideal of causality by a more general view-
 point usually termed "complementarity." The apparently incom-
 patible sorts of information about the behavior of the object under
 examination which we get by different experimental arrangements can
 clearly not be brought into connection with each other in the usual way,
 but may, as equally essential for an exhaustive account of all experience,
 be regarded as "complementary" to each other. In particular, the
 frustration of every attempt to analyse more closely the "individuality"
of single atomic processes, symbolized by the quantum of action, by a
subdivision of their course, is explained by the fact that each section
in this course definable by a direct observation would demand a
measuring arrangement which would be incompatible with the appear-
ance of the uniformities considered. Notwithstanding all differences, a
certain analogy between the postulate of relativity and the point of view
of complementarity can be seen in this, that according to the former the
laws which in consequence of the finite velocity of light appear in differ-
ent forms depending on the choice of the frame of reference, are equiva-
lent to one another, whereas, according to the latter the results obtained
by different measuring arrangements apparently contradictory because
of the finite size of the quantum of action, are logically compatible.
    In order to give as clear an idea as possible of the new epistomological
situation which we meet in atomic physics, we may briefly consider
those measurements designed to obtain an account of the space-time
course of some physical event. The account consists in the last analysis
in the establishment of a series of unambiguous connections between the
behavior of the object and the measuring rods and clocks which define
the system of reference involved in the space-time description. It is
thus only as long as we may completely ignore, in the description of all
the important circumstances of the event, all interaction between the
object and these measuring instruments, which unavoidably accompa-
nies the establishment of any such connection, that we can speak of an
autonomous space-time behavior of the object under observation,
independent of the conditions of observation. In case, however-as
in the region of quantum phenomena-this interaction plays an essential
r61e for the appearance of the phenomena themselves, the situation is
completely changed, and we are in particular forced to renounce the
combination, characteristic of classical physical description, of the
space-time co6rdination of the event with the general conservation




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                              All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
292        Causality and Complementarity
theorems of dynamics. For the use of rods and clocks to fix the system
of reference makes it by definition impossible to take into account the
energy of momentum which might be transferred to them in the course
of the phenomenon. Conversely, those quantum laws whose formula-
tion rests essentially on the application of the concept of energy or
momentum can appear only under circumstances of investigation from
which a detailed account of the space-time behavior of the object is
excluded.
   As is well known, a mode of description suitable to this situation has
been found in the so-called quantum mechanics, in which sufficient
freedom for the consistent co6rdination of the new regularities has been
achieved by the substitution for the usual kinematical and dynamical
quantities of symbols which obey laws of calculation of a novel type.
There is also from the point of view an interesting formal analogy
between quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity, in that it has
been possible in both cases with the help of abstract concepts of arith-
metic and geometry respectively, to build up strictly logical formalisms
which allow a mastering of the new domains of experience. In con-
nection with the often discussed question whether such formalisms can
be regarded as an extension of our power of visualization, it must not be
forgotten that the representation of the co6rdination of space and time
in the theory of relativity by a four dimensional manifold, as also the
connecting of kinematic and dynamic quantities in quantum mechanics
by non-commutative algebra, rest essentially on the old mathematical
artifice of the introduction of imaginary quantities; in fact the funda-
mental constants, the velocity of light and the quantum of action, are
introduced into the formalism as factors of the /- , the one in the
definition of the fourth coordinate, the other in the commutation laws
of canonically conjugate variables.
   It is of course not my intention here to go deeper into such special
points; I wished only to emphasize that in these fields the logical corre-
lations can only be won by a far-reaching renunciation of the usual
demands of visualization. It would in particular not be out of place
in this connection to warn against a misunderstanding likely to arise
when one tries to express the content of Heisenlerg's well known inde-
terminacy relations-which play as important a role in the judgment
of the consistency of the essentially statistical mode of description of
quantum mechanics as the Lorentz transformation does in solving the
paradoxes which appear in the theory of relativity-by such a state-
ment as: "the position and momentum of a particle cannot simulta-




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                              All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                      N. Bohr                                              293
neously be measured with arbitrary accuracy." According to such a
formulation it would appear as though we had to do with some arbitrary
renunciation of the measurement of either the one or the other of the
two well-defined attributes of the object, which would not preclude the
possibility of a future theory taking both attributes into account on the
lines of the classical physics. From the above considerations it should
be clear that the whole situation in atomic physics deprives of all
meaning such inherent attributes as the idealizations of classical physics
would ascribe to the object. On the contrary, the proper role of the
indeterminacy relations consists in assuring quantitatively the logical
compatibility of apparently contradictory laws which appear when we
use two different experimental arrangements, of which only one permits
an unambiguous use of the concept of position, while only the other
permits the application of the concept of momentum defined as it is,
solely by the law of conservation.
   We thus see that the impossibility of carrying through a causal
representation of quantum phenomena is directly connected with the
assumptions underlying the use of the most elementary concepts which
come into consideration for the description of experience. In this
connection the view has been expressed from various sides that some
future more radical departure in our mode of description from the
concepts adapted to our daily experience would perhaps make it possible
to preserve the ideal of causality also in the field of atomic physics.
Such an opinion would, however, seem to be due to a misapprehension
of the situation. For the requirement of communicability of the cir-
cumstances and results of experiments implies that we can speak of well
defined experiences only within the framework of ordinary concepts.
In particular it should not be forgotten that the concept of causality
underlies the very interpretation of each result of experiment, and that
even in the co6rdination of experience one can never, in the nature of
things, have to do with well-defined breaks in the causal chain. The
renunciation of the ideal of causality in atomic physics which has been
forced on us is founded logically only on our not being any longer in a
position to speak of the autonomous behavior of a physical object, due
to the unavoidable interaction between the object and the measuring
instruments which in principle cannot be taken into account, if these
instruments according to their purpose shall allow the unambiguous use
of the concepts necessary for the description of experience. In the last
resort an artificial word like "complementarity" which does not belong
to our daily concepts serves only briefly to remind us of the epistemo-




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                              All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
 294        Causality and Complementarity
 logical situation here encountered, which at least in physics is of an
 entirely novel character (AE).
    The repeatedly expressed hopes of avoiding the essentially statistical
 character of quantum mechanical description by the assumption of some
 causal mechanism underlying the atomic phenomena and hitherto
 inaccessible to observation would indeed seem to be as vain as any
 project of doing justice to the increased profundity of the picture of the
 world achieved by the general theory of relativity by means of the
 ordinary conceptions of absolute space and time. Above all such hopes
 would seem to rest upon an underestimate of the fundamental differences
 between the laws with which we are concerned in atomic physics and
 the every day experiences which are comprehended so completely by
 the ideas of classical physics. Not only is the well known dilemma
between the corpuscular and undulatory character of light and matter
 avoidable only by means of the viewpoint of complementarity, but the
peculiar stability properties of atomic structures which are in obvious
contrast with the properties of any mechanical model, but which are so
intrinsically connected with the existence of the quantum of action,
form the very condition for the existence of the objects and measuring
instruments, with the behavior of which classical physics is concerned.
On closer consideration, the present formulation of quantum mechanics
in spite of its great fruitfulness would yet seem to be no more than a first
step in the necessary generalization of the classical mode of description,
justified only by the possibility of disregarding in its domain of applica-
tion the atomic structure of the measuring instruments themselves in
the interpretation of the results of experiment. For a correlation of still
deeper lying laws of nature involving not only the mutual interaction of
the so-called elementary constituents of matter but also the stability of
their existence, this last assumption can no longer be maintained, as we
must be prepared for a more comprehensive generalization of the com-
plementary mode of description which will demand a still more radical
renunciation of the usual claims of so-called visualization.
   I hope by these remarks to have conveyed the impression that in
abandoning the causal description in atomic physics we are not con-
cerned with a hasty assertion of the impossibility of comprehending
the wealth of phenomena, but with a serious effort to account for the
new type of laws here encountered in conformity with the general lesson
of philosophy regarding the necessity of a balance between analysis and
synthesis. Just in this connection it appeared to me to be of interest to
point out that also in other regions of human knowledge we meet appar-




               This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                               All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                      N. Bohr                                              295
ent contradictions which might seem to be avoidable only from the
point of view of complementarity. I am far from sharing, however, the
widespread opinion that the recent development in the field of atomic
physics could directly help us in deciding such questions as "mechanism
or vitalism" and "free will or causal necessity" in favor of the one or the
other alternative. Just the fact that the paradoxes of atomic physics
could be solved not by a one sided attitude towards the old problem of
"determinism or indeterminism," but only by examining the possibili-
ties of observation and definition, should rather stimulate us to a re-
newed examination of the position in this respect in the biological and
psychological problems at issue.
   In the first place, regarding the question of the extent to which we
can hope to explain the characteristic features of living organisms with
the sole help of the experience acquired from the study of inanimate
nature, we must above all keep in mind that even a definition of life
itself contains epistemological problems. When we usually refer to a
machine as dead, we mean scarcely anything else than that we are able
to describe the circumstances essential for its functioning by means of
the conceptions of classical physics. Still in view of the insufficiency
of the classical mode of description in atomic physics, such a definition
of the inanimate would hardly any longer be adequate. Yet the newly
recognized possibility of inducing macroscopic effects by individual
atomic process, which plays an essential part in the functioning of organ-
isms-in any case for the sensitiveness of sense perceptions (Aiv)-has
been an incentive to the taking up anew of the question of a possible
"explanation" of life. But at the same time the recognition of the fact
that we must descend to the domain of atomic phenomena if we wish to
bridge the gulf between the living and the inanimate, should bring before
our eyes in a forceful way the practical and conceptual difficulties con-
nected with this problem.
    So far as we are at all in a position to follow the behavior of atoms in
organisms under similar conditions of investigation as in the funda-
mental experiments of atomic physics, of course we can only meet with
the laws disclosed by these experiments which, in spite of their feature
of individuality, foreign to classical mechanics, can give us clearly no
immediate understanding of the so-called holistic or finalistic character-
istics of the activities of life. The only logical possibility of avoiding
any contradiction between the formulation of the laws of physics and
the concepts suitable for the description of the phenomena of life ought
therefore to be sought in the essentially different character of the condi-




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                              All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
296        Causality and Complementarity
tions of investigation concerned. On a previous occasion (B) I have
tried to express this situation by saying that every experimental arrange-
ment suitable for following the behavior of the atoms constituting an
organism in as exhaustive a way as implied by the possibilities of
physical observation and definition would be incompatible with the
maintaining of the life of the organism. This would in fact be quite
analogous to the circumstance that all observations obtained by experi-
mental arrangements which allow of a space-time account of the
behavior of the constituents of atoms and molecules stand in a com-
plementary relation to those obtained under conditions permitting the
study of the intrinsic stability of atomic structures so essential for the
physical and chemical properties of matter.
   To make this view clearer, it was pointed out in the article cited, that
the continuous metabolism of organisms inseparably connected with life
prevents us even from distinguishing strictly which atoms belong to a
living organism, and that we are thus presented with a problem the
treatment of which, quite apart from its complication, is beyond the
scope of the methods of atomic mechanics. These methods, which
govern our entire knowledge of physics and chemistry concern, just as
do those of classical mechanics, in fact only systems for which it is
possible in principle to specify what are to be regarded as the elementary
constituents. This situation suggests that those essential features of
living organisms which are brought to light only under circumstances
which exclude an exact account of their atomic constituents are laws of a
nature which stands in a complementary relationship to those with
which we are concerned in physics and chemistry. Thus the existence
of life itself would have to be regarded in biology, both as regards the
possibilities of observation and of definition, as no more subject to
analysis than the existence of the quantum of action in atomic physics.
   I have endeavored to make it clear that in such considerations there is
no question whatever-as has been sometimes feared by philosophers
and biologists-of so-called purely metaphysical speculations or of an
arbitrary renunciation of the possibility by continued research, of
further increasing our knowledge of the functioning of organisms.
Rather, they aim at avoiding futile controversies by an analysis of the
presuppositions and of the appropriateness of the conceptual structures
involved. Though the viewpoint of complementarity rejects every
compromise with any anti-rationalistic vitalism, it ought at the same
time to be suited for revealing certain prejudices in so-called mechanism.
On the one hand, any violation of physico-chemical laws in organic




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                              All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                      N. Bohr                                              297
life-such as the often mistakenly maintained contradiction between
 the activities of life and the fundamental theorems of thermo-dynamics
-would be excluded from this point of view; on the other hand any
insistence on an analogy between the existence of life itself and such
laws should be rejected as irrational. As already emphasized in the
 article mentioned, this situation therefore implies no limitation what-
ever in the application to biology of the physico-chemical methods of
description and investigation; in fact, the appropriate use of such
methods-just as even in atomic physics all our experiences must rest
upon experimental arrangements classically described-remains our
sole and inexhaustible source of information about biological phenomena.
   According to its tendency to make room for the phenomena of life
within the conceptions suited to the description of material systems,
the viewpoint discussed stands far removed from every attempt to
exploit in a spiritual sense the failure of causal description in atomic
physics. On the contrary, the viewpoint toward fundamental biological
questions which we have here discussed, would rather seem suited to put
the old problem of psycho-physical parallelism in a new light. The
considerations which I have presented on previous occasions (A,I,, B)
on questions of psychology in connection with problems of atomic
physics followed indeed two essentially different aims. The one was by
means of well-known examples of the difficulties of analysis and synthesis
of psychic phenomena connected with introspection to remind ourselves
that in this region of knowledge we had already been forced to face a
situation presenting in several respects a formal similarity with that
with which,to the great disquietude of many physicists and philosophers,
we have met in atomic physics. The other aim was to express the hope
that the epistemological attitude which had led to the clarification of
the much simpler physical problems could prove itself helpful also in the
discussion of psychological questions. In fact, the use which we make
of words like "thought" and "feeling," or "instinct" and "reason" to
describe psychic experiences of different types, shows the existence of
characteristic relationships of complementarity conditioned by the
peculiarity of introspection. Above all, just the impossibility in intro-
spection of sharply distinguishing between subject and object as is
essential to the ideal of causality would seem to provide the natural play
for the feeling of free will.
   I am afraid that the short indications to which I have been obliged
to restrict myself with respect to the last and many other points of this
lecture will remind you only too well that in the last resort the direct




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                              All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
298        Causality and Complementarity
use of any word must stand in a complementary relationship to an
analysis of its meaning. I hope, however, that I have to some extent
succeeded in giving you the impression that my attitude is in no way
in conflict with our common endeavors to arrive at as great a unification
of knowledge as possible by the combating of prejudices in every field
of research.

  Copenhagen.




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 16:28:51 PM
                              All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
