Submitted to                                             LBL-Z07Z
Physical Review                                          Preprint ~.I




        EXPERIMENTAL CONSEQUENCES OF OBJECTIVE
                   LOCAL THEORIES I




                  John F. Clauser and Michael A. Horne



                               August 1973




        Prepared for the U. S. Atomic Energy Commission
                 unde r Contract W -7405 -ENG-48




                       For Reference
                     Not to be taken from this room
                                     DISCLAIMER

This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by the United States
Government. While this document is believed to contain correct information, neither the
United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor the Regents of the' University of
California, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or
assumes any legal responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any
information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not
infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product,
process, or service by its trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not
necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the
United States Government or any agency thereof, or the Regents of the University of
California. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or
reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof or the Regents of the
University of California.
                                               ,
                                               <   '




                                                             LBL-20n



     EXPERIMENTAL CONSEQUENCES OF OBJECfIVE LOCAL THEORIES 1*
                            JOM F. Clauser
\,
        Department of Physics and Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
                    University of California
                    Berkeley, California 84120
                                  and
                            Michael A. Horne
                      Department of Physics
                          Stonehill College
                     N. Easton, Mass., 02356



                                ABSTRACf

          Objective local          theories of reality are defined, and
     shown to lead to predictions which are distinctly different from
     the predictions by quanttnn mechanics.            Experiments may thus be
     performed which will either disprove the predictions by quanttnn
     mechanics in at least one application, or show that nature cannot
     be viewed as both objective and consistent with macrocausality.
     The experimental requirements are presented.            The demonstration is
     done through a generalization of analyses by Bell, Clauser, Horne,
     Shimony, and Holt.     The present analysis will be based solely on
     the phenomenology of correlation experiments, and thus will constrain
     the most general theories of this type.
                             ·f
                           -2-
 INTRODUCTION

     The old classical atomic theories described objective
deterministic systemS.   The advent ofquanttml mechanics introduced
(among other things) stochastic elements into the description,
presumably as an inherent attribute of nature.       Opponents of this
interpretation proposed that all of the statistical predictions
by quantum mechanics could be deduced from a broader deterministic

theory,in which the observed stochastic features emerge as the
result of unknown random initial conditions.       Such a covering theory
is generally called a hidden-variable theory.       Bell has recently
considered such theories in conjunction with a "locality" or
                                 1
'inacrocausality" requirement.       This requirement (reasonable for
any viable theory) denies the possibility of propagating signals for
macroscopic distances faster than the speed of light.     He showed that
no local hidden-variable theory can reproduce all of the statistical
predictions by quantum mechanics. Extension$ of this result to
realizable systems by Clauser" Home, Shimony, and Holt 2       have led
to experimental tests of the hidden-variable proposal. 3
     A related, but more general question concerns the objectivity
of the systems described by quantum mechanics.      One naturally
assumes that a physical measurement measures the properties of an
                                                                            • I



objective physical system, or object.      It is tacitly assumed that
measurable objects have at least some objective properties or real
physical conditions which exist independently of their being observed.
For example, an atom, prepared in a pure state,has characteristic
                              -3-



properties which it is known will be the results of certain
measurements perfonned upon it.There are the objective properties of
this object.     For classical objects, e.g.rocks, trees, etc.,     it
seems hard to dispute that these have characteristic properties.
Since objects evidently have some spatial extent, it is undoubtedly
more precise to consider all of the objects       (including measuring
apparatuses), or better yet, all of the real physical· conditions or
properties within a given spatial region; and indeed to assume that
the totality of all properties within this region exist.       Thus we
assume that a given region of space and time is characterized by
properties intrinsic to that region .
    . If one takes at all seriously the word ''measurement,'' these
properties must influence, at least to some extent, the results of
measurements occurring there.       On the other hanfi,they perhaps will
not fully detennine the results.       To be sure, the dependence upon
these may be     partially    random, since the evolution from the
specification of the properties until the result is finalized may
be an inherently stochastic feature of nature.       To compare various
systems, we must then specify the properties at some characteristic
point in time.    If one does so,and takes a large enough ensemble
of regions with identical natural properties       at that time, these
properties must determine at least the probabilities (fraction
among the numbers of the ensemble) of the various eventual outcomes.
Deterministic theories fonn a limiting case in which these probabil-
ities are always zero or one.       Since it is clearlY,meaningless to ask
                                 -4-


whether conditions in the future uniquely evolve from those at the
present when the conditions at the present are not definable,
deterministic theories form a subclass of the more general objective
theories.
        The locality requirement mentioned above will deny the influence
of the results of measurements performed within the region by
properties which are defined only outside of the backward light
cone of the region at the time of the measurement event.         In
surrunary, then, we define an objective local theory (OLT) as one
constrained by the fo11awingtwo postulates:

        I.     Signals cannot propagate macroscopic distances faster than
the speed of light, and so doing,inf1uence any experimental outcome
(macrocausa1ity - locality assumption).
    II.        The mathematical probabilities for various experimental
results observed in some spatial region at a given time are determined
by quantities        (objective properties) ,existing independently of a local
observer, that are characteristic of the backward light cone of this
region.        Deterministic (hidden~variab1e) theories form a limiting
case in which these probabilities are always zero or one (objectivity
assumption). 4
        These postulates, although reasonable in everyday terms ,
diverge from the normal quantum mechanical postulates.        It is worth-

while to ask whether quantum machanics can subsist within their frame-
work.        It cannot!   Thus ,it is thepti1'J??seofthispaper'toshowthcit
                                           -,



                            -5-



 suitable experiments JJi.ay beperfonned whiCh will either' disprove
 the predictions by quarttun'lIliechaiiics'irt,at'least one 'appliCation,
 or show that nature cannot be viewed as both objective and
 conslstent with macrocausality. We will use here observable
 phenomenology, but no assumptions additional to the above.         The
 results follow as an extension of the applicability, formalism, and
 interpretation of Bell's result for local hidden-variable theories. 5
      The paper consists of two parts.          In part I we first review
 the simple phenomenology of Ibhm's Gedankenexperiment, since
 arrangements of this type form the backbone of our analysis. 6 We
, then present in turn the predictions by our objectivity and locality
 assumptions, and by quanttml:mechanics.        We find a direct incompatibility
of these for realizable cases of Bohm's Gedankenexperiment and similar
schemes, over a range of experimental parameters.          We end this part
with a discussion of the requirements for an experimental test and
the implications of such a test.      Part II concerns itself with the
experimental status of these results. 7         We have mentioned that
earlier extensions of Bell's theorem have been recently tested
experimentally.    We discuss there the relationship of that experiment
to the above proposed test., Also there we explore the limits of
that data's applicability to the first question about determinisIli,
and the additional information which the proposed test will bring
to bear on this question.
                                -6-



            PHENOMENOLOGY OF BOHM' S GEDANKENEXPERIMENT

        Figure 1 shows schematically a Gedankenexperiment proposed by
       6·
Bohm as an example of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox.            In it
an unstable molecule with total spin equal to zero (or one)
dissociates into a pair of spin-liZ atoms.        Some of the pairs enter
a respective pair of apparatuses.        Each appara,tus consists of a

Stern-Gerlach analyzer, followed by a detector.           The analyzers may
be oriented along directions ,..,.,..,.
                              a and b by the experimenter
                                                    .
                                                          or
experimenters.
                 .


those with spin opposed to a(b) are ignored.
                                                  8
                                                      --
                      Particles with their spin along a(b) are detected;

                                 --
        A typical retord 6f the detector outputs is depicted in
Fig.        Z.   It consists of a random train of voltage pulses.    The
pulse rates and their correlation will in general depend upon the
orientations ,.,..
              a andb,
                   I¥'"
                        but the rate of molecUlar dissociations will
be specified to be constant. Thus COlmt rates (or probabilities per
lmit time) may be measured as a flmction of the detector orientations
only.
        Frequently, the detector at apparatus A will COlmt simultaneously,
or nearly so, with that of apparatus B.        The joint event is commonly
called a coincidence.       The definition of a coincidence, however, is
ambiguous and nonlocal.        In order to refrain from specifying an
internal model giving rise to the correlatiQns at A and B (e.g.
correlated "particle" emission), and to set the stage for what
follows,we shall provide a more careful definition of the tern.
                                -7-



 We equip each apparatus with a c16ckproducing tirile intervals

 of total length-     +~The two clocks have been synchronized
 beforehand.       Each time interVal (t , t +1 ) we divide into three
                                        i i
 subintervals of length Tl ,T2, and T3, such that T 1 -f'r2 -f'r 3 = T ,as

 shown in Figure 2.        During the first subinterval Tl, each analyzer

 is readjuste~ to some orientation, selected perhaps at random by

 the experimenter, lAnd supplied to the apparatus at time ti + E, with

 O<£<Tl.       The second subinterval T2 is inserted so that the adjustment
 can have sufficient time to effect the experimental result.           In the

 example of Bolun' s Gedankenexperiment, the spin 1/2 particles will
 traverse the Stern-Gerlach magnets and be deflected into or away
 from the detector during this period.        Finally at each detector if
 the leading edge of an output pulse occurs during the final subinterval
T 3,   the experimenter locally records the value + I for the time interval
 ( t. t.   )     along with the associated analyzer orientation a.
   1'1+1'                                                          -
 If no such voltage excursion occurs in this interval, he instead

                                   -
 records the current value of a and the result zero for that interval.
- Either detector output in each interval of time is thus constrained
 to be in one of the two final states 8 : +1 or O. - This procedure will
then convert these-detector records to the square pulses shown in

Fig.2.


       It should be noted in passing that the experimenter's role

here is twofold.        He nrust obsenre and record (perhaps using
                                -8-



 autanmtic equipment) the various experimental outcomes.           Second,     -,,

 he must generate signals to control the analyzer orientations.
 Since we have two apparatuses which may have an arbitrarily large
 separation, two experimenters (or equivalently} reliable mechanical
 or electronic surrogates) are needed to operate them.           These
 experimenters when acting as signal sources, may select at random
 the parameters A and ~ for each interval from among the set of
 possible orientations {a.} and th.}.         These orientations are also
                          "'J          "M-J
 recorded together with the associated experiment result .. If they
 are not, the introduced randonmess will obscure the correlation
 between the A and B results.         This recording assures that one can
 correctly measure probabilities conditioned by the appropriate
 parameter pair settings.
      Consider now the data accumulated over many time intervals
 during which a large number of +1 events have occurred for each of
 the various interesting pairs of analyzer orientations.           We group
 together the data for all of the intervals taken with like parameter
 pair settings.    Denote by N(2.,2) the number of time intervals that
 the apparatus was set at the orientation pair a, b.
                                                     --     For this (and
 for every other) pair we tally the four possible coincidence
                                                                               -i"

. combinations.   Thus N++ (~,.2) is the total number of time intervals


 the results A = +1 and B= +1 occurred; etc.
                                                            ..
 during which the apparatus was oriented to direction a and b, and
                                                    We now define the
                                                                       ""'--

 "overlap coincidence rate" as

                                                                 (1)
                                    -9-



     Correspondingly we define the "singles rates" as



.'
     and




     with




     One argument, x, remains, unspecified in each singles rate since
     locality will deny a dependence of this rate at one detector
     upon the orientation of the distant apparatus.
            With definitions (1) - (4), for negligible jitter in the
     experiment timing, we recover the usual measures of singles and
     coincidence rates.    We recall of course that these measure
     probabilities conditioned by the apparatus parameter settings.       Our
     procedure assures us that there are no tacit nonlocal     assumptions
     manifest in this definition.

     EXPERIMENTAL CONSEQUENCES OF OBJECTIVE LOCAL TIIEORIES

            We now aerive model-lfidependent predictions from the simultaneous
     assumption of locality and objectivity which are experimentally
     testable.    If these predictions are violated by experiment, then
     either objectivity or locality (or both) does not hold.    Implicit
     in our locality requirement is a presumed existence of sources of
                               -10-


space-time localized signals, so that such signals may be
generated independently of the objective world around the source.
In other words,. sources with "free will" must exist, for locality
      .          .     10
to h ave any meanIng.         Such signals presumably can then exist which
are observed to be localized in space-time regions outside of the
light-cone of the measurement region.        Any influence by these
signals on an individual measurement result is a violation of the
locality requirement.        Thus the locality restriction is nruch more
severe for individual objective systems than it is for an ensemble
of nonobjective systems.         Locality, in the latter case, simply
denies the influence of nonlocal signals upon an ensemble average,
of experiment results.        For objective systems, however, every
individual measurement result must not be influenced by th.e signal,
nor must        any ensemble average of these.       It is possible that
individual measurement results violate the locality restriction,
but that an ensemble' of these appears not to, because the absence
of 3eterminism masks this effect.         We shall see that in the
quantum mechanical case, the masking is incomplete.
     To explore the consequences of OLT's, we consider schemes like
Bohm' 5 Gedankenexperiment.      The timing, control of adjustable
apparatus paramenters, and data output are to follow the above
prescribed sequence.        For full generality, however, we simply
identify each apparatus (Stern-Gerlach analyzer and associated
detector) as a black box.       We surround each black box and the
                                      ..;11-




       associated signal source for apparatus parameters with an imaginary
        surface, ~ or ~~respectively; : such that every point on the surface
       has a separation from any point on the associated signal source and
'.'    box greater than CT     (see Fig. 3).     Our postulates imply that a
       result at t i +l may be influenced only by the properties of nature
       which are contained within the backward lightcone of the associated
       box and source at that time.       Equivalently, the i-th result recorded
       at the time ti+l at a given apparatus, A for example, is influenced
       only by the properties of nature which are physically located
       within the surface ~ A at time t i .
            We denote by the symbols AA and AB the set of natural properties
       contained within the surfaces ~ A and ~ B' respectively, at time t i •
       Thus, AA fully specifies the "objective state" or " ultlmate
                                                               •
                                                                    essence N
       of nature within the surface ~A at that time.      Although AA' AB, ~ and
       £ are denoted by single symbols they are' fully general quanti ties ,which
       may have any form and desired degree of complexity (it is not
       necessary that j}. and l specify a vector orientation of an analyzer).
       One exception we shall make to the all-inclusiveness ofAA and AB
       is the state of the "free willed" signal source, since by our
                           i                               '

       hypothesis the objective properties of nature exist independently
       of the observer, and conceivable sources include the observers'
       actual decisions.
            We separate the two apparatuses sufficiently far that the surfaces
      , ~ A and~B do not intersect.     In an ensemble of such pairs of
                                -12-


apparatuses, any correlation between the paired results             must
arise somehow through a correlation o~ AA and AB. That is, the
real physical properties of the two disjoint regions of space-time
nrust somehow be correlated.           Among the members of this ensemble
(equivalently we may consider a sequence of such measurements,
assuming the random processes to be ergodic l l ) there will be a
random distribution of these various natural properties AA and AB.
The signal sources do not define the apparatus parameters a and b
                                                                   """'       ....
tmtil a time ti + €:.   Hence it is impossible for AA and AB' defined
at an earlier time t.,
                    1  to be dependent upon quantities _a and b which     ~




are not yet defined.    Conversely, our objectivity postulate allows

                  -
the generation of a and b to be independent of AA and AB.
                         '""-                      .

write a probability density p(AA,AB)' describing the distribution
                                                                       Thus we


of AA and AB among the members of the ensemble, being justified in

                                          -
introducing it as independent of a and b. We leave open the specific
                                              I   "..

form of p so that the most general allowable correlation may be specified,
     Since we have defined the quanti ties AA and AB at time ti' but do
not complete our measurements tmtil the time ti+l' the states inside
the black boxes will evolve during the interim.           Locality requires that
the evolution proceed independently of anything outside of the
corresponding surface. Up tmtil time t i +€:, the evolutlon may depend
upon the local At s themSelves.          At that time the apparatus parameters
are defined and supplied to the black boxes. The evolution will then
depend upon these also, and they will become a part of the local
objective properties of nature.           Thus the final outcome at box A, for
example, can depend only upon the two quantities AA and           ~.
                                -13-



       Randomness has entered through the unknown initial conditions,

 specified by the: ftmction p.         We should also allow for situations

 in which probability enters in a deeper and more ftmdamental way,

 since the evolution of physical systems maybe inherently stochastic.

 Ins ide one surface, for example ~, in a large ensemble of cases with

 identical initial conditions AA and signal inputs !,both the +1 and

O"Ol1tEXBlles'tr\ayE>Ccur.   Denote the fraction of +1 outcomes in this'

ensemble by the symbol PC!,A A) . . Our postulates imply that A A and'

....a determine this ntunber, if the ensemble is sufficiently large .
Correspondingly there is a probability I13C2,A ) defined at the surface
                                              B
LB.   Because these are sensible probabilities, we nrust have


                                 <
                                     1,
                                                                (5)

                  o ~ I13~'~) ~ 1.
These probabilities are determined by ~, R, AA' and AB, thus for

a given set of these, the fraction PB cannot then depend upon any

chosen subensemble of associated A outcomes, and vice versa.          If
 PB and PB are dependent, then a subensemble of B outcomes associated
 with certain subensembles of A outcomes will have a fraction of +1

 resul ts different from PB. This subensemble is an equally valid

 ensemble for the definition of ~. SC contrary to our hypothesis,

 this fraction is not then uniquely specified by ~ and A . Therefore
                  . I                                   B
the probabilities PA and I13 must be independent.         This independence

implies that for fixed ~, 2, AA' and A , we can write the probability
                                      B
(of the second type) that both detectors will record +1, simply as
the product w = PA (a,AA)I13~"AB).

      Any correlation, we recall, enters via a correlation of AA and
AB·We thus calculate the fraction of the 'times that
                                  -14-



both apparatuses record the +1 result by averaging w over the· entire
sample space of AA and AB• This probab i1 i ty is then

      W[                                 f
           A(~)+. B!l!) +J " W(ij .Il) = PA(~.AA)% Cl/.. AB) P(AA' AJildAAdAB    (6)


In similar fashion the probability that the apparatus A will record
+1, irrelevantly of B's result is

         II
     wA (ll) =        PA (i!oA A) PD'A'AB)   ~ A~B'                              (7)


Likewise for apparatus B we have

     wB~ JI           11lC!l. AB)Po,A·AB) ~A~B'                                  (8)


     Let us now be more specific about the experimenter's choice                                   iI
                                                                                                   !
                                                                                               .   ;

for the apparatus parameters.1 Consider the case in which only two                                 I


different apparatus parameters are chosen for each apparatus.               Thus
the A apparatus parameter will be set at either i or ~', and the B
parameter at either sort'.            The above physical arguments       allow
us to. define the four probabilities PA (~,AA)' PA (i,.', AA)' PB (£.,A B) ,
and PB~' ,A B) associated with the objective properties inside the
surfaces LA and LB.
     The remainder of the demonstration is purely mathematical.                 We
use a theorem, proved in the appendix which states: Given any
six numbers Xl' x z' Yl' YZ' X, and Y such that the inequalities

           - ,0 <
    o<- Xl <X         - ,0 <- YI
                - X z <X                     <- Y, 0 <- yz <- Y                      (Al.I).

hold, then the following inequality also holds;
                                                      ·.


                                          -15-




"
                                                                                        (AI. 2)

    We now take




    and· find that inequalities (5) reduce to the required inequalities

        (AI. 1) .     The theorem thus imposes the following constraint upon these

    probabilities:




                                                                                        (9)


    Multiplying Ineq. (9) by P(AA' AB}, integrating it over the full
    domains of AA and AB, and 'using Eqs. (6) - (8), we get

    -1 'S. W(a,b)
            .,.._ - W(a,b.
                     _ _') + Wea'
                              _ ",b)
                                  ... + W(a',b')
                                         _.-     - wA(a
                                                      - ' ) - w..,(b)
                                                               Jj_    'S. 0I

                                                                                        (10)

    which will hold for each interval of time.                 Di vi ding by       T,   we

    find that the following inequality contrains observable overlap
    coincidence rates,defined by Eqs. (1) - (4) for our ensemble:
             ~.                 .       .                                      .

    -    T        ~ RC.~.;£)   - R(a,~') + R(!',W + RC!.' ,£.') - r AC.~') - r BC£) ~ o.
                                                                                        (11)
             Thus we have succeeded in casting the assumptions I and II into

    the form of a perfectly general inequality which contrains observable

    rates, using only the observable phenomenology of Bohm's

    Gedankenexperiment, but no, assumption of determinism, nor of any

    specific internal model.              Inequali ty (11) thus contralns any and
                                       -16-



 all objective,· local, theories of nature.                       In many relevimt experiments
 such· as Balun's --'CGe..;,.daIik._·                ....
                                                    ··..;..r_im_·ent,
                                _. ....;·e.;..·rt_e_xpe
                                                 -
                                                   .....
                                                               -      a and b may be taken as scalar
 parameters a and b, such as the angles between the analyzer orientations
 planes and some cOJJllllOnreference plane including the flight axis.                                  If
 experimentally (and as predicted by quanttun mechanics) the rates
                  I                         .



 r A and r B are found to be independent of a and b, and the rate R
 found to depend only upon the angle between the analyzer orientations                                      ~,
                  ,I           .


 then.this inequality can be written in the more convenient form

                                                                                 (12)

. where we have chosen b-a = c-b = d-c = ".
                                         ~




 QUANWM MEo-IANICAL PREDICTIONS AND INCCMPATIBILITY
        For a contrast with the predictions by objective local theories,
we now present the predictions by quanttun mechanics for Bohm's
Gedankenexperiment.                For each apparatus two efficiencies. may be
measured for a controlled flux of particles entering the collimator:
~ and~! are the response probabilities for a particle entering
collimator i, initially polarized parallel and antiparallel respectively
to the analyzer orientation.                     We rewri te th~se in ·the following
                                                       E;im • !he quanttun mechanical

prediction for the coincidence rate is then 12

R(a,b) =                                                                                        (13)


where F is a parameter which depends upon the nature of the two-atom
            "




                                     -17-



       initial state.       For an initially pure singlet (S=O) state we have
.'
,
       F = ~1; for an initially pure MFO' triplet (S=l) state we have F = +1.
       Statistical mixtures of other states will give correlations, which
       when averaged over a + b will, yield the same fonn with      IFI ~ 1.
                                     '-
       the apparatus orientations a and b are both taken perpendicular
                                            . ~
       to the experiment axis and are at angles a and b from some reference
       axis in their plane. , Here, Rp is the rate at which correlated particles
       simultaneously enter both collimators (proportional to the d1ssociation
      rate).        Ra
                     is the
                          ,
                            tmavoidab1e accidental rate .which in a well
      designed experiment, presumably, can be made negligible.        ~    is the
      efficiency by which our scheme recognizes coincidences.         The
      singles rates with the above definitions similarly are given by

                                                                   (14)



                                                                   (15)


      Here      r/ and nB are the "gathering efficiencies for the collimators
                                              i,


      A and B; i.e. nA is the probability that a particle will enter
      collimator A, given that an associated particle enters collimator
                               I


     , B.       The gathering efficiencies will depend upon the nature of the
      decay (e.g. two-body vs. three-body), the collimator geometry, and the
      center-of-mass momentum of the two particle system.        RdA and RdB
      are the detector backgrotmd cotmt rates.
                 In principle, at least, the efficiencies can be made nearly
      ideal and the backgrotmds negligible.        In this limit we have
                                 -18-




            R(/!,b) ..... ~ Rp COS 2 [(a-b)/2],
                                                               (16)


     We now contrast these predictions with Ineqs. (11)
and (12),derived above,·by evaluating the quantum mechanical
prediction at the relative orientations shown in Fig. 4.         Assuming
the nearly ideal· experimental conditions Eq. (16 ),1he central expression
of Ineq. (11),


                                        ~R
                                          P(J7 . - 1),
is positive, in clear violation of Ineq.{ll) which requires it to be
negative.   Thus experiment· must disprove the predictions by quantum
mechanics, or prove that nature cannot be viewed as both objective
and consistent with locality.            If these predictions by quantum
mechanics are correct, individual objective systems, if they exist,
must violate locality even though average values for ensembles of
them do not.

REQUIREMENTS ·FOR AN EXPERIMENTAL TEST

The orientations of Fig.4 were chosen to yield maximum violation.
ConverselY the mininrum experimental requirement for observat ion of .'
a violation of Ineq. (11) is obtained by direct sub~titution of the
quantum mechanical predictions,Eqs. (13) - (15) at these angles,
into Ineq. (12), and reversing the direction of the inequality.            The·
                               -19-



 required condition is

                                                           > 0      (17)


      Inequality (17) shows that the required analyzer efficiency,
. gathering efficiency, degree of correlation, etc. are interrelated.
 In ~neral, some par8l11ft. ers may deteriorate if others are improved.
 On the other hand, if all parameters are nearly ideal except one,

 that one must still have a certain absolute minimum quality in
 order for Ineq.(17) to be satisfied.        This condition represents an experi-
mental requirement that is difficult to meet.         In part II we show
                                                                     3
 that the existing experimental results of Freedman and Clauser do
not in fact do so.    On the other hand,      there seems to be no ~ priori
 reason why it cannot be achieved with current (or perhaps future)
 technology.   For example, the Y rays produced by positronilDll
anrtihilat:ion achieve the required correlation, but polarizers with
sufficient transmission and extinction for them are not available.
Alkali metal atoms can be detected by hot-wire detectors coupled
through    mass spectrometelS, and their polarization Call be
analyzed by modern Stern-Gerlach magnets, both processes with high
efficiency.    It may be difficult, however, to produce these in
                      I
pairs with the requisite polarization correlation,         angular correlation,
and intensity.   Nonetheless      it is plausible that suitable systems
can be found to satisfy all of these requirements, and that the above
experiments can be performed.         This question will be the subject of
future work.
                           -20-



DISCUSSION                                                                          I
                                                                                  .,I
                                                                                    I
                                                                                 - [
     The present paper has addressed the question of whether or not
the existing formalism of quantum mechanics can be recast or perhaps
reinterpreted in a manner which restores the objectivity of nature.
We h~rve fOlmd that it is not possible to do so, consistent with
locality (macrocausality), and without an observable change of the
                     -
experimental predictions. That Bell's theorem in principle implies
an incompatibility of objectivity and locality, with the quantum
mechanical predictions for idealized experiments was qualitatively
noted earlier by d'Espagnat!~ The present quantitative argument
shows that with no further assumptions, objectivity and
locality are amenable to direct experimental test.         Such data will
then confirm or reject any realistic, micro-objective,or macro-
objective natmral philosophy.     The reader is directed to d'Espagnat's
thorough discussion of these latter topics.
     In order to solve various difficulties encountered in an
analysis of the measurement process, Jauch has recently introduced
                                                       .                    15
a new concept 0 f state which is in many respects eqUIvalent to ours.
He has noted with interest the similarity in the predictions for
various examples of his scheme and the predictions by Bell's theorem.
Our analysis shows that this similarity is by no means coincidental.
It also clarifies many earlier misconceptions concerning non local

correlations~6

     Postulates I &II include an enormot.Islygeneral class of theories.
Physicists consistently attempt to model
                                          -21-



             microscopic and macroscopic phenomena.     Any such models, if they
             are covariant and geometrically based are included by ~his scheme,
.~


             and thus are inconsistent with the predictions by quantum mechanics.
             These include any conceptual model of a wave packet as a geometrical
             entity, Whether or not it is synthesized from a set of covariant
             field modes.     As long as the modei includes a space-time description

             of the measurement process, it must be inconsistent with the usual
             predictive rules of quantum mechanics.




                  Perceptive readers will have inunediately noticed that the "
            quantum mechanical formalism, as expected, directly violates our
            assumptions.      The wave function Wmay not be simply substituted for
            ourvariablesA A and ABO       In this case our postulate requires that
            . the local probability PA at detector A be determined then'
            by ljJ and i!.   Hence PA may not depend upon the selection of any
            associated subensemble or event at the B apparatus, and as noted
            before, PA and ~ will be independent.      For fixed W, there is then
            no correlation between the A and B measurements, in violation of
            the quantum mechanical prediction.     The only remaining way to give
 ,.:.   .
            a correlation is to recognize that the state Wis not pure, but a
            mixture.    Most assuredly it cannot be a quantum mechanical mixture,
            as it was very early noted by Furry17 t hat this will not give the
            desired prediction either.
                            -22-



     Together then, objectivity and macrocausality are
violated in Bohm's Gedankenexperiment by the quantum formalism.
Immediately after the molecular dissociation occurs, each atom may
not be individually described by a state vector, but must be
described as an improper mixture. 1 8 Thus the spin description of
an individual atom here has no objective properties.     The composite
state of the two atoms must be described together.     When either
particle of the pair is measured, the composite state vector
collapses and the other particle gains objective properties corres~
ponding   to the orientation of the first apparatus.    Hence the set
of objective properties of the second particle is in fact modified
by the first measurement in a manner which depends directly upon
the orientation of the first apparatus.   This is in violation of
our assumptions I and II.   It occurs even though the usual causality
condition--the principle of local cornmutivity--is satisfied~9    Thus
an experimental test of macrocausality and the objectivity of nature
is possible.   Fortunately the requirements for such a test are
perhaps within the limitations of current technology.    Such tests
are clearly of great importance, both philosophically, and physically,
to explore further the range of validity of the quantum mechanical
formalism.

                                                                         J
                                -23-



APPENDIX
       In this appendix we prove the following mathematical theorem:

Given six numbers Xl' X2 ' YI ' Y2 ' X, Y such that
       o <~ Xl <~ X, 0 <- X2 <- X, 0 <- Yl <- Y, 0 <-Y2 <- Y,     (A1.I)

then the function U = X1Yl -XI Y2 +X2Y1 + X2Y2 - YX2 - XY1 is
constrained by the inequality

                           . - xy<" U <.. o.                      (Al.2)

We first establish the upper bound by considering two cases.            First
assume that Xl <- Xz and rewrite



We have thus assumed the last tenn to be nonpositive.           Inequalities
(Al.I) require the first two tenns likewise to be nonpositive, and

the validity of the upper bound is demonstrated.          Next assume the
other altenlative, i.e. that Xl >~, and use this asstunption to bOlmd

U,   thus:

      U = Xl (Yl - Y2) + (X 2   -   X)Yl + X2(Y2 - Y)
      <
       - XI(YI - Y2) + (X 2 - X)YI + X1 (Y2 - Y) =                (AI. 3)

       (X2 - X)Yl + Xl (Yl - Y).
                                                -24-


Inspection and application of IneqS. (Al.I) show                                              that both of the

resulting terms are also nonpositive.Thus, the upper bound on U

is established for all cases.

        The proof of the lower botmd follows from a consid.eration of
                                                  .       > .
three cases.                  First, assume x             - x1 .        The validity of the lower
                                                      2

bound is apparent by inspection when written in the form

        U + TI = (X - x )(Y - Y ) + x y                                 + (x        - x )y            (Al.4)
                                            2    1              11             2          1·2)

since Ineq. (Al.I) requires all three tenns to be nonnegative.
   . S:irn ilarly for the case y                          ~ y ,inspection reveals the
                                                      1         2
correctness of the upper bound when written

        u + TI = eX - x )(Y - Y ) + x y                                 + x    (y     - y ) ~ O.       (Al.S)
                                            2    1              22            11              2

Finally, suppose neither of the two previous cases holds; that

is x< x          and y< y . Then write
    2        1                1     2

        U + TI = eX - x 2 )(Y - Y1 ) - (x 1 - x 2
                                                )(y - y ) + x y.
                                                  2    1     21
                                                                                                          (Al.6)
The stun of the first two tenns is nonnegative since now
                 >                                                      >             .
(X - x )
         2
                     (x
                          1
                                  - x ) > 0 and (Y - Y ) - (y                       - y » o.       Ineq. (Al.I)
                                        2                           1         2           1

requires the final term to be also nonnegative, hence the final
case is also verified, and the theorem is proved.
                             -25-


                    FOOTNOTE AND REFERENCES

 *Work supported by U.S. Atomic Energy Commission
1                              .
                                1,195 (1964); J~ S. Bell, in
     J. S. Bell, Physics (N.Y.) .,.

 Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Proceedings of the International
 School of Physics "Enrico Ferni", Course 49, edited by B. d'Espagnat
    (Academic Press, N.Y. 1971), p. 171.
2    J. F. Clauser, M. A. Horne, A. Shimony, and R.A. Holt, Phys . Rev.

           ....                                                  ...
 Letters 23, 880 (1969); J. F. Clauser, BUll. Amer. Phys. Soc. 14,
. 578 (1969); A. Shimony, in Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, p. 182
 (see Ref. 1); M. A. Horne, Ph.D. Thesis (Boston University, 1970)
 (unpublished) .
3
                                           ,
                                                          --
     S. J. Freedman and J. F. Clauser, Phys. Rev. Letters 28, 938 (1972);
S. J. Freedman, Ph.D. Thesis (University of California, Berkeley,
1972), Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Report LBL 391 (unpublished).
4    It should be noted that when we speak of objectivity, we refer to
what is sometimes called strong objectivity.     In this view, nature
really possesses the aforementioned properties, regardless of an
observer's particular technological ability to measUre them.     Strong
objectivity is to be contrasted with weak objectivity.    This latter
viewpoint merely stipulates that the results of observations are
independent of who observes them.     The usual interpretations of
quantum mechanics are consistent with weak but not strong objectivity.
The distinction between these views is discussed by B. d'Espagnat in
Ref. 14.
                            -26-



                             -
       Hartle [Am. J. Phys. 36, 704 (1968) 1 gives . a noteworthy
                                             ..   ""




alternative definition of objectivity which is, however, tmsatisfactory
for our purposes.     We quote, " ... the state will be called an objective
property if an assertion of what the state is can be verified by
measurements on the individual system without knowledge of the
system's history." The ultimate limitation to possible measurements
is, tmforttmately, unknown, and present limitations may perhaps be
only technological ones.     Quantum mechanics assumes the tmcertainty
principle to place a ftmdamental limitation on measurements.        Since
it would be circular for us to assume- "!priori the c.oi'Tectnessof a
theory whose veracity we currently question, we cannot in the present
instance accept this limitation.     Hartle's statement is meaningful
only if one knows the ultimate limitation to physical measurements.
It can equally well be used to define this liniitation.

S   Indeed, Bell (Ref.l) considered a quite general case which included
"indetenninism with a certain local character." Unforttmately, this
phrase alone was the full extent of his description.      Understandably
it led to subsequent confusion; see K. Popper, in Perspectives in
QUarttumTheory:     Essays iIi Honor of Alfred Lande, edited by W. Yourgrau
and A. Van der Merwe (MIT Press, Cambridge, 1971), p.182.      Some of


(1972)].   Nonetheless, even though Bell's conclusions were indeed
                                                                    --
the confusion was subsequently clarified [J. S. Bell, Science 177, 880
                               -27-



 correct, the difficulties discussed i..'1 Ref. 8, prevented his analysis
 from so proving them.Nei thera fully general argument, nor a
 prescription for a conclusive test has heretofore been exhibited.
 6   D. Borun,Q.!antum Theory' (Prentice Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs ,N.J.

 1951), p.614.
 7
     J. F. Clauser and M. A. Horne, Part II of this two-part article.
 Phys.' Rev.
 8
     J. A. Crawford (see Ref. 1) and P. M. Pearle [Phys. Rev. D .,..
                                                                 2,
 1418 (1970)] h~ve noticed that the systems considered by Bell are
 not two-state systems, but in fact three-state systems.        The third
 state corresponds to the situation in which one or both particles of
 a pair are not observed.    Bell, to counter this argument suggested
 that a given apparatus could respond +1 for "spin up," -1 for "spin
 down," and 0 ,for "unobserved.   tI
                                       Unfortunately, his prescription is
 either incomplete or ineffective.        In the same paper he derives an
 inequality constraining correlation functions, which to be measurable,
 nrust be normalized to the total m.vnber of events.      If! the unobserved
 flux of particles is assumed to be arbitrarily large, the predictions
 by quantum mechanics and Bell's assignment yield no violation of his
 inequality, since his correlation ftmctions vanish in'this limit.
 The unobservability of some events prevents their enumeration in his
,case.   Pearle derived a lower limit to the unobserved flux of-particles
 necessary to prevent an experiment from conclusively testing for the
 existence of hidden variables.        He did not, however, consider the
 possibility of using only observable data to draw conclusions despite
                            -28- .



 the existence of the UnobserVed particles, as we do here.    The
 present discussion avoids the above difficulty by reverting to a
 consideration of two-state systems.    Spin-down particles are
 grouped with unobserved ones, and both assigned the value zero.
 This assignment does indeed still yield a violation of the
 inequality we derive, even for a large flux of unobserved particles.
 9   The idea of readjusting the analyzers while the particles are in
 flight is Originally due (essentially) to D. Bohm and Y. Aharonov, .
 Phys. Rev.Jj~" 1070 (1957).
10   It has already been noticed that strict determinism may be
 incompatible with free will [H. P. Stapp, Phys. Rev. D ~ 1303 (1971)].
Hence, a logically defensible alternative is that spontaneous
 signal sources cannot exist.    In this case a signal may be received
outside of the transmitter's light cone, but the causality violation is
only apparent.    Both the transmitter and receiver were predetermined
to exhibit the same signal.     The point of origin of the "actual" signal
was some point wi thin the light cones of both.   Here, then, the
locality postulate is meaningless.     This position seems rather
farfetched, however, since for a Lorentz-invariant objective theory
to produce the required correlation in our proposed experiment, it
is necessary that the properties of the measured objects actually
corrommicate with the experimenter.    Indeed, they must convince the
experimenter without his knowledge to set the apparatus in a marmer
specified by the objects themselves.    We will thus ignore this possibility.
                              -29-



11   To perfonn an ensemble of identical experiments on an associated

 ensemble of quanttnn systems will indeed. be expensive!     Nor will it

 even be practical to assure that such ensembles are in fact identical.

 More practically, one may use an ensemble of identically prepared

 quanttnn systems, and the same apparatus repeatedly.      To do so one

 must, however, assume that the associated random processes are
 ergodic .. The invariances of nature required by the ergodic hypothesis
 [see for example D. Middleton, Introduction to Statistical Crnmnunication

 Theory OMcGraw Hi11,New York, 1960), p.S6] are so natural that they
 are tacitly assl~d by practically every experimenter.        Strictly
 speaking, however, ergodicity does represent an additional assumption,
 if the experiment is to be perfonned in this manner.

12   These results apply only in the low rate limit such that the counter

 "dead time" is small, i.e .. when T«1/r ..

13   In any real experiment the effective path lengths and flight times

 for the paired atoms will vary so that R and lli will both depend
                                         a
 upon T.
14   B. d'Espagnat, Conceptual Foundations of Quanttnn Mechanics (Benjamin,
Menlo Park, Calif., 1971), Chapters 8, 9, and 16.
15   J. M. Jauch, in Foundations of ·~antumMechanics, p~20(s~eRef~Yi:1) •
                               -30-



16   For example, M. L. Goldberger and K. M. Watson [Phys. Rev. 134,  ~


 B 919 (1964)] consider a system composed of two spin-l/2particles.
 Th~connnent:    " ... IIi general therefore the observation of the
 orientation of spin 1 with respect to the axis has an instantaneous
 effect on the state of the second spin.      With the interpretation of
 an observation as making a selection among the members of an ensemble,
 this is in no sense surprising."         The above discussion shows that
 such an interpretation cannot of course be considered correct.
17   W. H. Furry, Phys. Rev. 49, 393 and 476 (1936).
18
                              """'"
     B. d'Espagnat, in Preludes in Theoretical Physics; in Honor of
 v. F. Weisskopf, edited by DeShalit et a!. (North Holland Pub!. Co.,
 Amsterdam, 1966), p.185
19   This principle states that the commutator of any two operators must
vanish if they correspond to measurements made outside of each other's
 light cones.
                                                                      -
                 Following R. Haag and B. Schroer [J. Math. Phys. 3, 248
 (1962)] this principle is often referred to as the Einstein causality
 condition.     In view of the above discussion and Einstein's conviction
 concerning physical reality, the term is clearly a misnomer.
      ! '



                                -31-



                         FIGURE CAPfIONS



Figure 1.        Schematic diagram of Bohm's Gedankenexperiment.
     Spin-l/2.partic1es produced by the dissociation of a spin-zero
     molecule are spin-state selected by Stern-Gerlach magnets and
     detectors.


Figure 2.       Typical detector outputs (first two traces) are
     converted by procedure outlined in text to records (+ I or 0)
     shown as the third and fourth traces.                    Clock pulses are
     shown as the last trace.          During subinterval Tl , the analyzer
     orientations are readjusted.         Any pulse leading edge falling
                                               "         .,
     in subinterval T3 is accepted as a + 1 event.


Figure 3.       Apparatuses A and B with typical associated signal
     sources and recorders.        Surfaces LA and LB do not intersect,
     and have separation greater than CT from the boxes and sources.


Figure 4.       Analyzer orientations for maximum violation with
     F = + 1 (</f = 45 0 ) .   Maximum violation for F = - 1 occurs

                                                   ...
     with cp= 135 0 (reverse directions of b and .....,
                                                  b').
-32-




                     I


                     I




                         ....... 0
                         +II    II
                         mm


       o                                 .
                                     .....OIl
       II                            ~




            =   --
             c _0
            _0 -

            ~o
            II  II
            <t:<t:
                                    -33-




/"1
      Detector A
      output.
          ---It           ~           ~                                                                .   ~

•
      Detector 8
      outpu..!....A           ~           ~.              L»
                                                      \                    \                               "'--
                                                          \                   \
                                                          \                       \
                                                           \                          \
                                                                  \
                                                                      \       '           \
      Apparatus A                                                     \                   \
                                                                          I   \
      output                                                              I . 1                    .
      record     n n n                               tJ I
                                                              --.1                            L)i+l            f1-
                                                                          I                    I
                                                                                               I
                                                                          1                   1
      Apparatus 8                                                         1                   I
      output·    n                        n                               II                   I
                                                                                               I
                                                                                               I
                                                                                                               rL.
      record                                                          I                       I
                                                                   I                 I
                                                                  I                 I
                                                              I                    I
                                                              I                   I

                                                    --.,, /It·
                                                          I
                                               tj
      Clock pulses                                          / 1+1
                 III III III III III hi III III I"                        I" I" hi III I" h, 1., l!l I




                                                                           XBL 737-3358

                                       Fig. 2
                                       ~B



           o     o   A= 1 ...lon"
                     A=O ... "Off II
                                                               ll
                                                     B=1 ..'.'on
                                                     B=O.. I.IOff"
                                                                     @     o
                                                                           o
                                                                            o
                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                  \.I.J
Signal                                                                                            ,j:>.
                                                                                Signal
source
                                                                                source
and
recorder--..,.                                                                  and
                                                                                recorder




                                                             XBL737-3356


                                            Fig. 3




                                                                                           ....
      -35-




                             a'
                             JVV




             XB L 737-3359


    Fig. 4



:
     p-----------------LEGALNOTICE------------------~

        This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by the
        United States Government. Neither the United States nor the United
        States Atomic Energy Commission, nor any of their employees, nor
        any of their contractors, subcontractors, or their employees, makes
        any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or
        responsibility for the accuracy, completeness or usefulness of any
        information, apparatus, product or process disclosed, or represents
        that its use would not infringe privately owned rights.




,"
                                  .~.



 TECHNICAL INFORMATION DIVISION
LAWRENCE BERKELEY LABORATORY
    UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
   BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA 94720
