J. Social Biol. Struct. 1978 1, 117-125




             A cognitive view of biological process
                                        B. C. G o o d w i l l
                      School of Biological Sciences, University of Sussex, UK

       From the study of biological pattern formation, formal rules have begun to emerge
       which allow one to generate structures representing characteristic biological forms
       such as limbs, eyes, and plant leaves. These rules are phenomenological, providing a
       structuralist, non-reductionist approach to the problem of biological form. This
       approach is developed in relation to a cognitive view of biological process which sees
       organisms as systems which operate on the basis of knowledge. This knowledge is
       expressed in the form of rules or constraints which generate behaviour useful to the
       organism or the species for survival, reproduction and evolution.
          Organisms, defined as cognitive (knowledge using) systems, are characterised by
       generative processes which involve both constraint and innovation, properties which
       are taken to define creative behaviour. Both development and evolution are then seen
       to be aspects of a creative process. Such a concept of creative becoming is basic to a
       philosophy of organism such as Whitehead's, but is problematic to a philosophy of
       substance such as Descartes'. It is argued that the dualistic and positivistic aspects of
       contemporary science, deriving from philosophies of substance, are detrimental to an
       understanding of biological process, and that a cognitive view is helpful in con-
       ceptualizing biological problems in terms of creative process.




                                           Introduction
M y intention in this essay is to describe the emergence of a new view of biological
pattern f o r m a t i o n which links this area of study very m u c h m o r e closely to h u m a n
pattern-forming activities than has been the case in the past. D u r i n g most of this
century, biologists have tended to make the assumption that, somehow or other,
detailed studies in genetics, biochemistry and biophysics would eventually provide
explanations of the processes which generate limbs in insects, feathers on birds,
spiral patterns in the arrangement of leaves on plants, and spots on ladybirds' backs.
T h i s expresses a reductionist belief which is now foundering badly and is being
replaced b y a view of biological process which seeks to understand pattern forma-
tion in t e r m s of rules or laws operating at levels above the molecular and the genetic
(in the sense of products of the p r i m a r y genetic material, D N A ) . Furthermore,
these rules are biological, not physical, although they in no sense violate the laws
of physics and chemistry. I t is here that this new approach to morphogenesis differs
quite sharply f r o m the view of the m o s t outstanding student of biological f o r m
in this century, D ' A r c y W e n t w o r t h T h o m p s o n . His study On Growth and Form,
published in 1917, sets forth the thesis that form can only be understood through
mathematics and that the forces which operate in the genesis of biological structure
are essentially physical. T h a t mathematics and f o r m or order belong together few

0140-1750/78/0401-0117 $02.00/0                      ~) 1978 Academic Press Inc. (London) Limited
   9
118                                  B. C. Goodwin

would dispute, but D'Arcy Thompson's view tends to eliminate the biological as
a distinct and autonomous realm of nature; i.e. his reduction of biological structure
to the operation of mathematical and physical laws fails to recognise the biological
origins of the constraints which generate this structure. It is biological process
which 'discovers' rules, expressible in mathematical form, these rules giving rise
to order and pattern. This process is both orderly and creative. Furthermore, I will
argue that it may also be seen to be cognitive. Thus biological pattern formation
assumes characteristics which link it closely with the processes which generate
pattern and order in human society. However, this similarity is not an identity:
I do not wish to imply any reduction of the social order to biological order, which
would simply commit again the reductionist fallacy at another level. The creativity
of Nature is not the same as the creativity of Mind. But I will argue that they are
much more akin than current thinking allows.


           The failure of the reductionist view o f pattern formation
One of the most distinctive characteristics of biological process is its capacity to
generate a great diversity of structures, forms and patterns. The evolutionary process
produces species of distinct morphology and behaviour, the developmental process
generates individuals of characteristic form from eggs or buds, the process of living
manifests itself in behaviour patterns such as hunting, feeding, talking, building,
etc., typical of the individual and its species. In recent decades, the dramatic success
of such subjects as genetics, molecular biology and neurophysiology in analysing
biological activities in terms of units such as genes, molecules and neurons encour-
aged the view that a satisfactory understanding of biological pattern formation
would arise from the detailed study of the properties and behaviour of these units,
order and complexity arising from their interaction. However, this analytical pro-
gramme of reduction and resynthesis works satisfactorily only when there is an
extremely simple and direct relationship between the units of a system and its
higher level behaviour, as in a gas where the momentum or the kinetic energy of
the molecules can be averaged to determine the pressure or the temperature of
the gas. Of course there must always be some relationship between the properties
of the units which are construed to exist within a complex system and the behaviour
of the system itself. The problem is that if the units themselves are complex, in
the sense that macromolecules or neurons are complex, then there are very many
different ways in which higher order behaviour can arise. The reductionist pro-
gramme is then faced with the virtually impossible task of exploring all the possible
interaction patterns available and selecting those which conform to observed higher
order behaviour. Given that one never has complete knowledge of the properties
of the units, so that the relevant behaviour may well be missing from the computa-
tion to begin with, it is clear that this is not a very reliable strategy to pursue in the
study of biological pattern formation at the macroscopic level, that of the species,
the individual and its behaviour.
   An alternative approach, which has always been an important strategy in science,
is to observe the behaviour of the system of interest, to record its regularities and
then to see if it is possible to devise simple formal rules which act as axioms from
which the behaviour of the system may be deduced. These formal rules then repre-
sent the constraints within the system which underly its orderly behaviour. It may
happen that they can never be reduced to certain categories of behaviour of simpler
                         tl cognitive vie~ of biological process                    119

units, as the inverse square rule or law of gravitational attraction could never be
reduced to the mechanical properties of matter, much to the discomfiture of seven-
teenth-century mechanical philosophers. However, scientists rapidly accommodate
themselves to such eventualities and quite soon even go so far as to believe that
a phenomenon such as gravitational attraction is in some sense explain.ed by the
law, whereas it is only described. What is explained by the use of the rule is, for
example, planetary motion. Newtonian mechanics is a generative theory in the
sense that it allows one to generate patterns (trajectories which are conic sections,
e.g. ellipses, parabolae or hyperbolae) by means of formal operations constrained
by rules (the calculus, with the inverse square law of attraction) and these patterns
fit the observed behaviour of the planets. This is not a reductionist theory, since
the phenomena can be explained in terms of units and rules which correspond to
the level of the observables themselves. Reductionism entered science largely with
the adoption of the atomic hypothesis in the seventeenth century. It is an extremely
useful hypothesis for the explanation of certain microscopic phenomena in physics,
chemistry and biology; but not, I submit, for the understanding of biological
pattern formation.

                                 Cognitive biology
In facing the problem of pattern and order in biological process, I believe that
biologists will be induced to adopt a very different view of organisms and their
evolution from the reductionist and materialist one which has prevailed throughout
this century. This will bring biology much closer to the ideas expressed by White-
head in his philosophy of organism and the idealist approach to the understanding
of form which originated in the West with Pythagoras. Developmental biologists
are now beginning to describe the appearance of characteristic structures such
as limbs and eyes in terms of systems obeying formal rules whose molecular inter-
pretation is left undescribed and is irrelevant for the explanation of the phenomena
of interest (French, Bryant & Bryant, 1976; MacDonald, 1977). These rules are
not in the category of natural law, as the physicist tends to regard the law of gravita-
tional attraction. They are rules which have been arrived at by the evolutionary
process as a solution to the problem of reliably and repeatedly generating particular
types of form. And they are of course inherited, passed on from generation to
generation.
   What sort of system is this which employs rules to generate useful structures
and behaviour patterns and which can transmit the rules to its progeny ? I have
argued that such rules constitute knowledge and that a system which uses know-
ledge is a cognitive system (Goodwin, 1976a, 1977). This comes from an extension
of an argument presented by Chomsky (1972) in a linguistic context. In his analysis
of linguistic competence, Chomsky presents evidence for an instinctive, unlearned
capacity for generating correct sentence structure or syntax, a capacity which emerges
in the course of the human developmental process. The rules or constraints which
constitute linguistic competence define the processes which generate the correct
surface structure of sentences from their deep structure, such as structure-dependent
operations in sentence transformation. Possession of these rules, i.e. possession of
the structural (anatomical) and functional (physiological) constraints which are
the embodiments of the rules, is equivalent to having the knowledge required for
speaking correct sentences. This knowledge is not learned, but is innate, inherited
as part of the human phenotype. Chomsky's (1972) contention is that: 'knowledge of
120                                  B. C. Goodndn

 language results from the interplay of initially given structures of mind, matura-
 tional processes, and interaction with the environment.' Innate structures are thus
 seen to constitute elements of knowledge. I have simply used this proposition in
 a more extended form to suggest that the basic attribute of living organisms is their
 possession of knowledge about aspects of the world, knowledge which renders
 them competent to survive and to reproduce in the environment to which they
 are adapted or which they know.
    I have defined knowledge as a useful description of some aspect of the world,
 giving the possessor the competence to behave in a manner which contributes to
its survival and reproduction (Goodwin, 1976a). The fact that we are dealing with
 descriptions means that there are codes or sets of codes which relate them to that
which is described. The unravelling of such codes, which is the equivalent of
learning to read an unknown language, together with the solution of the problem
how the knowledge is transmitted reliably from generation to generation, has been
a major preoccupation of contemporary biology: coded knowledge is located largely
in the DNA, which acts as a primary memory store for the organism, this know-
ledge being in the form of hypotheses which need to be translated into active form
for testing. However, there is a great deal of 'tacit' knowledge in other structures.
The elucidation of the translation and assembly process from the coded linear
sequences in the DNA to active three-dimensional proteins, which function as
tests of genetic hypotheses by revealing their meaning, constitutes one of the
triumphs of twentieth-century biology.
    I used the term 'meaning' above in relation to the translation and testing of genetic
hypotheses and it needs some clarification in this context. In coded form as it occurs
in the DNA, the information for a particular protein such as the enzyme fl-galacto-
sidase (required for the catabolism of the nutrient lactose in micro-organisms) or a
crystallin (a protein which forms the transparent lens of the eye) cannot be tested
because it exerts no action upon the organism or its environment. Before it can
be tested, the information in the DNA must be translated into a form in which it
exerts a particular type of force and acts within a particular context. Thus the fl-
galactosidase converts lactose into glucose and galactose when it operates within
the context of the bacterial cell (which defines particular conditions of pH, osmotic
concentration, substrate level, etc.); while a crystallin transmits light rays in a
particular way within the context of the eye. These activities may be said to consti-
tute tests of meaning of the coded hypotheses in the hereditary material, involving
the interpretation of the information. This interpretation takes place within a partic-
ular context, which in part determines the pattern of forces which operate during
the testing operation. We then arrive at a distinction between information and
knowledge. The technical definition of information involves only selection (e.g.
specifying one out of a set of possibilities), but says nothing about meaning, which
I take always to involve activity in real space-time. Thus knowledge differs from
information in that it not only involves selection of alternative possibilities, but
also includes instruction for action which, operating in a particular context, conveys
meaning.

                              Generative processes
In the rather detailed discussion given above, it is clear that every aspect of the
behaviour of what I have called a cognitive system is compatible with physical
and chemical laws. However, such a system transcends the rules of physics and
                         A cognitive view of biological process                    121

 chemistry in that, besides obeying these, its behaviour is constrained by other rules
which are the embodiment of particular types of knowledge of which it makes use.
This allows such systems to operate in domains which, while available to systems
obeying the laws of physics and chemistry, are relatively improbable; i.e. cognitive
systems can stabilize behaviour in physically and chemically improbable states by
means of particular rules of action which they have embodied in parts of their own
structure, such as catalysis of chemical reactions by enzymes so that relatively high
rates of metabolic transformation can occur at low temperatures. By thus regulating
their own activities through the imposition upon themselves of specific rules or
 constraints, biological systems have managed to discover and exploit an immense
 range of behavioural and morphological patterns. To give an architectural example,
although rectangular stones occur in nature they are very rare; and structures in
which they are piled on top of one another are much rarer still. However, the art
of the stone-mason and the builder consists in following some very simple rules
about shaping stone and assembling it and these rules then permit the construction
of an immense variety of highly improbable structures, from Stonehenge to Chartres
 Cathedral.
   The essence of order and pattern is adherence to laws or rules; and the charac-
teristic of cognitive systems is that they operate in terms of rules which stabilize
useful temporal and spatial patterns. The process whereby such rules and the
variety of their applications is discovered is described as creative in a human context
and I would suggest that the evolutionary process shares this property. We do
not yet know how to describe this creative potential of evolution, which generates
organisms of greater and greater complexity constrained by the necessity that this
be relevant, meaningful in its context; i.e. that it be biologically successful. (But
see Saunders & Ho, 1976, for a very thoughtful and interesting paper on this subject.)
Such generative processes appear to have the property of proceeding from sym-
metry to asymmetry, which involves an increase in complexity; but then a new
symmetry is generated which resolves the complexity into higher order simplicity
without, however, losing the lower-level complexity. Thus in the evolution of the
human hand, the development of the opposable thumb involved the breaking of a
structural and dynamic symmetry in the organization and behaviour of primate
digits. The grasping action of the primate hand wherein all the digits act in unison,
so well adapted to swinging in trees and grasping certain types of object, is trans-
formed into a much more complex structure with great independence of action
of the thumb. However, the human uses a series of co-ordinating activities for the
hand which involve higher order symmetries such as the coming together of the
first finger and thumb in the typical action of picking up a small object, or the
opposed wrapping of thumb and fingers around a stick. These symmetries have a
bilateral element rather than the simpler unilateral action of the primate, giving
a unity of movement and action to the more complex structure.
   Alternatively, asymmetry can arise as a functional adaptation within a system
with higher order symmetry as in the breaking of symmetry of the aortic arches
in the evolution of the circulatory system in vertebrates, which retain a bilaterally
symmetric overall body plan. Thus the hierarchical organisation of biological sys-
tems, both structural and functional, allows for the appearance of asymmetry at
one level and symmetry at another. However, the general tendency is for symmetry
to evolve into asymmetry, as in the phenomenon of cerebral dominance and handed-
ness in human beings, which breaks the bilateral body symmetry of the vertebrate
122                                B. C. Goodzoin

line; and then for a higher level symmetry to appear. In relation to human evolu-
tion, the higher level symmetry which transcends the asymmetry of cerebral domi-
nance is not yet evident. It is, however, clear that the biosphere needs a more
balanced dominant being than the one currently with us, and we may look forward
hopefully to its emergence.
   It is of some interest to pursue this line of thinking in a little more detail, and
to see if there is an analytical foundation for the ideas presented above, since in
certain respects they appear to be at variance with some basic generalisations about
'natural' process as described by physics and chemistry. What I am suggesting is
that there is a natural tendency for systems to break their symmetries and become
asymmetric, thus becoming more complex. On the other hand, physics says that,
for a system with given constraints, there is a natural tendency for asymmetry to
disappear and for entropy (disorder) to increase. Thus if a thermally isolated gas
or liquid starts with a temperature gradient, then the natural tendency is for this
to disappear and for the initial heterogeneity of state (asymmetry) to decay into
homogeneity (symmetry), with a uniform temperature throughout the system.
This is a fundamental property of thermodynamically isolated systems, and is
expressed in the second law of thermodynamics. However, observe that the state-
ment of the law depends upon the assumption of fixed constraints: entropy increases
to the maximum, subject to given constraints, in a thermodynamically closed system.
If we are concerned with systems whose constraints can change, then the law no
longer applies, and this is the situation for developing or evolving organisms. The
problem then is to formulate a 'law' which describes the general tendency for com-
plexity to increase in systems which can undergo this more general change, and
which suggests why such a process is 'natural'. By 'natural' one usually means
that increased complexity is, on the whole, more stable than decreased complexity.
One way of looking at this problem is in terms of structural stability, a concept
used to describe the properties of dynamical systems whose parameters ('constraints')
are subject to change. In this context, it is the case that asymmetry is more stable
than symmetry; i.e. systems with symmetry transform into asymmetric systems
under a perturbation (variation) of parameters. Particular examples are the trans-
formations of periodic systems undergoing simple harmonic motion, such as an
ideal pendulum, into either a damped oscillation (a real pendulum with friction
which eventually comes to rest) or into a limit cycle (a child on a swing); the emer-
gence of spiral motion in water running down a plug-hole, from an initially sym-
metric flow; or the appearance of coherent light emission from a laser when the
external 'pump' exceeds a particular energy level. All these asymmetrics arise spon-
taneously in systems which are displaced from thermodynamic equilibrium and are
subject to parametric perturbations. Thus the transition from symmetry to asym-
metry, i.e. the breaking of symmetry, is a natural process in systems whose constraints
are subject to change, and this provides a description of the general tendency of
such systems to increase this complexity (asymmetry is more complex than
symmetry; it requires more terms to describe it). However, this is a long way
from giving us a theory of the evolution of living systems. These are not simply
 complex; they show ordered complexity or organisation. The way one represents
this central property of organisms is crucial to any attempt at a formal analysis
of generative processes, ones which operate on the basis of knowledge or
useful descriptions, seen as ordering or organising constraints. I do not wish to
 pursue these technical problems here, but rather to take up the more general
                         A cognitive view of biological process                     123

discussion of the implications of such a view regarding the creativity of the
biological process.


                      Biological process as creative becoming
 To obtain some initial focus on the concept of creativity, let us start with Descartes'
 description of speech and language as creative expression, as discussed by Chomsky
 (1968). There are three essential ideas here: unlimited variety, freedom from
stimulus control and relevance or appropriateness. A competent language user can
generate an unlimited variety of sentences, each of which is relevant or appropriate
 to some situation; and the particular one selected is not dictated by any obvious
 controlling stimulus. Grammatical and syntactical rules determine sentence struc-
ture, these constraints arising from the demands of communication: the hearer
must be able to recover the meaning of the sentence. These rules and constraints
 constitute part of the knowledge required for linguistic competence as described
by Chomsky (1968). It is this view of knowledge, extended to the basic organisation
of living systems, which provides the basis for the cognitive biology which I have
 described in previous sections. The question we now face is whether biological
processes at levels below that of the human mind, with linguistic behaviour as one
example, can be said to reveal creative expression in the terms defined above.
   An example of behaviour conforming to these general criteria is embryonic
development. The developing embryo certainly defines its own goals, so that its
behaviour is free from a wide range of stimulus control. Furthermore, it is capable
of making an unlimited variety of appropriate responses to situations which demand
an altered strategy of development from the normal one. Thus, for example, damage
to an amphibian embryo, such as removal of part of the tissue which would normally
form the tail, results in a compensatory response in which other tissue which would
have become part of the mid-back musculature, say, becomes tail. And such a
regulatory response occurs irrespective of the nature of the damaging stimulus,
whether surgery, cauterization, focussed ultrasound or any other method of removing
tissue. Within certain defined tolerance limits, the response is always appropriate
to the goal, which is the formation of a complete organism and is independent of
the type of stimulus acting on the system. It is the property of appropriateness
relative to an internally defined goal which I take to be the essence of creative
response, together with the other features of unlimited variety and independence
of stimuli which do not constitute part of the internal goal-seeking process. Embryos
have this capacity and so do organisms in their behaviour.
   Animal behaviour was, in fact, something which Cartesians assumed could be
explained in strictly mechanical terms, which for them meant the absence of creative
expression. Therefore in using Cartesian criteria for creativity and concluding that
organismic behaviour reveals this property, I am contradicting their conclusions.
It will become evident that I also reject the basic metaphysical dualism of the Car-
tesians regarding mind and body and it is precisely this dualism which underlies
their sharp division between creative human expression as revealed in language,
and organismic behaviour below the human level. My extension of cognitive process
to the lower levels is consistent with a parallel extension of the concept of creative
expression; and this requires a concept of perception which is similarly extended
over the Cartesian one which associates it with thinking, hence with human con-
sciousness. The abandonment of the Cartesian criteria for identifying the distinctive
124                                  B. C. Goodwin

features of humafi cognition in terms of creative self-expression does not eliminate
the problem of accounting for the discontinuity of creative level between the human
and the biological spheres; it means only that I choose to characterize this dis-
continuity in other terms. This involves primarily an analysis of symbol use and
function, of imagination and morality, but I am unable to undertake this here.
   If the above propositions regarding the creative behaviour of organisms are
accepted, then the evolutionary process itself, involving the discovery of rules or
constraints which generate new and successful organisms, is also seen to be creative.
This involves the process described above, the transformation of symmetry to
asymmetry by parametric perturbation, subject to the constraint of survival or
relevance which tends to require the emergence of a higher order symmetry.
Expressed less technically, this is the process of generating new organisms as a
creative response to new opportunities which emerge from the on-going nexus of
organic evolution. In order to make a full transition to the description of biology
as a creative process, one needs a philosophy which takes the essence of being to
be creative becoming and which is free of the positivistic and dualistic elements
which permeate contemporary science. There can be no atoms of substance or
meaning in a creative process where every element of structure or function is sensi-
tive to its context, a property which I have elsewhere argued is characteristic of
biological systems (Goodwin, 1976a, b); and a cognitive biology which assumes
that organisms have real knowledge of the world requires that the 'subject' possessing
this knowledge and the 'object' whose properties the knowledge expresses be essen-
tially similar in nature, not distinct. It is here that one needs definitions of perception
and experience which describe a continuity of relationship between subject and
object. A philosophy which satisfies these requirements is that of A. N. Whitehead.
What I shall do finally in this essay is to explore what I regard as some of the impli-
cations of an organic philosophy of Whitehead's type, particularly those relating
to his manner of resolving the body-mind or substance-quality dualism which is
a prominent feature of contemporary scientific thought, and is a severe hindrance
to the development of an adequate theory of organism.


                          Cognition and creative process
My own definition of knowledge as a useful description of an aspect of the world
has itself dualistic overtones, since it can be taken to mean that the description
need not reproduce the essence of that described, but only represent it in some
formal sense. My meaning is that knowledge is manifest when there is a re-enact-
ment of the process which is described, as the biological clock re-enacts the cyclic
process of the night-day-night transition. The evolutionary history of the organism,
which includes the experience of these day-night cycles, is embodied in the organ-
ism's activity. Therefore its knowledge is in its process; it is not something static,
set aside from this process. Thus instead of a description of the organism's world
emerging from the organism as subject, which is the Cartesian or the Kantian way
of looking at knowledge, we have the organism emerging from the world as an
organised, coherent whole in which knowledge is a constituent of activity: a con-
straining, ordering constituent, as described above. As Whitehead (1929) has put
it: 'Descartes in his philosophy conceives the thinker as creating the occasional
thought. The philosophy of organism inverts the order, and conceives the thought
as a constituent operation in the creation of the occasional thinker . . . .  In this
                         A cognitive view of biological process                      125

inversion we have the final contrast between a philosophy of substance and a philo-
sophy of organism.' The creative process thus realises itself through the organised
activities of beings. For Whitehead this description applies not only to organisms,
but to Nature in general, thus avoiding a physical-biological dualism. But we then
find ourselves in the position of asking what is the nature of these beings if they
are other than biological organisms; i.e. how are we to recognise other 'actual
entities' apart from ourselves and other organisms ? We are faced with some kind
of distinction between the organic and the inorganic, between animate and inanimate.
Whitehead regards this distinction as fictitious, arising from an abstraction. He also
appears to deny that there is any significant distinction between organic order and
mind. This denial results in the important assertion of continuity, of a basic unity
in the world; but it fails to recognise different levels of creative organisation, and
to distinguish between them. I have suggested a distinction between biological and
physical process in terms of the concept of a cognitive system (Goodwin, 1976a);
but a distinction between organisms and minds requires, I believe, a theory of sym-
bolic and moral processes which characterises human intelligence and contrasts it
sharply with the constrained knowledge which operates in organisms. Symbolic
thought has degrees of freedom not available to processes which employ fixed
relationships of interpretation and meaning between structures and their descrip-
tions (reproductions or re-enactments). A brilliant beginning for such a theory of
symbolism is provided by Sperber (1975).
   However, despite the necessity for clear distinctions between levels of organisa-
tional complexity in Nature, I believe that a major consequence of Whitehead's
philosophy of organism is the resolution of the Cartesian duality in his vision of the
world as creative process. The fundamental category of being is activity, creative
activity. In relation to organismic process, knowledge is an essential ordering
ingredient. Man as an actual entity interacts with every other actual entity, i.e. the
rest of the universe, and this is how the world can be known, why it is intelligible.
Knowledge cannot be obtained without this union and the way of science is the
way of experience. Knowledge comes through the resolution of complication into
greater and greater simplicity and the art of resolution is the art of life. A cognitive
biology seeks to bring this vision into clearer perspective. The way is made infinitely
easier by the extraordinarily penetrating insights of Whitehead.


                                        References
Chomsky, N. (1968). Language and Mind. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
Chomsky, N. (1972). Problems of Knowledge and Freedom. London: Fontana.
French, V., Bryant, P. J. & Bryant, S. V. (1976). Science 193, 969.
Goodwin, B. C. (1976a). Analytical Physiology of Cells and Developing Organisms. London:
  Academic Press.
Goodwin, B. C. (1976b). Theoria to Theory 10, 33.
Goodwin, B. C. (1977). In International Workshop on the Cognitive Viewpoint (M. deMey, R.
  Pinxten, M. Poriau & F. Vandamme, Eds). Belgium: University of Ghent Press, pp. 396-400.
MacDonald, N. (1977).ff. theoret. Biol. 69, 153.
Saunders, P. T. & Ho, M. W. (1977).j~. theoret. Biol. 63, 375.
Sperber, D. (1975). Rethinking Symbolism. Cambridge University Press.
Whitehead, A. N. (1929). Process and Reality. Cambridge University Press, p. 210.
