                      C H A P T E R                O N E


                 Consciousness:
             Philosophical Paradox
              or Scientific Object?


The subject of consciousness has not lacked for human attention. In the past, it was
the exclusive domain of philosophers, but recently both psychologists and neuroscien­
tists have begun to attack the so-called mind-body problem or, in Schopenhauer's
suggestive phrase, “the world knot. ” In this chapter we briefly review classical and
modem approaches to consciousness. We point out various positions taken by philoso­
phers, psychologists, and neuroscientists, rejecting, some of the more flagrant ones, —
such as dualism or extreme reductionism. We suggest that consciousness can be con­
sidered a scientific subject and that it is not the sole province of philosophers.     **



Everyone knows what consciousness is: It is what abandons you every
evening when you fall asleep and reappears the next morning when you
wake up. This deceptive simplicity reminds us of what William James said of
attention at the turn of the century: “Everyone knows what attention is. It is ^
the taking possession by the mind, in clear and vivid form, of one out of
what seem several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought.”1 s W*
More than one hundred years later, many think that neither attention nor y.
consciousness is understood in any fundamental sense.
   This lack of understanding is certainly not because of lack of attention in
philosophical or scientific circles. Ever since Rene Descartes, few subjects

                                                   1
4                 A UNI VERSE     OF   CONSCIOUSNESS


have preoccupied philosophers so consistently as the riddle of consciousness^""
For Descartes, as for James more than two centuries later, to be conscious
was synonymous with “to think”: James’s stream of thought, for example,
was nothing but the stream of consciousness. The cogito ergo sum, “I think
therefore I am,” which Descartes posed as the foundation of his philosophy
in his Meditationes de Prima Philosophia,2 was a direct recognition of the cen­
trality of consciousness with respect to both ontology (what is) and episte­
mology (what and how we know).
    If taken too seriously, “I am conscious, therefore I exist” can lead to solip­
sism, the view that nothing exists but one’s individual consciousness, evi­
dently not a view that can appeal to two authors who are sharing the writing
of a book. More realistically (pun intended), that starting point leads to ide­
alistic positions that emphasize mind over matter—ideas; perception;
thought; or, in one word, consciousness. By taking mind as a starting point,
however, idealistic philosophies must take pains to explain matter—which is
not necessarily a better predicament than starting from mere matter to
derive mind.
    Descartes argued that there is an absolute distinction between mental
and material substance. The defining characteristic of matter, he thought, is
to be extended, to occupy space, and thus be susceptible to physical explana­
tion, whereas the defining characteristic of mind is to be conscious or, in a
broad sense of the term, to think. In this view, mental substance exists in the
form of individual minds. In this way, Descartes inaugurated dualism, a posi­
tion that is unsatisfactory scientifically but appears intuitively simple and
appealing until one attempts to explain the connection between the mind
and the body (see figure 1.1). Since the days of Descartes, philosophers have
suggested versions of dualism or related alternatives. For example, a related
 theory is epiphenomenalism, which agrees with other theories in holding
 that mental events and physical events are different but maintains that the
 only true causes of mental experiences are physical events, with mind as a
 causally inefficacious by-product. In the words of Thomas Huxley, “con­
 sciousness would appear to be related to the mechanism of [the] body simply
 as a collateral product of its working, and to be as completely without j my
 power of modifying that working as the steam whistle that accompanies the
 working of a locomotive engine is without influence upon its machinery.”3
    In more recent times, philosophers have taken a materialistic stance,
 holding that the mind and consciousness are identical *to the operations of
 the brain or, at least, to certain of these operations. Some materialistic posi­
 tions go so far as to deny any ontological or epistemic validity to conscious-
                   1>                       (wnyfc£/r
       PHILOSOPHICAL         PARADOX      OR   SCIENTIFIC      OBJECT?          5


-      they insist that there is literally nothing else beyond the functioning of
m m circuits or, at least, that there is nothing else that needs to be
     n n ed . Several philosophers have suggested that once we understand the
■m: ridngs of the brain sufficiently well, the concept of consciousness will / C f .
r       rite just as the concept of phlogiston (a hypothetical volatile con-
 —T_en: of all combustible substances that was thought to be released as a
fam e in combustion) evaporated when oxidation was understood. The                 >
               problem is thus made to disappear by denying or explaining
wm .t the consciousness side of it. Other materialistic positions insist that
i.—:o_rh consciousness is generated by physical events in the brain, it is not
reduced to them but, rather, emerges from them, just as the properties of
water emerge from the chemical combination of two hydrogens and one
oxygen but are not directly reducible to the properties of hydrogen or oxy­
gen alone. Such positions come in various flavors, but, in general, they grant
consciousness some residual status, at least from the point of view of expla­
nation. Nevertheless, they insist that there is no “consciousness” substance
separate from a “brain” substance.
    The philosophical debate on the mind-body problem is by now
extremely sophisticated and, in their variety, some current disputes rival
those that flourished among post-Cartesian philosophers. As we had




FIGURE 1.1 A diagram by Descartes illustrating his ideas about how the brain forms
-ental images of an object. The transaction between mental substance and physical
substance was supposed to take ploce in the pineal gland (H).
6                A UNI VERSE     OF   CONSCIOUSNESS


Spinoza’s dual-aspect theory, Malebranche’s occasionalism, Leibniz’s paral­
lelism and his doctrine of preestablished harmony, we now have the identity
theory, the central state theory, neutral monism, logical behaviorism, token
physicalism and type physicalism, token epiphenomenalism and type
epiphenomenalism, anomalous monism, emergent materialism, eliminative
materialism, various brands of functionalism, and many others.4
    Despite the profusion of philosophical positions, it appears unlikely that
philosophical arguments alone will lead to a satisfactory solution to the
mind-body problem. In the words of Colin McGinn,5 a philosopher who
takes an extreme position: “We have been trying for a long time to solve the
mind-body problem. It has stubbornly resisted our best efforts. The mystery
persists. I think the time has come to admit candidly that we cannot solve
the mystery. [We still have no idea of how] the water of the physical brain is
turned into the wine of consciousness.”
    There is indeed a fundamental limitation on philosophical efforts to dis­
cern the origins of consciousness that arises, in part, from the presumption
that the sources of conscious thought can be revealed by thinking alone.
This presumption is as patently inadequate as efforts in previous times to
understand cosmogony, the basis of life, and the fine structure of matter in
the absence of scientific observations and experiments. In fact, philosophers
have excelled not so much in proposing solutions to the problem but in
pointing out just how intractable the problem is. W hat many philosophers
are reiterating amounts to this: N o m atter what scientists do, the first-
person and third-person perspectives of conscious individuals will not be rec­
onciled, the explanatory gap will not be bridged, and the “hard” problem—
the generation of sensations, of phenomenal or experiential states out of the
buzzing of neurons—will not be solved.6
    How have scientists fared in explaining the mystery? If we look at psy­
chology, we find that the “science of the mind” always had trouble in accom­
modating what should be its central topic—consciousness—within an
acceptable theoretical framework. The introspectionist tradition of
Titchener and Kiilpe7was the psychological counterpartTTfIdealistic or phe-
nomenologicaLpositions in philosophy; it attempted to describe conscious­
ness viewed by the individual exclusively from the inside, hence the term
introspection. Many introspectionists were psychological atomists; not unlike
some present-day neurophysiologists, they postulated that consciousness
was made up of elementary parts that could be catalogued (never mind that
the American school came up with more than 40,000 sensations and the
German school with just 12,000). By contrast, behaviorists notoriously
       PHILOSOPHICAL         PARADOX      OR   SCIENTIFIC     OBJ ECT?          7


attempted to eliminate consciousness completely from scientific discourse, a
position not unlike that of some contemporary philosophers.
     Present-day cognitive psychologists have reintroduced consciousness and
mind as legitimate concepts. They conceive of consciousness as either a spe-
. .al module or a stage in the flowchart delineating an information-processing
merarchy. In fact, cognitive psychologists often consider consciousness in
terms of a limited-capacity bottleneck in our mental functioning, possibly
iue to an unspecified limitation of our brains. Several such models of the
functions associated with consciousness have been formulated, drawing their
inspiration from cognitive psychology or artificial intelligence or using
metaphors borrowed from computer science, such as that of a central execu­
tive systenT or~an” operating system. Psychologists have also used the
metaphor of consciousness as a unified stage, scene, or theater in which
information from multiple sources is integrated for the control of behavior.8
Some of these intuitions may point in the right direction, while others may
be as misleading as they are potentially appealing.
     W hat is certain, however, is that such metaphors cannot substitute for a
genuine scientific understanding of consciousness. Cognitive models usually
have little to offer vis-a-vis the experiential, phenomenal side of conscious
experience. Looked at from the perspective of these models, consciousness
as a phenomenal experience (and often an emotional one) may as well not
exist, as long as some of its presumed functions, such as control, coordina­
tion, and planning, can be carried out. Standard cognitive accounts offer no
convincing explanation of why multiplication performed by a human is a
slow and hesitant conscious process while the same multiplication quickly
 carried out by a pocket calculator is presumably not conscious at all. N or do
 they explain why the complicated processes needed to balance your weight
when you walk or to articulate words when you speak should remain
 unconscious, while the simple application of pressure to your finger pro­
 duces a conscious experience. Finally, as many critics have pointed out, any
 information-processing, strictly functionalistic approach to consciousness
 has little to say about the fact that consciousness requires the activity of spe­
 cific neural substrates. These substrates are actually the central concern of
 neuroscientists.
     Except for fundamental observations about coma, anesthesia, and the
 like, neuroscientists used to be exceedingly careful in their approaches to
 consciousness. Most profess a convenient agnosticism about the subject and
 justify their caution by our present ignorance. Although many of them
 would probably subscribe to some kind of system-level explanation—if only
8                 A UNI VERSE     OF   CONSCIOUSNESS


they knew which one—for the present, they deem it more fruitful painstak­
ingly to collect new facts and observations and to leave theorizing to the
future. Over the past decade or so, however, something has definitely
changed in the relationship between studies of consciousness and the neuro­
sciences. Scientists seem less afraid of addressing the subject unabashedly,
several books by neuroscientists have appeared, new journals have been
launched, and studies have been conducted in which consciousness was actu­
ally treated as an experimental parameter.9
    Although certain recent “scientific” hypotheses do not cover as wide a
spectrum as that offered by philosophers, they are in some ways even more
exotic or extreme. For example, some neuroscientists have embraced dualis-
tic positions according to which the conscious mind interfaces with the brain
by virtue of “psychons” communicating with “dendrons” in certain areas of
the left brain (Descartes suggested that the pineal gland was the site of the
interaction because it is situated in the middle of the head).10 Some scientists
(who may or may not qualify as neuroscientists) have concluded that con­
ventional physics is not enough of a basis for theorizing about conscious­
ness—one has to invoke esoteric physical concepts, such as quantum gravity,
to explain consciousness.11
    Others have pursued what appears to be a more profitable strategy—
focusing on the search for specific neural correlates of consciousness.
Indeed, in this area definite progress has been made. For example, given the
limited neurological knowledge of his times, James had to conclude that the
neural basis for consciousness was nothing less than the whole brain.12
Today, scientists are able to be more sophisticated and specific. Different
authors believe that different brain structures support consciousness,
structures with forbidding names, such as the intralaminar thalamic nuclei,
reticular nucleus, mesencephalic reticular formation, tangential intracorti-
cal network of layers I-II, and thalamocortical loops. Controversies rage
over issues that were unthinkable at the time of James’s writing: Does the pri­
mary visual cortex contribute to conscious experience or not? Are areas of the
brain that project direcdy to the prefrontal cortex more relevant than those
that do not? Does only a particular subset of cortical neurons play a role? If
so, are these neurons characterized by a special property or location? Do
cortical neurons need to oscillate at 40 Hz or fire in bursts to contribute to
conscious experience? Do different areas of the brain or groups of neurons
generate different conscious fragments—a kind of microconsciousness?13
    These questions are being debated more and more frequently, and new
experimental data are fueling the debate. Yet, as this profusion of various
             PHILOSOPHICAL        PARADOX     OR   SCIENTIFIC     OBJECT?          9


tk-   questions and hypotheses indicates, something is definitely missing in
he    attempts to identify the neural basis of consciousness with this or that set of
-ly   neurons. Again, we confront the world knot. By what mysterious transfor­
o-    mation would the firing of neurons located in a particular place in the brain
ly,   or endowed with a particular biochemical property become subjective expe­
sn    rience, while the firing of other neurons would not? It is not surprising that
u-    some philosophers view such attempts as prime examples of a category
      error—the error of ascribing to things properties that they cannot have.14
 a       It is also not surprising that such errors are made, given how special con­
re    sciousness is as a scientific object. In the next chapter we consider how the
s-    fundamental problem posed by this specialness may be confronted. We take
in    the position that consciousness is not an object but a process and that,
if    looked at from this point of view, it is indeed a fitting scientific subject.
ie
ts



V,




e
e
2
t
