      N. Bohr, Philos. Mag. 26, 1                                         1913




               On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules

                                   N. Bohr,
                             Dr. phil. Copenhagen
                             (Received July 1913)


 Introduction

In order to explain the results of experiments on scattering of α rays by
matter Prof. Rutherford1 has given a theory of the structure of atoms.
According to this theory, the atom consist of a positively charged nucleus
surrounded by a system of electrons kept together by attractive forces from
the nucleus; the total negative charge of the electrons is equal to the positive
charge of the nucleus. Further, the nucleus is assumed to be the seat of
the essential part of the mass of the atom, and to have linear dimensions
exceedingly small compared with the linear dimensions of the whole atom.
The number of electrons in an atom is deduced to be approximately equal to
half the atomic weight. Great interest is to be attributed to this atom-model;
for, as Rutherford has shown, the assumption of the existence of nuclei, as
those in question, seems to be necessary in order to account for the results
of the experiments on large angle scattering of the α rays.2
    In an attempt to explain some of the properties of matter on the basis
of this atom-model we meet, however, with difficulties of a serious nature
arising from the apparent instability of the system of electrons: difficulties
purposely avoid in atom-models previously considered, for instance, in the
one proposed by Sir. J.J. Thomson3 According to the theory of the latter
the atom consist of a sphere of uniform positive electrification, inside which
the electrons move in circular orbits.
  1
    E. Rutherford, Phil. Mag. XXI. p. 669 (1911)
  2
    See also Geiger and Marsden, Phil. Mag. April 1913.
  3
    J.J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. VII. p. 237 (1904).



                                         1
    The principal difference between the atom-models proposed by Thomson
and Rutherford consist in the circumstance that the forces acting on the
electrons in the atom-model of Thomson allow of certain configurations and
motion of the electrons for which the system is in a stable equilibrium; such
configurations, however, apparently do not exist for the second atom- model.
The nature of the difference in question will perhaps be most clearly seen by
noticing that among the quantities characterizing the fist atom a quantity
appears – the radius of the positive sphere – of dimensions of a length and of
the same order of magnitude as the linear extension of the atom, while such
a length does not appear among the quantities characterizing the second
atom, viz. the charges and masses of the electrons and the positive nucleus;
nor can it do determined solely by help of the latter quantities.
    The way of considering a problem of this kind has, however, undergone
essential alterations in recent years owing to the development of the theory
of the energy radiation, and the direct affirmation of the new assumptions
introduced in this theory, found by experiments on very different phenomena
such as specific heats, photoelectric effect, Röntgen-rays, & c. The result of
the discussion of these questions seems to be a general acknowledgment of
the inadequacy of the classical elecrtodynamics in describing the behaviour
of system of atomic size.4 Whatever the alteration in the laws of motion of
the electrons may be, it seems necessary to introduce in the laws in question
a quantity foreign to the classical electrodynamics, i.e., Planck’s constant, or
as it often is called the elementary quantum of action. By the introduction
of this quantity the question of the stable configuration of the electrons in
the atoms is essentially changed, as this constant is of such dimensions and
magnitude that it, together with the mass and charge of the particles, can
determine a length of the order of magnitude required.
    This paper is an attempt to show that the application of the above ideas
to Rutherford’s atom-model affords a basis for a theory of the constitution
of atoms. It will further be shown that from this theory we are led to a
theory of the constitution of molecules.
    In the present first part of the paper the mechanism of the binding of
electrons by a positive nucleus is discussed in relation to Planck’s theory. It
will be shown that it is possible from the point of view taken to account in
a simple way for the law of the line spectrum of hydrogen. Further, reason
are given for a principal hypothesis on which the considerations contained
in the following parts are based.
  4
   See f. inst., “Theorie du ravonnement et les quanta.” Rapports de la rennion a
Bruxeless, Nov. 1911, Paris, 1912.



                                       2
   I wish here to express my thinks to Prof. Rutherford for his kind and
encouraging interest in this work.




Part I. – Binding of Electrons by Positive Nuclei.


 § 1. General Considerations

The inadequacy of the classical electrodynamics in accounting for the prop-
erties of atoms from an atom-model as Rutherford’s, will appear very clearly
if we consider a simple system consisting of a positively charged nucleus of
very small dimensions and an electron describing closed orbits around it.
For simplicity, let us assume that the mass of the electron is negligibly small
in comparison with that of the nucleus, and further, that the velocity of the
electron is small compared with that of light.
    Let us at first assume that there is no energy radiation. In this case the
electron will describe stationary elliptical orbits. The frequency of revolution
ω and the major-axis of the orbit 2a will depend on the amount of energy
W which must be transferred to the system in order to remove the electron
to an infinitely great distance apart from the nucleus. Denoting the charge
of the electron and of the nucleus by – e and E respectively and the mass
of the electron by m, we thus get
                             √
                               2 W 3/2                eE
                        ω=       ·    √ ,      2a =      .                   (1)
                              π eE m                  W

Further, it can easily be shown that the mean value of the kinetic energy of
the electron taken for a whole revolution is equal to W . We see that if the
value of W is not given, there will be no values of ω and a characteristic for
the system in question.
    Let us now, however, take the effect of the energy radiation into account,
calculated in the ordinary way from the acceleration of the electron. In this
case the electron will no longer describe stationary orbits. W will continu-
ously increase, and the electron will approach the nucleus describing orbits
of smaller and smaller dimensions, and with greater and greater frequency;
the electron on the average gaining in kinetic energy at the same time as the
whole system loses energy. This process will go on until the dimensions of

                                       3
the orbit are the same order of magnitude as the dimensions of the electron
or those of the nucleus. A simple calculation shows that the energy radiated
out during the process considered will be enormously great compared with
that radiated out by ordinary molecular processes.
    It is obvious that the behaviour of such a system will be very different
from that of an atomic system occurring in nature. In the first place, the
actual atoms in their permanent state to have absolutely fixed dimensions
and frequencies. Further, if we consider any process, the result seems always
to be that after a certain amount of energy characteristic for the systems in
question is radiated out, the system will again settle down in a stable state
of equilibrium, in which the distance apart of the particles are of the same
order of magnitude as before the process.
    Now the essential point in Planck’s theory of radiation is that the energy
radiation from an atomic system does not take place in the continuous way
assumed in the ordinary electrodynamics, but that it, on the contrary, takes
place in distinctly separated emissions, the amount of energy radiated out
from an atomic vibrator of frequency ν in a single emission being equal to
τ hν, where τ is an entire number, and h is a universal constant.5
    Returning to the simple case of an electron and a positive nucleus consid-
ered above, let us assume that the electron at the beginning of the interaction
with the nucleus was at a great distance apart from the nucleus, and had
no sensible velocity relative to the latter. Let us further assume that the
electron after interaction has taken place has settled down in a stationary
orbit around the nucleus. We shall, for reasons referred to later, assume
that the orbit in question is circular: this assumption will, however, make
no alteration in the calculations for system containing only a single electron.
    Let as now assume that, during the binding of the electron, a homo-
geneous radiation is emitted of a frequency ν, equal to half the frequency
of revolution of the electron in its final orbit; then from Planck’s theory,
we might expect that the amount of energy emitted by the process consid-
ered is equal to τ hν, where h is Planck’s constant an entire number. If we
assume that the radiation emitted is homogeneous, the second assumption
concerning the frequency of the radiation suggests itself, since the frequency
of revolution of the electron at the beginning of the emission is 0. The ques-
tion, however, of the rigorous validity of both assumptions, and also of the
application made of Planck’s theory, will be more closely discussed in § 3.
   5
     See f. inst., M. Planck, Ann. d. Phys. XXXI. p. 758 (1910); XXXVII. p. 612 (1912);
Verh. Phys. Ges. 1911, p. 138.




                                          4
       Putting
                                      ω
                                W = τh ,                                             (2)
                                      2
we get by help of the formula (1)
                   2π 2 me2 E 2          4π 2 me2 E 2              τ 2 h2
             W =                ,   ω=                ,   2a =            .          (3)
                      τ 2 h2                τ 3 h3               2π 2 meE
    If in these expressions we give τ different values, we get a series of values
for W , ω, and a corresponding to a series of configurations of the system.
According to the above considerations, we are led to assume that these
configurations will correspond to states of the system in which there is no
radiation of energy; states which consequently will be stationary as long as
the system is not disturbed from outside. We see that the value of W is
greatest if τ has its smallest value 1. This case will therefore correspond
to the most stable of the system, i.e., will correspond to the binding of
the electron for the breaking up of which the greatest amount of energy is
required.
    Putting in the above expressions τ = 1 and E = e, and introducing the
experimental values
                                e
             e = 4.7 · 10−10 ,     = 5.31 · 1017 , h = 6.5 · 10−27 ,
                                m
we get
                                                       1      W
            2a = 1.1 · 10−8 cm,      ω = 6.2 · 1015       ,     = 13 volt.
                                                      sec     e
    We see that these values are of the same order of magnitude as the linear
dimensions of the atoms, the optical frequencies, and the ionization- potentials.
    The general importance of Planck’s theory for the discussion of the be-
haviour of atomic system was originally pointed out by Einstein.6 The
considerations of Einstein have been developed and applied on a number
of different phenomena, especially by Stark, Nernst, and Sommerfield. The
agreement as to the order of magnitude between values observed for the
frequencies and dimensions of the atoms, and values for these quantities cal-
culated by considerations similar to those given above, has been the subject
of much discussion. It was first pointed out by Haas,7 in ann attempt to
   6
     A. Einstein, Ann. d.Phys. XVII. p. 132 (1905); XX. p. 199 (1906); XXII. p. 180
(1907).
   7
     A.E. Haas, Jahrb. d. Rad. u.El. VII. p. 261 (1910). See further, A.Schidlof, Ann. d.
Phys. XXXV. p. 90 ( 1911); E. Wertheimer, Phys. Zietschr. XII. p. 409 (1911), Verh.
deutsch. Phys. Ges. 1912, p. 431; F.A. Lindermann, Verh.deutsch.Phys.Ges. 1911, pp.
482, 1107; F. Haber, Verh. deutsch. Phys. Ges. 1911, p. 1117.


                                           5
explain the meaning and the value of Planck’s constant on the basis of J.J.
Thomson’s atom-model, by help of the linear dimensions and frequency of
an hydrogen atom. Systems of the kind considered in this paper, in which
the forces between the particles vary inversely as the square of the distance,
are discussed in relation to Planck’s theory by J.W. Nicholson. 8 In a series
of papers this author has shown that it seems to be possible to account for
lines of hitherto unknown origin in the spectra of the stellar nebulae and
that of the solar corona, by assuming the presence in these bodies of certain
hypothetical elements of exactly indicated constitution. The atoms of these
elements are supposed to consist simply of a ring of a few electrons surround-
ing a positive nucleus of negligibly small dimensions. The ratios between
the frequencies corresponding to the lines in question are compared with the
ratios between the frequencies corresponding to different modes of vibration
of the ring of electrons. Nicholson has obtained a relation to Planck’s theory
showing that the ratios between the wave-lenth of different sets of lines of
the coronal spectrum can be accounted for with great accuracy by assum-
ing that the ratio between the energy of the system and the frequency of
rotation of the ring is equal to an entire multiple of Planck’s constant. The
quantity Nicholson refers to as the energy is equal to twice the quantity
which we have denoted above by W. In the latest paper cited Nicholson has
found it necessary to give the theory a more complicated form, still, how-
ever, representing the ratio of energy to frequency by a simple function of
whole numbers.
    The excellent agreement between the calculated and observed values of
the ratios between the wave-length in question seems a strong argument in
favour of the validity of the foundation of Nicholson’s calculations. Serious
objections, however, may be raised against the theory. These objections are
intimately connected with the problem of the homogeneity of the radiation
emitted. In Nicholson’s calculations the frequency of lines in a line-spectrum
is identified with the frequency of vibration of a mechanical system in a
distinctly indicated state of equilibrium. As a relation from Planck’s theory
is used, we might expect that the radiation is sent out in quanta; but systems
like those considered, in which the frequency is a function of the energy,
cannot emit a finite amount of a homogeneous radiation; for, as soon as
the emission of radiation is started, the energy and also the frequency of
the system are altered. Further, according to the calculation of Nicholson,
the systems are unstable for some modes of vibration. Apart from such
  8
    J.W. Nicholson, Month. Not. Roy. Astr. Soc. LXXII. pp. 49, 139, 677, 693, 729
(1912).



                                       6
objections – which may be only formal (see p. 23)?????? – it must be
remarked, that the theory in the form given dies not seem to be able to
account for the well-known laws of Balmer and Rydberg connecting the
frequencies of the lines in the line- spectra of the ordinary elements.
    It will now be attempted to show that the difficulties in question disap-
pear if we consider the problems from the point of view taken in this paper.
Before proceeding it may be useful to restate briefly the ideas characterizing
the calculations on p. 5. The principal assumptions used are:

 (1) That the dynamical equilibrium of the systems in the stationary states
     can be discussed by help of the ordinary mechanics, while the passing
     of the systems between different stationary states cannot be treated
     on that basis.

 (2) That the latter is followed by the emission of a homogeneous radiation,
     for which the relation between the frequency and the amount of energy
     emitted is the one given by Planck’s theory.

The first assumption seems to present itself; for it is known that the or-
dinary mechanism cannot have an absolute validity, but will only hold in
calculations of certain mean values of the motion of the electrons. On the
other hand, in the calculations of the dynamical equilibrium in a stationary
state in which there is no relative displacement of the particles, we need not
distinguish between the actual motions and their mean values. The second
assumption is in obvious constant to the ordinary ideas of electrodynamics,
but appears to be necessary in order to account for experimental facts.
    In the calculations on page 5 we have further made use of the more
special assumptions, viz., that the different stationary states correspond to
the emission of a different number of Planck’s energy-quanta, and that the
frequency of the radiation emitted during the passing of the system from a
state in which no energy is yet radiated out to one of the stationary states,
is equal to half the frequency of revolution of the electron in the latter state.
We can, however (see § 3), also arrive at the expressions (3) for the stationary
states by using assumptions of somewhat different from. We shall, therefore,
postpone the discussion of the spacial assumptions, and first show how by
the help of the above principal assumptions, and of the expressions (3) for
the stationary states, we can account for the line-spectrum of hydrogen.




                                       7
 § 2.Emission of Line-spectra

Spectrum of Hydrogen. – General evidence indicates that an atom of hydro-
gen consist simply of a single electron rotating round a positive nucleus of
charge e.9 The reformation of a hydrogen atom, when the electron has been
removed to great distances away from the nucleus – e.g. by the effect of
electrical discharge in a vacuum tube – will accordingly correspond to the
binding of an electron by a positive nucleus considered on p. 5. If in (3)
we put E = e, we get for the total amount of energy radiated out by the
formation of one of the stationary states,

                                           2π 2 me4
                                    Wr =            .
                                            τ 2 h2
    The amount of energy emitted by the passing of the system from a state
corresponding to τ = τ1 to one corresponding to τ = τ2 , is consequently
                                                      µ         ¶
                                        2π 2 me4           1   1
                       W r 2 − Wr 1 =            ·           −    .
                                           h2             τ22 τ12

If now we suppose that the radiation is question is homogeneous, and that
the amount of energy emitted is equal to hν, where ν is the frequency of the
radiation, we get
                            Wr2 − Wr1 = hν
and from this                                   µ           ¶
                                  2π 2 me4           1   1
                             ν=            ·           −    .                         (4)
                                     h3             τ22 τ12
   We see that this expression accounts for the law connecting the lines in
the spectrum of hydrogen. If we put τ2 = 2 and let τ1 vary, we get the
ordinary Balmer series. If we put τ3 = 3, we get the series in the ultra-red
observed by Paschen10 and previously suspected by Ritz. If we put τ2 = 1
and τ = 4, 5, . . . , we get series respectively in the extreme ultraviolet and
the extreme ultra-red, which are not observed, but the existence of which
may be expected.
   9
     See f. inst. N. Bohr, Phil. Mag. XXV. p. 24 (1913). The conclusion drawn in
the paper cited in strongly supported by the fact that hydrogen, in the experiments on
positive rays of Sir. J.J. Thomson, is the only element which never occurs with a positive
charge corresponding to the lose of more than one electron (comp. Phil. Mag. XXIV. p.
672 (1912).
  10
     F. Paschen, Ann. d. Phys. XXVII. p.565 (1908).


                                            8
      The agreement in question is quantitative as well as qualitative. Putting
                                  e
             e = 4.7 · 10−10 ,      = 5.31 · 1017       and   h = 6.5 · 10−27 ,
                                  m
we get
                           2π 2 me4
                                    = 3.1 · 1015 .
                              h3
The observed value for the factor outside the bracket in the formula (4) is

                                       3.290 · 1015 .

We agreement between the theoretical and observed values is inside the
uncertainty due to experimental errors in the constants entering in the ex-
pression for the theoretical value. We shall in § 3 return to consider the
possible importance of the agreement in question.
    It may be remarked that the fact, that it has not been possibly to observe
more than 12 lines of the Balmer series in experiments with vacuum tubes,
while 33 lines are observed in the spectra of some celestial bodies, is just
what we should expect from the above theory. According to the equation
(3) the diameter of the orbit of the electron in the different stationary states
is proportional to τ 2 . For τ = 12 the diameter is equal to 1.6 · 10−6 cm,
or equal to mean distance between the molecules in a gas at a pressure of
about 7 mm mercury; for τ = 33 the diameter is equal to 1.2 · 10−5 cm,
corresponding to the mean distance of the molecules at a pressure of about
0.02 mm mercury. According to the theory the necessary condition for the
appearance of a great number of lines is therefore a very small density of
the gas; for simultaneously to obtain an intensity sufficient for observation
the space filled with the gas must be very great. If the theory is right, we
may therefore never expect to be able in experiments with vacuum tubes to
observe the lines corresponding to high numbers of the Balmer series of the
emission spectrum of hydrogen; it might, however, be possible to observe
the lines by investigation of the absorption spectrum of this gas. (see § 4).
    It will be observed that we in the above way do not obtain other series of
lines, generally ascribed to hydrogen; for instance, the series first observed
by Pickering11 in the spectrum of the star ζ Puppis, and the set of series
recently found by Fowler12 by experiments with vacuum tubes containing a
mixture of hydrogen and helium. We shall, however, see that, by help of the
above theory, we can account naturally for these series of lines if we ascribe
them to helium.
 11
      E.C. Pickering, Astrophys. J. IV. p. 369 (1896); v. p. 92 ( 1897).
 12
      A. Fowler, Mouth. Not. Roy. Astr. Soc. LXXIII. Dec. 1912.


                                             9
    A neutral atom of the latter element consists, according to Rutherford’s
theory, of a positive nucleus of charge 2e and two electrons. Now considering
the binding of a single electron by a helium nucleus, we get putting E = 2e
in the expressions (3) on page 5, and proceeding in in exactly the same way
as above,
                         µ             ¶                  Ã                     !
            8π 2 me4          1    1         2π 2 me4           1        1
         ν=          ·         2 − 2       =          ·       ¡ τ ¢2 − ¡ τ ¢2       .
               h3            τ2   τ1            h3              2        1
                                                               2         2

If we in this formula put τ1 = 1 or τ2 = 2, we get series of lines in the
extreme ultra-violet. If we put τ2 = 3, and let τ1 vary, we get a series which
includes 2 of the series observed by Folwer, and denoted by him as the first
and second principal series of the hydrogen spectrum. If we put τ2 = 4,
we get the series observed by Pickering in the spectrum of ζ Puppis. Every
second of the lines in this series is identical with a line in the Balmer series
of the hydrogen spectrum; the presence of hydrogen in the star in question
may therefore account for the fact that these lines are of a greater intensity
than the rest of the lines in the series. The series is also observed in the
experiments of Fowler, and denoted in his paper as the Sharp series of the
hydrogen spectrum. If we finally in the above formula put τ2 = 5, 6, . . ., we
get series, the strong lines of which are to be expected in the ultra-red.
    The reason why the spectrum considered is not observed in ordinary
helium tubes may be that in such tubes the ionization of helium is not
so complete in the star considered or in the experiments of Fowler, where
a strong discharge was sent through a mixture of hydrogen and helium.
The condition for the appearance of the spectrum is, according to the above
theory, that helium atoms are present in a state in which they have lost both
their electrons. Now we must assume that the amount of energy to be used in
removing the second electron from a helium atom is much greater than that
to be used in removing the first. Further, it is known from experiments on
positive rays, that hydrogen atoms can acquire a negative charge; therefore
the presence of hydrogen in the experiments of Fowler may effect that more
electrons are removed from some of the helium atoms than would be the
case if only helium were present.
    Spectra of other substances. — in case of systems containing more elec-
trons we must – in conformity with the result of experiments – expect more
complicated laws for the line-spectra than those considered. I shall try to
show that the point of view taken above allows, at any rate, a certain under-
standing of the laws observed. According to Rydberg’s theory — with the



                                            10
generalization given by Ritz13 – the frequency corresponding to the lines of
the spectrum of an element can be expressed by

                                   ν = Fτ (τ1 ) − Fs (τ2 ),

where τ1 and τ2 are entire numbers, and F1 , F2 , F3 , . . . are functions of
                                           K            K
τ which approximately are equal to (τ +a     1)
                                                2 , (τ +a )2 , . . . K is a universal
                                                          2
constant, equal to the factor outside the bracket in the formula (4) for the
spectrum of hydrogen. The different series appear if we put τ1 or τ2 equal
to a fixed number and let the other vary.
    The circumstance that the frequency can be written as a difference be-
tween two functions of entire numbers suggests an origin of the lines in the
spectra in question similar to the one we have assumed for hydrogen; i.e.
that the lines correspond to a radiation emitted during the passing of the
system between two different stationary states. For system containing more
than one electron the detailed discussion may be very complicated, as there
will be many different configurations of the electrons which can be taken
into consideration as stationary states. This may account for the difference
sets of series in the line spectra emitted from the substances in question.
Here I shall only try to show how, by help of the theory, it can be simple
explained that the constant K entering in Rydberg’s formula is the same for
all substances. Let us assume that the spectrum in question corresponds to
the radiation emitted during the binding of an electron; and let us further
assume that the system including the electron considered is neutral. The
force on the electron, when at a great distance apart the nucleus and the
electrons previously bound, will be very nearly the same as the above case of
the binding of an electron by a hydrogen nucleus. The energy corresponding
to one of the stationary states will therefore for τ great be very nearly equal
to that given by the expression (3) on p. 5, if we put E = e. For τ great we
consequently get

                                                                      2π 2 me4
                  lim[τ 2 · F1 (τ )] = lim[τ 2 · F2 (τ )] = . . . =            ,
                                                                         h3
in conformity with Rydberg’s theory.

  13
       W. Ritz, Phys. Zeitschr. IX. p. 521 (1908).




                                              11
 § 3.General Considerations Continued

We shall now return to the discussion (see p. 7) of the special assumptions
used in deducing the expression (3) on p. 5 for the stationary states of a
system consisting of an electron rotating round a nucleus.
    For one, we have assumed that the different stationary states correspond
to an emission of a different number of energy-qyanta. Considering systems
in which the frequency is a function of the energy, this assumption, however,
may be regarded as improbable; for as soon as one quantum in sent out the
frequency is altered. We shall now see that we can leave the assumption used
and still retain the equation (2) on p. 5, and thereby the formal analogy
with Planck’s theory.
    Firstly, it will be observed that it has not been necessary, in order to
account for the law of the spectra by help of the expressions (3) for the
stationary states, to assume that in any case a radiation is sent out corre-
sponding to more than a single energy-quantum, hν. Further information
on the frequency of the radiation may be obtained by comparing calcula-
tions of the energy radiation in the region of slow vibrations based on the
above assumptions with calculations based on the ordinary mechanics. As
is known, calculations on the latter basis are in agreement with experiments
on the energy radiation in the named region.
    Let us assume that the ratio between the total amount of energy emitted
and the frequency of revolution of the electron for the different stationary
states is given by the equation W = f (τ ) · hω, instead of by the equation
(2). Proceeding in the same way as above, we get in this case instead of (3)

                           π 2 meE 2               π 2 me2 E 2
                     W =                ,     ω=                .
                           2h2 f 2 (τ )            2h3 f 3 (τ )

    Assuming as above that the amount of energy emitted during the passing
of the system from a state corresponding to τ = τ1 to one for which τ = τ2
is equal to hν, we get instead of (4)
                                       µ                       ¶
                       π 2 me2 E 2              1         1
                    ν=             ·                 −          .
                           2h3              f 2 (τ2 ) f 2 (τ1 )

We see that in order to get an expression of the same form as the Balmer
series we must put f (τ ) = cτ .
    In order to determine c let us now consider the passing of the system
between two successive stationary states corresponding to τ = N and τ =

                                        12
N − 1; introducing f (τ ) = cτ , we get for the frequency of the radiation
emitted
                           π 2 me2 E 2   2N − 1
                      ν=               · 2         .
                              2c2 h3    N (N − 1)2
    For the frequency of revolution of the electron before and after the emis-
sion we have
                     π 2 me2 e2                     π 2 me2 E 2
              ωN =                and   ωN −1 =                   .
                     2c3 h3 N 3                   2c3 h3 (N − 1)3

    If N is great the ratio between the frequency before and after the emission
will be very near equal to 1; and according to the ordinary electrodynamics
we should therefore expect that the ratio between the frequency of radiation
and the frequency of revolution also very nearly equal to 1. This condition
will only be satisfied if c = 1/2. Putting f (τ ) = τ /2, we, however, again
arrive at the equation (2) and consequently at the expression (3) for the
stationary states.
    If we consider the passing of the system between two states corresponding
to τ = N and τ = N − n, where n is small compared with N , we get with
the same approximation as above, putting f (τ ) = τ /2,

                                   ν = nω.

The possibility of an emission of a radiation of such a frequency may also be
interpreted from analogy with the ordinary electrodynamics, as an electron
rotating round a nucleus in an elliptical orbit will emit a radiation which
according to Fourier’s theorem can be resolved into homogeneous compo-
nents, the frequency of which are nω, if ω is the frequency of revolution of
the electron.
    We are thus led to assume that the interpretation of the equation (2) is
not that the different stationary states correspond to an emission of differ-
ent numbers of energy-quanta, but that the frequency of the energy emitted
during the passing of the system from a state in which no energy is yet
radiated out to one of the different stationary states, is equal to different
multiples of ω/2, where ω is the frequency of revolution of the electron in the
state considered. From this assumption we get exactly the same expressions
as before for the stationary states, and from these by help of the principal
assumptions on p. 7 the same expression for the law of the hydrogen spec-
trum. Consequently we may regard our preliminary considerations on p. 5
only as a simple from of representing the results of the theory.


                                        13
    Before we leave the discussion of this question, we shall for a moment
return to the question of the significance of the agreement between the ob-
served and calculated values of the constant entering in the expressions (4)
for the Balmer series of the hydrogen spectrum. From the above consider-
ation it will follow that, taking the starting-point in the form of the law of
the hydrogen spectrum and assuming that the different lines correspond to
a homogeneous radiation emitted during the passing between different, sta-
tionary states, we shall arrive at exactly the same expression for the constant
in question as that given by (4), if we only assume (1) that the radiation is
sent out in quanta hν, and (2) that the frequency of the radiation emitted
during the passing of the system between successive stationary states will
coincide with the frequency of revolution of the electron in the region of slow
vibrations.
    As all the assumptions used in this latter way of representing the theory
are of what we may call a qualitative character, we are justified in expecting
— if the whole way of considering is a sound one – an absolute agreement
between the values calculated and observed for the constant in question, and
not only an approximate agreement. The formula (40 may therefore be of
value in the discussion of the results of experimental determinations of the
constants e, m, and h.
    While there obviously can be no question of a mechanical foundation of
the calculations given in this paper, it is, however, possible to give a very
simple interpretation of the result of the calculation on p. 5 by help of sym-
bols taken from the ordinary mechanics. Denoting the angular momentum
of the electron round the nucleus by M , we have immediately for a circular
orbit πM = T /ω, where ω is the frequency of revolution and T the kinetic
energy of the electron; for a circular orbit we further have T = W (see p. 3)
and from (2), p. 5, we consequently get

                                 M = τ M0 ,

where
                                    h
                          M0 =        = 1.04 · 10−27 .
                                   2π
    If we therefore assume that the orbit of the electron in the stationary
states is circular, the result of the calculation on p. 5 can be expressed by
the simple condition: that the angular momentum of the electron round the
nucleus in a stationary state of the system is equal to an entire multiple of
a universal value, independent of the charge on the nucleus. The possible
importance of the angular momentum in the discussion of atomic systems


                                      14
in relation to Planck’s theory is emphasized by Nicholson.14
    The great number of different stationary states we do not observe expect
by investigation of the emission and absorption of radiation. It most of the
other physical phenomena, however, we only observe the atoms of the matter
in a single distinct state, i,e., the state of the atoms at low temperature.
From the preceding considerations we are immediately led to the assumption
that the “ permanent” state is the one among the stationary states during
the formation of which the greatest amount of energy is emitted. According
to the equation (3) on p. 5, this state is the one which corresponds to τ = 1.



 § 4. Absorption of Radiation

In order to account for Kirchhoff’s law it is necessary to introduce assump-
tions on the mechanism of absorption of radiation which correspond to those
we have used considering the emission. Thus we must assume that a system
consisting of a nucleus and an electron rotating round it under certain cir-
cumstances can absorb a radiation of a frequency equal to the frequency of
the homogenous radiation emitted during the passing of the system between
different stationary states. Let us consider the radiation emitted during the
passing of the system between two stationary states A1 and A2 correspond-
ing to values for τ equal to τ1 and τ2 , τ1 > τ2 . As the necessary condition
of the radiation in question was the presence of systems in the state A1 , we
must assume that the necessary condition for an absorption of the radiation
is the presence of systems in the state A2 .
    These considerations seems to be in conformity with experiments on
absorption in gases. In hydrogen gas at ordinary conditions for instance
there is no absorption of a radiation of a frequency corresponding to the
line-spectrum of this gas; such an absorption is only observed in hydrogen
gas in a luminous state. This is what we should expect according to the
above. We have on p. 9 assumed that the radiation in question was emitted
during the passing of the systems between stationary states corresponding
to τ ≥ 2. The state of the atoms in hydrogen gas at ordinary conditions
should, however, correspond to τ = 1; furthermore, hydrogen atoms at
ordinary conditions combine into molecules, i.e., into system in which the
electrons have frequencies different from those in the atoms (see Part III.)
From the circumstance that certain substances in a non-lumimous state, as,
 14
      J.W. Nicholson, loc. cit. p. 679.


                                          15
foe instance, sodium vapour, absorb radiation corresponding to lines in the
 line-spectra of the substances, we may, on the other hand, conclude that
the lines in question are emitted during the passing of the system between
two states, one of which is the permanent state.
    How much the above considerations differ from an interpretation based
on the ordinary electrodynamic of perhaps most early shown by the fact
that we have been forced to assume that a system of electrons will absorb
a radiation of a frequency different from the frequency of vibration of the
electrons calculated in the ordinary way. It may in this connexion be of
interest to mention a generalization of the considerations to which we are led
by experiments on the photo-electric effect and which may be able to throw
some light on the problem in question. Let us consider state of the system in
which the electron is free, i.e., in which the electron possesses kinetic energy
sufficient to remove to infinite distances from the nucleus. If we assume
that the motion of the electron is governed by the ordinary mechanics and
that there is no ( sensible) energy radiation, the total energy of the system
– as in the above considered stationary states – will be constant. Further,
there will be perfect continuity between the two kinds of states, as the
difference between frequency and dimensions of the system in successive
stationary states will diminish without limit if τ increases. In the following
considerations we shall for the sake of brevity refer to the two kinds of states
in question as “ mechanical” states; by this notation only emphasizing the
assumption that the motion of the electron in both cases can be assumed
for by the ordinary mechanics.
    Tracing the analogy between the two kinds of mechanical states, we
might now expect the possibility of an absorption of radiation, not only
corresponding to the passing of the system between two different stationary
states, but also corresponding to the passing between one of the stationary
states and a state in which the electron is free; and as above, we might
expect that the frequency of this radiation was determined by the equation
E = hν, where E is the difference between the total energy of the system
in the two states. As it will be see, such an absorption of radiation is just
what is observed in experiments on ionization by ultra-violet light and by
Röntgen rays. Obviously, we get in this way the same expression for the
kinetic energy of an electron ejected from an atom by photo-electron effect
as that deduced by Einstein15 i.e., T = hν − W , where T is the kinetic
energy of the electron ejected, and W the total amount of energy emitted
during the original binding of the electron.
 15
      A. Einstein, Ann. d. Phys. XVII. p. 146 (1905).



                                           16
    The above considerations may further account for the result of some ex-
periments of R.W. Wood16 on absorption of light by sodium vapour. In these
experiments, an absorption corresponding to a very great number of lines
in the principal series of the sodium spectrum is observed, and in addition
a continuous absorption which begins at the head of the series and extends
to the extreme ultra-violet. This is exactly what we should expect accord-
ing to the analogy in question, and, as we shall see, a closer consideration
of the above experiments allows us to trance the analogy still further. As
mentioned on p. 9 the radii of the orbits of the electrons will for stationary
states, corresponding to high values for τ be very great compared with or-
dinary atomic dimensions. This circumstance was used as an explanation of
the non-appearance in experiments with vacuum-tubes of lines correspond-
ing to the higher numbers in the Balmer series of the hydrogen spectrum.
This is also in conformity with experiments on the emission spectrum of
sodium; in the principal series of the emission spectrum of this substance
rather few lines are observed. Now in Wood’s experiments the pressure was
not very low, the states corresponding to high values for τ could therefore
not appear; yet in the absorption spectrum about 50 lines were detected.
In the experiments in question we consequently observe an absorption of
radiation which is not accompanied by a complete transition between two
different stationary states. According to the present theory we must assume
that this absorption is followed by an emission of energy during which the
systems pass back to the original stationary state. If there are no collisions
between the different systems this energy will be emitted as a radiation of
the same frequency as that absorbed, and there will be no true absorption
but only a scattering of the original radiation; a true absorption will not
occur unless the energy in question is transformed by collisions into kinetic
energy of free particles. In analogy we may now from the above experi-
ments conclude that a bound electron – also in cases in which three is no
ionization – will have an absorbing (scattering) influence on a homogeneous
radiation, as soon as the frequency of the radiation is greater than W/h,
where W is the total amount of energy emitted during the binding of the
electron. This would be highly in favour of a theory of absorption as the one
sketched above, as there can in such a case be no question of a coincidence
of the frequency of the radiation and a characteristic frequency of vibration
of the electron. If will further be seen that the assumption, that there will
be an absorption (scattering) of any radiation corresponding to a transi-
tion between two different mechanical states, is in perfect analogy with the
 16
      R.W. Wood, Physical Optics, p. 513 (1911).



                                           17
assumption generally used that a free electron will have an absorbing (scat-
tering) influence on light of any frequency. Corresponding considerations
will hold for the emission of radiation.
    In analogy to the assumption used in this paper that the emission of
line- spectra is due to the re-formation of atoms after one or more of the
lightly bound electrons are removed, we may assume that the homogeneous
Röntgen radiation is emitted during the setting down of the systems after one
of the firmly bound electrons escapes, e.g. by impact of cathode particles. 17
In the next part in this paper, dealing with the constitution of atoms, we
shall consider the question more closely and try to show that a calculation
based on this assumption is in quantitative agreement with the results of
experiments: here we shall only mention briefly a problem with which we
meet in such a calculation.
    Experiments on the phenomena of X-rays suggest that not only the emis-
sion and absorption of radiation cannot be treated by the help of the ordinary
electrodynamics, but not even the result of a collision between two electrons
of which the one is bound in an atom. This is perhaps most early shown by
some very instructive calculations on the energy of β-particles emitted from
radioactive substances recently published by Rutherford.18 These calcula-
tions strongly suggest that an electron of great velocity in passing through
an atom and colliding with the electrons bound will loose energy in distinct
finite quanta. As is immediately seen, this is very different from what we
might expect if the result of the collisions was governed by the usual me-
chanical laws. The failure of the classical mechanics in such a problem might
also be expected beforehand from the absence of anything like equipartition
of kinetic energy between free electrons and electrons bound in atoms. From
the point of view of the “mechanical” states we see, however, that the follow-
ing assumption – which is in accord with the above analogy – might be able
to account for the result of Rutherford’s calculation and for the absence of
equipartition of kinetic energy; two colliding electrons, bound or free, will,
after the collision as well as before, be in mechanical states. Obviously, the
introduction of such an assumption would not make any alteration neces-
sary in the classical treatment of a collision between two free particles. But,
considering a collision between a free and a bound electron, it would follow
that the bound electron by the collision could not acquire a less amount of
energy than the difference in energy corresponding to successive stationary
states, and consequently that the free electron which collides with it could
 17
      Compare J.J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. XXIII. p. 456 (1912).
 18
      E. Rutherford, Phil. Mag. XXIV. pp. 453 & 893 (1912).



                                         18
not lose a less amount.
    The preliminary and hypothetical character of the above considerations
needs not to be emphasized. The intention, however, has been to show that
the sketched generalization of the theory of the stationary states possibly
may afford a simple basis of representing a number of experimental facts
which cannot be explained by help of the ordinary electrodynamics, and
that assumptions used do not seem to be inconsistent with experiments
on phenomena for which a satisfactory explanation has been given by the
classical dynamics and the wave theory of light.



 § 5.The permanent State of an Atomic System

We shall now return to the main object of this paper – the discussion of the
“permanent” state of a system consisting of nuclei and bound electrons. For
a system consisting of a nucleus and an electron rotating round it, this state
is, according to the above, determined by the condition that the angular
momentum of the electron round the nucleus is equal to h/2π.
    On the theory of this paper the only neutral atom which contains a single
electron is the hydrogen atom. The permanent state of this atom should
correspond to the values of a and ω calculated on p. 5. Unfortunately,
however, we know very little of the behaviour of hydrogen atoms on account
of the small dissociation of hydrogen molecules at ordinary temperatures. In
order to get a closer comparison with experiments, it is necessary to consider
more complicated systems.
    Considering systems in which more electrons are bound by a positive
nucleus, a configuration of the electrons which presents itself as a permanent
state is in which the electrons are arranged in a ring round the nucleus. In the
discussion of this problem on the basis of the ordinary electrodynamics, we
meet– apart from the question of the energy radiation – with new difficulties
due to the question of the stability of the ring. Disregarding for a moment
this latter difficulty, we shall first consider the dimensions and frequency of
the systems in relation to Planck’s theory of radiation.
    Let us consider a ring consisting of n electrons rotating round a nucleus
of charge E, the electrons being arranged at equal angular intervals the
circumference of a circle of radius a.
    The total potential energy of the system consisting of the electrons and



                                      19
the nucleus is
                                   ne
                           P =−       · (E − esn ) ,
                                   a
where
                                1 s=n−1
                                   X         sπ
                           sn =         cosec .
                                4 s=1         n
For the radial force exerted on an electron by the nucleus and the other
electrons we get
                             1 dP        e
                     F =− ·         = − 2 · (E − esn ) .
                             n da        a
    Denoting the kinetic energy of an electron by T and neglecting the elec-
tromagnetic forces due to the motion of the electrons (see Part II), we get,
putting the centrifugal force on an electron equal to the radial force,
                            2T   e
                               = 2 · (E − esn ) ,
                             a  a
or
                                 e
                             T =   · (E − esn ) .
                                2a
From this we get for the frequency of revolution
                                     s
                               1         e (E − esn )
                           ω=    ·                    .
                              2π             ma3
The total amount of energy W necessary transferred to the system in order
to remove the electrons to infinite distances apart from the nucleus and from
each other is
                                        ne
                   W = −P − nT =           · (E − esn ) = nT,
                                        2a
equal to the total kinetic energy of the electrons.
    We see that the only difference in the above formula and those holding
for the motion of a single electron in a circular orbit round a nucleus is the
exchange of E for E − esn . It is also immediately seen that corresponding to
the motion of an electron in an elliptical orbit round a nucleus, there will be
a motion of the n electrons in which each rotates in an elliptical orbit with
the nucleus in the focus, and the n electrons at any moment are situated at
equal angular intervals on a circle with the nucleus as the centre. The major
axis and frequency of the orbit of the single electrons will for this motion
be given by the expressions (1) on p. 3 if we replace E by E − esn and W
by W/n. Let us now suppose that the system of n electrons rotating in a
ring round a nucleus is formed in a way analogous to the one assumed for

                                      20
a single electron rotating round a nucleus. It will thus be assumed that the
electrons, before the binding by the nucleus, were at a great distance apart
from the latter and possessed no sensible velocities, and also that during
the binding a homogeneous radiation is emitted. As in the case of a single
electron, we have here that the total amount of energy emitted during the
formation of the system is equal to the final kinetic energy of the electrons.
If we now suppose that during the formation of the system the electrons at
any moment are situated at equal angular intervals on the circumference of a
circle with the nucleus in the centre, from analogy with the considerations,
on p. 5 we are here led to assume the existence of a series of stationary
configurations in which the kinetic energy per electron is equal to τ hω/2,
where τ is an entire number, h Planck’s constant, and ω the frequency of
revolution. The configuration in which the greatest amount of energy is
emitted is, as before, the one in which τ = 1. This configuration we shall
assume to be the permanent state of the system if the electrons in this state
are arranged in a single ring. As for the case of a single 3electron we get
that the angular momentum of each of the electrons is equal to h/2π. It
may be remarked that instead of considering the single electrons we might
have considered the ring as an entity. This would, however, lead to the same
result, for in this case the frequency of revolution ω will be replaced by the
frequency nω of the radiation from the whole ring calculated from ordinary
electrodynamics, and T by the total kinetic energy nT .
    There may be many other stationary states corresponding to other ways
of forming the system. The assumption of the existence of such states seems
necessary in order to account for the line-spectra of systems containing more
than one electron (p. 11); it is also suggested by the theory of Nicholson
mentioned on p. 6, to which we shall return in a moment. The consideration
of the spectra, however, gives, as far as I can see, no indication of the
existence of stationary states in which all the electrons are arranged in a ring
and which correspond to greater values for the total energy emitted than
the one we above have assumed to be the permanent state. Further, there
may be stationary configurations of a system of n electrons and a nucleus
of charge E in which all the electrons are not arranged in a single ring. The
question, however, of the existence of such stationary configurations is not
essential for our determination of the permanent state, as long as we assume
that the electrons in this state of the system are arranged in a single ring.
Systems corresponding to more complicated configurations will be discussed
on p. 24.?????
    Using the relation T = hω/2 we get, by help of the above expressions
for T and ω, values for a and ω corresponding to the permanent state of the

                                      21
system which only differ from those given by the equations (3) on p. 5, by
exchange of E for E − esn .
    The question of stability of a ring of electrons rotating round a positive
charge is discussed in great detail by Sir. J.J. Thomson19 An adaption of
Thomson’s analysis for the case here considered of a ring rotating round a
nucleus of negligibly small linear dimensions is given by Nicholson.20 The
investigation of the problem in question naturally divides in two parts: one
concerning the stability for displacements of the electrons on the plane of the
ring; one concerning displacements perpendicular to this plane. As Nichol-
son’s calculations show, the answer to the question of stability differs very
much in the two cases in question. While the ring for the latter displace-
ments in general is stable if the number of electrons is not great; the ring is
in no case considered by Nicholson stable for displacement of the first kind.
    According, however, to the point of view taken in this paper, the ques-
tion of stability for displacements of the electrons in the plane of the ring is
most intimately connected with the question of the mechanism of the bind-
ing of the electrons, and like the latter cannot be treated on the basis of
the ordinary dynamics. The hypothesis of which we shall make use in the
following is that the stability of a ring of electrons rotating round a nucleus
is secured through the above condition of the universal constancy of the an-
gular momentum, together with the further condition that the configuration
of the particles is the one by the formation of which the greatest of energy
is emitted. As will be shown, this hypothesis is, concerning the question of
stability for a displacement of the electrons perpendicular to the plane of
the ring, equivalent to that used in ordinary mechanical calculations.
    Returning to the theory of Nicholson on the origin of lines observed in
the spectrum of the solar corona, we shall now see that the difficulties men-
tioned on p. 7 may be only formal. In the first place, from the point of
view considered above the objection as to the instability of the systems for
displacements of the electrons in the plane of the ring may not be valid. Fur-
ther, the objection as to emission of the radiation in quanta will not have
reference to the calculations in question, if we assume that in the coronal
spectrum we are not dealing with a true emission but only with a scattering
of radiation. This assumption seems probable if we consider the conditions
in the celestial body in question: for on account comparatively few colli-
sions to disturb the stationary states and to cause a true emission of light
corresponding to the transition between different stationary states; on the
 19
      Loc. cit.
 20
      Loc. cit.



                                      22
other hand there will in the solar corona be intense illumination of light of
all frequencies which may excite the natural vibrations of the systems in
the different stationary states. If the above assumption is correct, we im-
mediately understand the entirely different from for the laws connecting the
lines discussed by Nicholson and those connecting the ordinary line-spectra
considered in this paper.

    Proceeding to consider systems of more complicated constitution, we
shall make use of the following theorem, which can be very simply proved; –
“In every system consisting of electrons and positive nuclei, in which the nu-
clei are at rest and the electrons move in circular orbits with a velocity small
compared with the velocity of light, the kinetic energy will be numerically
equal to half the principal energy.”
    By help of this theorem we get – as in the previous cases of a single
electron or of a ring rotating round a nucleus – that the total amount of
energy emitted, by the formation of the systems from a configuration in
which the distances apart of the particles are infinitely great and in which
the particles have no velocities relative to each other, is equal to the kinetic
energy of the electrons in the final configuration.
    In analogy with the case of a single ring we are here led to assume that
corresponding to any configuration of equilibrium a series of geometrically
similar, stationary configuration of the system will exist in which the kinetic
energy of every electron is equal to the frequency of revolution multiplied
by τ /2h where τ is an entire number and h Planck’s constant. In any such
series of stationary configurations the one corresponding to the greatest
amount of energy emitted will be the one in which τ for every electron is
equal to 1. Considering that the ratio of kinetic energy to frequency for a
particle rotating in a circular orbit is equal to π times the angular momentum
round the center of the orbit, we are therefore led to the following simple
generalization of the hypotheses mentioned on pp. 15 and 22. ??????
    “In any molecular system consisting of positive nuclei and electrons in
which the nuclei are at rest relatire to each other and the electrons more in
circular orbits, the angular momentum of every electron round the centre of
its orbit will in the permanent state of the system be equal to h/2π, where h
is Planck’s constant.”21
    In analogy with the considerations on p. 23, we shall assume that a
  21
     In the considerations leading to this hypothesis we have assumed that the velocity of
the electrons is small compared with the velocity of light. The limits of the validity of this
assumption will be discussed in Part II.



                                             23
configuration satisfying this condition is stable if the total energy of the
system is less than in any neighbouring configuration satisfying the same
condition of the angular momentum of the electrons.
    As mentioned in the introduction, the above hypothesis will be used in a
following communication as a basis for a theory of the constitution of atoms
and molecules. It will be shown that it leads to results which seem to be in
conformity with experiments on a number of different phenomena.
    The foundation of the hypothesis has been sought entirely in its relation
with Planck’s theory of radiation; by help of considerations given later it
will be attempted to throw some further light on the formation of it from
another point of view.

   April 5, 1913




                                     24
