               COSMIC EVOLUTION
       AND THERMODYNAMiC IRREVERSIBILITY
                               DAVID LAYZER

 Department of Astronomy, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts

                               ABSTRACT
  This paper seeks to explain and relate three macroscopic arrows of time:
  the thermodynamic arrow, defined by entropy-generating processes in closed
  systems, the historical arrow, defined by information-generating processes
  in certain open systems, and the cosmological arrow, defined by the cosmic
                                   expansion.




                            INTRODUCTION
SEVERAL speakers at this conference have referred to the zeroth law of
thermodynamics. Cosmology also has its zeroth law. It states that cosmoin-
gists are fermions: no two of them can be in the same state of mind at the
same time. Earlier in this conference Dr Narlikar explained how the expansion
of the universe introduces an asymmetry into local descriptions of radiation
processes. He argued that the use of retarded rather than advanced solutions
of Maxwell's equations to describe radiation processes supports steady-state
cosmology but contradicts conventional relativistic cosmology. On the
other hand, Dr Narlikar's theory does not relate the cosmic expansion
directly to thermodynamic irreversibility. It ties the electromagnetic arrow
of time firmly to the cosmological arrow, but leaves the thermodynamic
arrow suspended in mid-air.
  The views I wish to elaborate are rather different. First, I believe that the
electromagnetic arrow has nothing directly to do with cosmology, but is
determined by the thermodynamic arrow in the manner elucidated by
Einstein in 19091. Einstein pointed out that the retarded and advanced
descriptions of radiation processes occurring in any finite region of space-
time are completely equivalent, but the auxiliary conditions in the two
descriptions differ in kind, in the retarded description all macroscopic
radiation sources must be specified, while in the advanced description the
microscopic absorption processes must be specified in detail. In practice one
uses the retarded description because one does not have microscopic
information about the absorbing matter. For the same reason, if one wishes
to describe an irreversible process such as diffusion or heat conduction at
the macroscopic level one must describe it as occurring in the 'forward'
                                     457
                                      DAVID LAYZER
direction of time. In short, Einstein's argument demonstrates that the
asymmetry of macroscopic radiation processes results from precisely those
properties of matter in bulk that give rise to other macroscopically irreversible
phenomena.
   On the other hand, I believe that current discussions of thermodynamic
irreversibility, though essentially correct, are incomplete, and need to be
supplemented by cosmological considerations. To explain this view, let me
recall—very schematically—the sequence of steps leading from a reversible
microscopic description of an N-body system to an irreversible macroscopic
description.

               THERMODYNAMIC IRREVERSIBILITY
  The first step is to introduce statistics. Instead of saying that an N-body
system is in a definite state k, specified by 6N coordinates and momenta
(or by a state vector /'k) we specify a probability distribution {Pk} or a density
matrix p. The information associated with this description is defined by
                                       1 S —S
where the entropy S is defined by
                          S = — >Pk in Pk or S = — Tr {p in p}
In equation 1 Smax is the maximum value of S consistent with the macro-
scopic constraints on the system. It is well known that, by virtue of Liouville's
theorem, S is a constant of the motion for an isolated N-body system;
dynamical evolution neither creates nor destroys information. Therefore
the passage to a statistical description does not disturb the temporal symmetry
of the description.
  The next step is coarse-graining. One combines the microstates k into
aggregates within which macroscopic variables such as the energy do not
vary appreciably. Let {} denote the set of coarse-grained probabilities
and p The coarse-grained density matrix. With the coarse-grained probability
distribution (or density matrix) we associate the coarse-grained entropy S
and a corresponding information measure I, which I shall call the macro-
information. The microinformation I' and the corresponding entropy S' are
defined by
                                          S = S + S'
                                          I = :i + I'
It is easy to show that the microscopic entropy S' is just the average entropy
of the aggregates      Since the total information I is constant, any change
in the macroinformation of the system is accompanied by an equal and
opposite change of the microinformation. But merely introducing a distinc-
tion between macroscopic and microscopic information does not of course
disturb the temporal symmetry of the description.
  * The entropy S of an aggregate is defined in terms of the conditional probabilities
p(k/) = Pk/P, and in the averaging process that defines S' the quantities Sc, are weighted by the
probabilities pc,, Thus
                                 S=
                                              458
        COSMIC EVOLUTION AND THERMODYNAMIC IRREVERSIBILITY
  Temporal asymmetry is introduced by the third and most crucial stept.
Fifteen years ago van Hove2 proved that if the Hamiltonian of a closed system
satisfies a certain rather general condition and if the off-diagonal elements of
the coarse-grained density matrix p vanish at a particular instant, then the
coarse-grained entropy S will subsequently increase monotonically until it
assumes its greatest possible value, when the system will be in a state of
thermodynamic equilibrium. The essential feature of van Hove's theorem is
that it relates the irreversible increase of entropy in a closed system to a
property of the initial state. Several similar theorems have subsequently been
proved3. All of them state that if microinformation (suitably defined) is
initially absent in a closed system, then the macroinformation will subse-
quently decrease monotonically. The thermodynamic arrow is thus defined
by a unidirectional flow of information from macroscopic into microscopic
degrees of freedom.
   Modem theories of irreversible processes have yielded valuable insight
into the detailed mechanisms responsible for the approach to equilibrium,
as well as powerful methods for calculating transport coefficients. The
following discussion proceeds from the assumption that these theories are
essentially correct. But if they are correct, they cannot be complete.
   For example, a theory that deals only with closed systems obviously
cannot explain why irreversible processes occurring in different closed
systems should define the same arrow. Again, the coarse-graining procedure,
and hence the dividing line between macroscopic and microscopic informa-
tion, is largely arbitrary in the theories under consideration. Finally, these
theories offer no justification for the assumption that microinformation is
initially absent. Indeed, the very meaning of this assumption is unclear. The
absence of microinformation in a theoretical description does not imply-—
according to currently held views---that it is unattainable in some objective
sense, but only that it is uninteresting or hard to get, or both. This seems to
imply that thermodynamic irreversibility is at least in part a psychological
phenomenon-—a position that most physicists would probably be unwilling
to accept, though it has been advocated by some.


                          BOREL'S ARGUMENT
   The recognition that no finite physical system can be truly isolated from
the rest of the universe seems at first sight to offer an attractive solution to
these difficulties. The Hamiltonian of every ostensibly closed system contains
a finite contribution representing the interaction between the system and its
environment So long as we focus attention on a definite system, omitting
from our description all dynamical variables referring to particles and fields
outside the system, the interaction Hamiltonian is not fully known and
hence has a stochastic character. This interaction can have a profound
effect on the microscopic state of a system, even if it has been shielded as
carefully as possible from outside influences. Thus E. Borel4 calculated that
moving 1 g of matter through 1 cm at the distance of Sirius would destroy
  For sake of simplicity, there is here no discussion of the thermodynamic limiting process- -
a matter of considerable technical interest which, however, is not directly relevant to the present
discussion.

                                               459
                                    DAVID LAYZER
microinformation about the state of a macroscopic gas in 10-6 second. Such
calculations afford a basis for an objective physical interpretation of the
probabilities that figure in statistical descriptions of microscopic systems.
They also imply that microscopic reversibility is not a property of finite
'closed' systems but only of the universe as a whole. But for this very reason
they provide at best oniy a partial explanation of the thermodynamic arrow.
   Borel's calculation shows that in a 'closed' gaseous system microinforma-
tion flows quickly into a very large number of external degrees of freedom.
Such calculations can be used to justify assumptions about the initial absence
of microinformation of the kind that figure in modern theories of irreversible
processes. But the interaction between a system and its environment does
not impose a particular direction on this flow of information, much less a
common direction for all 'closed' systems. We are still faced with the paradox
of a microscopically reversible* universe whose temporal structure, viewed
macroscopically, is radically anisotropic.

                        THE HISTORICAL ARROW
   So far I have discussed one aspect of this anisotropy, the thermodynamic
arrow (defined by entropy-generating processes in 'closed' systems), and
alluded to a second aspect, the cosmological arrow (defined by the cosmic
expansion). But I have not mentioned what is perhaps the most conspicuous
class of processes serving to define time's arrow: those that generate informa-
tion in open systems. Such processes are central to all biological systems.
They play an indispensable role in growth, in biological evolution, and in the
phenomena of memory and consciousness. But they are not confined to
living systems. A record of the Moon's past is written in its pitted surface;
the internal structure of a star, like that of a tree, records the process of aging;
and the complicated forms we observe in spiral galaxies reflect the evolution-
ary processes that shape them. The complex overlapping array of all these
evolutionary records defines a third arrow of time, the historical arrow.
   The thermodynamic arrow points in 'the direction of increasing entropy;
the historical arrow points in the direction of increasing information.
Equivalently, we may define the historical arrow through the statement that
the present state of the universe (or of any sufficiently large subsystem of it)
contains a partial record of the past but none of the future.
  Because the thermodynamic arrow refers ideally to closed systems while
the historical arrow manifests itself only in open systems, their coexistence
presents no problem. Entropy-generating and information-generating
processes normally proceed simultaneously and more or less independently
in every complex system. In living systems, of course, harmful entropy-
producing processes are usually offset by countervailing information-
producing processes.

             COSMOLOGY AND MACROSCOPIC PHYSICS
  I shall now sketch a theory that seeks to relate the three arrows of time—
  * I am here neglecting the quantitatively small departures from microscopic time reversibility
suggested by experiments on the decay of the K° meson.
                                             460
        COSMIC EVOLUTION AND THERMODYNAMIC IRREVERSIBILITY
the thermodynamic, the historical, and the cosmological—to one another,
and to derive them all from a common postulate. This postulate—a slightly
strengthened version of Einstein's cosmological principle—----concerns the
spatial structure of the universe. It states that no statistical property of the
universe serves to define a preferred position or direction in space; the
spatial structure of the universe is statistically homogeneous and isotropic*.
     Before discussing the implications of this postulate, I should say a few
words about the relationship between cosmology and macroscopic physics.
From one point of view, cosmological theories are not essentially different
from other physical theories. The cosmologist, like the astrophysicist, must
make certain assumptions that cannot be verified directly; he must develop
the consequences of these assumptions using relevant physical theories;
and he must ultimately make predictions that are explicit enough so that
they can be contradicted by appropriate observations or experiments. A good
theory, whether in cosmology or any other branch of physics, enables one to
draw more or less rigorous and quantitative inferences, in agreement with
experience, from simple and natural assumptions—which need not themselves
be capable of direct verification. Thus the inaccessibility of stellar interiors
to direct observation has not prevented the development of highly credible
theories of stellar structure. Similarly, the impossibility of directly verifying
postulates about the universe as a whole does not in itself doom cosmology
to speculative status; the postulates themselves matter less than the quality
and quantity of the inferences that can be drawn from them.
   Yet there is a basic difference between cosmology and astrophysics. It
stems from the fact that the universe is not one member of a class of similar
objects characterized by a certain range of physical parameters, but is unique
and all-embracing. The physical parameters that characterize a particular
star, such as the Sun, have no special significance; other stars are more or less
massive, have more or less angular momentum, are richer or poorer in
metals. But while it is possible to construct mathematical models of the
universe characterized by different sets of parameters, there is only one
correct model. Hence its defining properties have special significance. In
fact we may reasonably accord them the status of physical laws rather than
auxiliary conditions.
  If we adopt this point of view, we may reasonably employ the usual
empirical criteria of simplicity and economy as guides in formulating
appropriate cosmological postulates. The postulate of statistical homogeneity
and isotropy seems to be the simplest assumption that does not conflict
with any currently-accepted physical law.

     IMPLICATIONS OF THE COSMOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE
   Two well-known consequences of the cosmological principle are especially
relevant to the present discussion.
   First, the cosmological principle implies that the space-time continuum
can be uniquely resolved into space plus time. For it is obvious that if
statistical homogeneity and isotropy prevail in a given frame of reference,
  * Einstein's cosmological principle, as it is normally employed, states that the universe can be
represented, in a first approximation, by a uniform and isotropic distribution of matter.
                                              461
                               DAVID LAYZER
they cannot prevail in any frame of reference that is in motion—-uniform or
accelerated—with respect to this frame. The only symmetry-preserving
transformations are spatial rotations and translations.
  This conclusion may seem to have a paraloxical quality. Before Einstein,
space and time were distinct. Special relativity fused them into a single
four-dimensional continuum, replacing the concept of absolute space by
that of the inertial frame of reference. Finally, through a further fusion of the
concepts of gravitational force and inertial acceleration, general relativity
succeeded in encompassing inertial and non-inertial frames of reference in a
single mathematical formalism. The cosmological principle does not undo
this work. Einstein's field equations still govern the local structure of a four-
dimensional continuum in which space, time and gravitation are indis-
solubly blended; but at the cosmological level of description the old distinc-
tion between space and time re-emerges in new dress. And indeed it can be
shown that the local inertial frame of reference—the frame in which Newton's
theory is approximately valid—is one whose motion with respect to the
preferred cosmological frame is unaccelerated. Thus the cosmological frame
replaces absolute Newtonian space and time.
  The second well-known consequence of the cosmological principle is the
cosmic expansion. Einstein's equations (in the simplest and most widely
accepted form of his theory) admit no static solutions satis!'ing the cosmo-
logical principle. The theory predicts that the universe expands (contracts)
uniformly from (toward) a singular state of infinite density in the finite past
(future). The rate of expansion depends on the equation of state and on the
mean spatial curvature. For simplicity and definiteness, I shall assume in the
following discussion that the spatial curvature is negative or zero. This implies
that the universe is spatially infinite. A universe with positive spatial curva-
ture, though unbounded has finite volume and is also, in a certain sense,
finite in time. A discussion of this case would raise certain subtle and con-
troversial points not essential to the main discussion.

            THE STRONG COSMOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE
                    AND INDETERMINACY
  So far I have made use only of the weak form of the cosmological principle.
The strong form, which postulates complete statistical homogeneity and
isotropy, has a remarkable implication that does not seem to have been
noted previously. Consider, by way of illustration, a statistically uniform
(Poisson) distribution of points on a straight line; this is the simplest example
of a statistically homogeneous (and isotropic) distribution. Let the line be
divided into cells of equal length h, the analogues of quantum cells in six-
dimensional phase space. The Poisson distribution is defined by a single
parameter, n, the mean occupation number of a cell A particular realization
of a given Poisson distribution is characterized by an inimite sequence of
integer occupation numbers, e.g. .. . 00210111 .... Such realizations have a
unique pair of properties, not shared by realizations of Poisson distributions
on finite or semi-infinite segments. (a) From a single realization one can
calculate the value of the statistical parameter n with arbitrary precision.
This property, an immediate consequence of the law of large numbers,
                                     462
       COSMIC EVOLUTION AND THERMODYNAMIC IRREVERSIBILITY
implies that a single realization contains all the statistical information needed
to construct it. (b) Two realizations characterized by the same statistical
parameter are operationally indistinguishable, since any finite sequence
of occupation numbers must occur with precisely the same frequency in each
sequence. Thus it is obviously impossible to devise an operational matching
procedure that would distinguish between two realizations having the same
statistical properties.
  These properties of one-dimensional Poisson distributions obviously
apply to statistically homogeneous distributions of points in six-dimensional
phase space, provided that a suitably defined correlation distance is finite.
(This property is needed to ensure the ergodicity of the distribution.) Let us
agree to regard the values of quantities that figure in a complete statistical
description of a statistically homogeneous and isotropic universe as con-
stituting macroinformation, and all remaining information as microinforma-
tion. What has just been shown is that, under our assumptions, there is no
micro information; the uncertainties implicit in a statistical description of an
infinite universe satisfying the strong cosmological principle are irreducible.
   For example, if such a universe is in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium,
it is completely characterized by its temperature and density; all other
observable quantities can then be calculated. It is true that a hypothetical
observer could measure the actual positions and velocities of molecules in a
given region, but since all such regions are on exactly the same footing, and
their statistical properties are calculable in advance, such measurements
would convey no information in a technical sense.
   The preceding argument depends essentially on the quanta] character of
the microscopic description. For in a classical (i.e. non-quantal) universe
the distance between any two particles at a given instant serves to define a
given statistical realization completely and to distinguish it from all other
possible realizations of the same statistical description. Thus microinforma-
tion always exists in a classical universe.
  The present conclusion goes beyond the implication of Borel's and
similar calculations, that certain kinds of microinformation diffuse very
rapidly from ostensibly closed systems. The diffusion process does not
destroy information, it merely redistributes it. Thus the total quantity of
microinformation in the universe remains constant. According to the
present picture, however, microinformation is simply absent.

GROWTH OF MACROINFORMATION IN COSMIC EVOLUTION
 Consider a universe filled uniformly with non-interacting particles. Let
p denote the momentum of a particle as measured in a frame of reference that
is locally at rest at the particle's instantaneous position. (The corresponding
velocity v = c2p/E is thus the velocity relative to the uniformly expanding
or contracting substratum.) The internal energy density u and the tempera-
ture T are defined by
                          u = nkT — n<E>                            (6)
where n denotes the mean particle density, and the particle energy
E = \/(m2c4 + c2p2). An elementary kinematic calculation shows that the
                                      463
                                      DAVID LAYZER
momentum of a free particle varies with time according to the simple law
p cc a1, where a is the cosmological scale factor defined by the relation
pa3 = constant. Thus the momentum of a free particle in an expanding
universe continually decreases*. It follows that the temperature and the
specific internal energy decrease with time in an expanding universe. In this
important respect the universe does not behave like a closed system. We
should therefore not be surprised to find that its thermodynamic behaviour
differs from that of a closed system.
   If the particles are ultra-relativistic (for example, ii they are photons),
E cc p, so that T cc a . For non-relativistic particles on the other hand,
E cc p2, so that T cc a2 Thus, for a given rate of expansion, a relativistic
gas cools less rapidly than a non-relativistic one.
   Now consider a mixture of non-relativistic gas and radiation. Suppose
that at some initial instant the mixture is in thermodynamic equilibrium at
the temperature T0. Suppose further that there is negligible interaction
between the gas and the radiation. Then, as the universe expands (or con-
tracts) away from the initial state, a temperature difference will develop
between the two componentst.
  The cosmic expansion (or contraction) preserves the mean entropy per
particle of each constituent, so that the specific entropy of the mixture does
not change. But the maximum specific entropy increases monotonically in
both directions of time. For if the thermalization rate were suddenly to become
much greater than the expansion rate, the gas and the radiation would assume
a common temperature, and in the process the specific entropy would in-
crease. Hence at any given instant the actual specific entropy is less than its
maximum possible value. In the general case, when the thermalization rate
is neither vanishingly small nor infinitely large compared with the expansion
rate, the specific entropy of the mixture will increase, but not as rapidly as
maximum specific entropy. Since information is defined as the difference
between the actual entropy and the maximum entropy (subject to given
macroscopic constraints), this example shows that expansion or contraction
from an initial state of thermodynamic equilibrium generates both specic
entropy and specific information.
  This conclusion obviously applies under much more general assumptions
about the state and composition of the cosmic medium. The essential elements
of the argument are (a) that the 'initial' state is one of maximum specific
entropy (zero information), and (b) that the rate of cosmic expansion or
contraction—which is of order J(6nGp), where p denotes the mean cosmic
density—may be comparable to or greater than the rates of processes that
tend to produce the state of local thermodynamic equilibrium. Because the
cosmic expansion or contraction is not quasi-static, it generates departures
from local thermodynamic equilibrium and hence generates information.
At the same time, irreversible processes generate entropy.


   * Since the frequency of a photon is proportional to its momentum, it diminishes with time
in an expanding universe. This is the basis of the cosmological redshift—distance relation.
     It is easy to show that for extreme relativistic and extreme non-relativistic gases the thermal
character of the momentum distribution is preserved under expansion or contraction.
                                               464
       COSMIC EVOLUTION AND THERMODYNAMIC IRREVERSIBILITY
                         THE ARROW OF TIME
  Suppose that at some epoch the universe was in a state of global thermo-
dynamic equilibrium. Let us tentatively identify time's arrow with the
direction in which cosmic entropy and information are generated, anticipat-
ing that this will turn out to coincide with the direction in which entropy and
information are generated locally. Then the hypothesized state of thermo-
dynamic equilibrium would indeed appear to be an initial state from which
the universe must either expand or contract: the two possibilities are equally
consistent with our considerations up to this point Thus according to the
present considerations, and in contrast with Dr Narlikar's conclusion,
there is no direct link between the cosmic expansion and the thermodynamic
arrow.
   But we are not, of course, free to postulate that at some arbitrary epoch the
universe was in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium. For such an assump-
tion to be plausible, the cosmic expansion rate must be vanishingly small
compared with local relaxation rates. A simple calculation shows that this
condition is likely to be satisfied oniy near the singular state of infinite
density. For it can be shown that the expansion rate H a/a t1 as
t —+ O(p —* cx)).On the other hand, two-body reaction rates vary as nf(T),
where n cc a3----at least for a certain range of values of a—and f(T) is a
function of temperature. In a universe dominated by relativistic particles,
a t, while in one dominated by non-relativistic particles a t. For
interactions other than the Coulomb interaction, the two-body reaction
rate is a non-decreasing—or at least not a rapidly increasing—function of
temperature, which in turn is a decreasing function of time. It follows that
in the limit t -+ 0 the cosmic expansion rate does become infinitely slow
compared with two-body reaction rates. It is therefore plausible to postulate
that the cosmic expansion began from a state of near-thermodynamic
equilibrium; the initial stages of the expansion are quasi-static, even though
the expansion rate varies as t '.
  To summarize the argument up to this point: From the assumption that
no statistical property of the universe serves to define a preferred position or
direction in space, we deduce that a complete description of the universe can
be couched in statistical terms, and so contains no microinformation. On
physical grounds, we postulate that thermodynamic equilibrium prevails
in the limit p —* cc (t —+ 0), and we define this as the initial state. Then
macroscopic and microscopic information are both absent initially. The
cosmic expansion generates entropy and information.
  In a universe that expands from an initial singularity, every 'closed'
system has a finite past and a more or less definite beginning in time. Given a
sufficiently complete cosmogonic theory, one could in principle predict
the statistical properties of all 'closed' systems and describe the processes
by which they came or will come into being. In any case, a given 'closed'
system will contain a certain quantity of macroinformation, but no micro-
information (since none was present initially and the cosmic expansion
generates only macroinformation, by definition). Thus the present theoretical
scheme leads to precisely the sort of assumptions that have been introduced
in modern theories of irreversible processes. And if this scheme could be
developed into a quantitative theory, it would afford an explicit definition
                                     465
                              DAVID LAYZER
of macroinformation and macroscopic variables for every class of 'closed'
systems.
  In a general way, it is clear that the historical arrow must be related to the
growth of information in the universe as a whole. In most open systems,
however, the growth of information results directly from a redistribution of
information within an effectively isolated parent system rather than from the
cosmic expansion. But a detailed discussion of the historical arrow lies outside
the scope of this article.
  The scheme I have just outlined supports the intuitive ideas that the world
is unfolding in time and that the future is never wholly predictable. For,
as we have seen, the specific information content of the universe increases
steadily in the direction away from the• initial state of maximum cosmic
density. This implies that the present state of the universe cannot contain
enough information to define any future state. The future grows from the
past, as a plant grows from a seed, yet it contains more than the past.

                          COSMIC EVOLUTION
   Can the kind of cosmological assumptions I have discussed support a
theory of cosmic evolution that accounts for the observed properties of the
astronomical universe?
   Having postulated an initial state of thermodynamic equilibrium, we are
left with just one free parameter at our disposal: the temperature at a given
epoch or density. Fixing this parameter involves a choice between two main
possibilities, usually referred to as the hot universe and the cold universe.
   In the hot universe, energy resides chiefly in electromagnetic radiation
during the early stages of the expansion. The cosmic microwave background
(which is thought to result from a thermal radiation field with T = 27°K)
is interpreted as a remnant of the primordial radiation field; this allows the
initial temperature to be calculated. One can then go on to calculate the
relative abundances of elements heavier than hydrogen that would be formed
during the early stages of the cosmic expansion. The most crucial prediction
is that of the helium abundance, which turns out to be about 28 per cent5.
Observational tests of this prediction are extremely difficult. There is some
evidence for the existence of stars whose atmospheres contain substantially
less than the predicted primeval abundance, but astronomers do not yet
accept it as conclusive6.
   The stability of the hot universe against local density fluctuations has been
carefully studied by a number of authors, with consistently negative results.
If only thermal fluctuations were present when the cosmic medium had the
density of a nuclear fluid, significant local inhomogeneities could never have
developed. This conclusion has forced proponents of the hot universe to
postulate that substantial density fluctuations either were present initially
or were created at supernuclear densities by physical processes whose
experimental verification lies outside the scope of current experimental
techniques.
   The alternative approach is to postulate an initial state cold enough to
allow the formation of substantial density fluctuations. One must then find
an alternative explanation for the cosmic microwave background. The
                                      466
        COSMIC EVOLUTION AND THERMODYNAMIC IRREVERSIBILITY
requirements for such an explanation imposed by the observed quantity and
quality of the radiation field are rather stringent, but can perhaps be satisfied
by a hypothesis that links the background radiation field to large-scale
explosive events occurring within galaxies during their formative stages7.
  If the initial temperature is sufficiently low, the universe may freeze into
solid molecular hydrogen—a possibility first suggested by Zeldovich8.
Continued expansion would cause the solid cosmic medium to shatter into
fragments, whose masses, as a simple calculation shows, would be comparable
to those of planetary satellites.
   I have developed an approximate and somewhat speculative theory of the
ensuing evolutionary stages9. The 'gas' composed of solid-hydrogen frag-
ments is unstable against a form of turbulence driven by local gravitational
forces. The turbulence creates a wide spectrum of density fluctuations.
Ultimately self-gravitating systems begin to separate out The least massive
systems separate out first, then clusters of these systems, then clusters of
these clusters, and so on. In this way a hierarchy of self-gravitating systems
comes into being, and is still in process of formation at the present time.


                                     Time of formation
                                    2x102




         21


              0      2        4       6        8       10     12      14      16
                                            log M/M0
Figure 1. Specific binding energy versus mass for newly formed self-gravitating systems, according
                         to an approximate cosmogonic theory (ref. 9).



   Although the theory is speculative and approximate, it predicts a definite
relation between the average binding energy per unit mass and the mass of
newly formed self-gravitating systems, shown in Figure 1. The most tightly
bound systems correspond to galaxies and compact galaxy clusters, which
accordingly are predicted to have masses around 1012 solar masses and
binding energies around 1016 erg/g. These and other semi-quantitative
predictions agree surprisingly well with observational estimates over a mass
range of more than fifteen decades. These tentative and approximate results
encourage one to believe that further theoretical studies along the lines
I have sketched may ultimately lead to a quantitative understanding of
cosmic evolution as well as a qualitative understanding of time's arrow.
                                            467
                                       DAVID LAYZER

                                       REFERENCES
1
    A. Einstein, Phys. Z. 10, 185 (1909).
2
    L. van Hove, Physica, 21, 512 (1955).
    For example, I. Prigogine, Non-equilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Interscience: New York
    (1962).
    W. Kohn and M. Luttinger, Phys. Rev. 108, 590 (1957); 109, 1892 (1958).
    M. Kac, Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium, (J. Neyman, ed.), Vol. III, p 171.
    University of California Press: Berkeley (1956).
    E. Bore!, introduction Géométrique a la Physique, Gauthier-Villars: Paris (1912).
    E. Borel, Introduction Géométrique a Quelques Theories Physiques, Gauthier-Villars: Paris
    (1914).
    See also J. M. Blatt, Prog. Theor. Phys. 22, 745 (1959).
    P. Morrison, Preludes in Theoretical Physics, (edited by A. de-Sha!it, H. Feshbach and L. van
    Hove), p 347. North-Holland: Amsterdam (1966).
    P. G. Bergmann and J. L. Lebowitz, Phys. Rev. 99, 578 (1955).
    R. V. Wagoner, W. A. Fowler and F. Hoyle, Astrophys. J. 148, 3 (1967). This paper contains
    references to earlier and less complete calculations.
6 A. comprehensive review of this question is given by I. J. Danziger, Annu. Rev. Astron.
  Astrophys. 8 (1970).
  D. Layzer, Astrophys. Letters, 1, 99 (1968).
8
  Ya. B. Zel'dovich, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 16, 1102 and 1395 (1963).
  D. Layzer, 'Cosmogonic Processes,' Proceedings of the Brandeis Summer institute in Theoretical
    Physics—1968 (to be published).




                                               468
