Prolegomenon for a formal theory of referential information: T. Deacon (12/20/14)


A. General case: passive information medium near equilibrium [ e.g. geological
   formation, crime scene evidence, data from a scientific experiment, text, etc.]

1. Shannon (e.g. information) entropy is NOT equivalent to thermodynamic (e.g.
    Boltzmann-Gibbs) entropy (or to the absolute statistical diversity of physical states).
    [For convenience these entropies will be provisionally distinguished as Shannon
    versus Boltzmann entropy, though recognizing that each includes multiple variant
    forms.]
2. However, for any physical signal medium, a change in Shannon entropy must also
    correspond to a change in Boltzmann entropy, though not vice versa because the
    distinctions selected/discerned to constitute the Shannon entropy of a given signal
    medium are typically a small subset of the possible physical variety of states—e.g.
    statistical entropy—of that medium. (See notes below.).
3a. The Shannon information of a received message is measured as a reduction of signal
    uncertainty (= a reduction of Shannon entropy).
3b. For a simple physical medium reduction of Shannon entropy must also correspond to
    a reduction of the Boltzmann entropy of that medium.
3c. This can be generalized as “any deviation away from a more probable state” (which
    can violate 3b in the case of media that are actively maintained in an improbable
    state, such as maintained far-from-equilibrium. See B below.).
4a. A reduction of Boltzmann entropy of any physical medium is exhibited as constraint
    on its possible states or dynamical “trajectories.”
4b. The production of physical constraint requires physical work in order to produce a
    decrease of Boltzmann entropy, according to the second law of thermodynamics.
5a. For a passive medium the physical work required to reduce its Boltzmann entropy
    must originate from some physical source extrinsic to that medium.
5b. Generalization: Constraint of the Shannon entropy of a passive medium = constraint
    of its Boltzmann entropy = the imposition of prior work from an external source.
6. An increase in constraint (i.e. deviation away from a more probable state) in the
    information medium literally “re-presents” the physical relationship between the
    medium and the extrinsic contextual factors (work) that caused this change in
    entropy. (= what the information embodied in the constraint can be “about.”)
7. Since a given constraint has statistical structure, its form is a consequence of the
    specific structure of the work that produced it, the physical susceptibilities of the
    information bearing medium, and the possible/probable physical interactions between
    that medium and this extrinsic contextual factor.
8. The form of this medium constraint therefore corresponds to and can indirectly “re-
    present” the form of this work. (i.e. in-form-ation)
9. Conclusion 1. The possibility of reference in a passive medium is a direct reflection
    of the possibility of a change in the Boltzmann and Shannon entropies of that medium
    due to a physical interaction between the information bearing medium and a condition
    extrinsic to it.


                                            !1
Prolegomenon for a formal theory of referential information: T. Deacon (12/20/14)


10. Conclusion 2. The possible range of contents thereby referred to is conveyed by the
    form of the constraint produced in the medium by virtue of the form of work imposed
    from an extrinsic physical interaction.
11. Conclusion 3. The informing power of a given medium is a direct correlate of its
    capacity to exhibit the effects of physical work with respect to some extrinsic factor.
12. Corollary 1. What might be described as the referential entropy of a given medium is
    a function of the possible independent dimensions of kinds of extrinsically induced
    physical modifications it can undergo (e.g. physical deformation, electromagnetic
    modification, etc.) multiplied by the possible “distinguishable” (see notes) states
    within each of these dimensions.
13. Corollary 2. Having the potential to exhibit the effects of work with respect to some
    extrinsic physical factor means that even no change in medium entropy or being in a
    most probable state still can provide reference (e.g. the burglar alarm that has not
    been tripped, or the failure of an experimental intervention to make a difference). It is
    thus reference to no work performed.

In addition, since not all information media are physical structures or otherwise passive
    systems at or near thermodynamic equilibrium we need to modify certain of these
    claims to extend this analysis to media that are themselves dynamical systems
    maintained far-from-equilibrium. This yields the following additional claims:

B. Special case: non-passive information medium maintained far from equilibrium
    [e.g. metal detector or organism sense organ]

1. A persistently far-from-equilibrium process is one that is maintained in a lowered
    probability state. So certain of the above principles will be reversed in these
    conditions. Specifically, those that depend on extrinsic work moving a medium to a
    lower probability, lower entropy state.
2. Maintenance of a low Boltzmann entropy dynamical process necessarily requires
    persistent physical work or persistent constraints preventing an increase of Boltzmann
    and Shannon entropies.
3. Any corresponding increase in Shannon entropy therefore corresponds to a disruption
    of the work that is maintaining the medium in its lower entropy state. This can occur
    by impeding the intrinsic work or disrupting some dissipation-inhibiting constraint
    being maintained in that system.
4a. An increase in the Shannon entropy of a persistently far-from-equilibrium
    information medium can thereby "indicate" extrinsic interference with that work or
    constraint maintenance.
4b. A persistently far-from-equilibrium dynamical medium can be perturbed in a way that
    increases its entropy by contact with a passive extrinsic factor. Any passive or
    dynamic influence that produces a loss of constraint in such a system can provide
    reference to that extrinsic factor.


                                              !2
Prolegomenon for a formal theory of referential information: T. Deacon (12/20/14)


5a. Since work requires specific constraints and specific energetic and material resources,
    these become dimensions with respect to which the change in entropy can refer to
    some external factor.
5b. The dynamical and physical properties of a far-from-equilibrium information bearing
    medium determine its “referential entropy.”
6. Corollary 3. This can be generalized to also describe the referential capacity of any
    medium normally subject to regular teleodynamic or teleological influences that tend
    to cause it to be in an improbable or highly constrained state. This therefore is
    applicable to living systems with respect to their adaptations to avoid degradation and
    also to far more complex social and cultural contexts where there is active “work” to
    maintain certain “preferred” orders.


Notes:

Shannonian theory is the necessary but not sufficient foundation for defining information:
   Shannon’s and related forms of “information theory” do NOT provide an account of
   what it means to inform. Shannon’s theory only concerns the medium (or signal)
   properties that are a prerequisite for a given medium to be able to inform: i.e. to refer
   to an extrinsic/absent feature relevant to some interpretive system. For this reason
   Shannonian analysis is both applicable to all forms of information and yet cannot
   explain any higher order feature of informational phenomena. These are only
   distinguished once the theory of reference is included to augment the Shannonian
   analysis.

Non-equivalence of the two meanings of ’entropy’: Shannon entropy is typically a very
   small subset of the physical entropy (aka Boltzmann-Gibbs) and statistical entropy of
   any given physical medium. Shannon entropy is that small fraction of the physically
   distinctive states of the medium corresponding to those discernible by a given
   interpretive process. Thus Shannon entropy assumes an interpretive process that must
   have its own entropy (related to Ashby’s “requisite variety”) which corresponds to the
   system’s capacity for state changes capable of contributing to a completed end-
   directed (teleodynamic) work cycle (see below).

Limitations: The expansion of information theory (above) to include the necessary and
   sufficient conditions for reference does not yet address either the dynamical
   organization required to constitute an interpretative process nor does it provide a
   means to distinguish between the variant forms of reference (e.g. iconic, indexical,
   symbolic) that are possible. This requires expanding this analysis to formalize what is
   meant by an interpretive process and the nature of a semiotically competent system.

Interpretation and Significance: The realization that work plays a critical role in the
    potential-to-refer is a critical clue to the problem of assessing significance –
                                              !3
Prolegomenon for a formal theory of referential information: T. Deacon (12/20/14)


    something that has often left the bounds of science by arguing that it is a “subjective”
    issue (e.g. MacKay’s critique of Shannon). This is because work is also the relevant
    measure when it comes to assessing the “usefulness” of information. In general, I
    argue that it is the amount of work “saved” toward the completion of a teleodynamic
    work cycle* (as a result of access to information) that determines the significance or
    usefulness of that information. Since “work saved” is a comparative measure with
    respect to achieving a defined end, this assessment is necessarily a competitive
    selection process with respect to alternative variant processes “aimed” at achieving
    the same end — hence Darwinian in a general sense.

*   A teleodynamic work cycle is not merely a thermodynamic work cycle (though it
    must also include both endergonic [catalytic] and exergonic phases [self-assembling]
    phases), but is additionally an organizational work cycle that contributes to its own
    preservation and reproduction. A simplest example of this is provided by autogenesis,
    which if structurally degraded or disrupted will initiate a work cycle to reconstitute
    the boundary constraints required to support future work cycles to perpetuate this
    same capacity.




                                             !4
