“The fundamental problem of communication is that of
reproducing at one point either exactly or approximately
a message selected at another point.” [Claude Shannon,
1948]

“Information has nothing to do with meaning” [Warren
Weaver, 1949]

"The great tragedy of formal information theory is that its
very expressive power is gained through abstraction away
from the very thing that it has been designed to describe."
[John Collier, 2003]

“… there is no general agreement about the relation
between physics and information.” [Werner Ebling, IS4IS
2015]
“I didn’t like the term Information Theory. Claude didn’t
like it either. You see, the term ‘information theory’
suggests that it is a theory about information – but it’s
not. It’s the transmission of information, not information.
Lots of people just didn’t understand this... I coined the
term ‘mutual information’ to avoid such nonsense:
making the point that information is always about
something. It is information provided by something, about
something.” [Interview with R. Fano, 2001]

“What I have tried to do is to turn information theory
upside down to make what the engineers call
“redundancy” [coding syntax] but I call “pattern” into
the primary phenomenon. . . . [Gregory Bateson, 1969]
  Shannon’s measure of information
     ∑ pi log pi                               ∑ pi log pi — ∑ pj log pj
                           channel
  potential                                       received
   signals                                         signal
initial channel                               reduced entropy
   entropy =            (noise-entropy)          = reduced
  uncertainty                                   uncertainty

 Shannon measured information in terms of the reduction in
 uncertainty that results from receiving a specific signal.
 The difference between possible signal entropy (a measure
 of its possible variant forms) and the entropy of the received
 message is the measure of reduced uncertainty.
 This reduction can be understood as a measure of constraint
 on possible degrees of freedom of the signal medium.
     Properties analyzed by the
mathematical theory of communication
   Mutual information is a measure of the information
redundancy between two systems (i.e. correspondence)
     It is not equivalent to reference or “meaning.”
 entropy= Hs                                    Hr
 transmitted information =                 Ht = Hs - Hr
 mutual information =                      Hm < Hs+Hr




                                                                      significance,
                                                                       usefulness,
                                                                        relevance
                        Hs        Hr
      sender                                receiver

                         physical
     reference           medium           interpretation
                        properties

  relationships ignored by the mathematical theory of communication
                                                                        significance
 object                                             person


reference             computation                 assignment

The difference between a computer and any mechanical device is a
function of referential correspondences being extrinsically assigned.
     “Aboutness" is not intrinsic

Information in the full sense is distinguished from
other physical or statistical properties by virtue of
providing reference (“aboutness") and relevance
(i.e. functional significance, value).
These properties are not intrinsic to any specific
physical substrate or signal medium, nor are they
statistical attributes of the medium.
What information is “about” is precisely something
not present in the conveying medium.
But if aboutness needs to be assigned extrinsically to
computations it must not be a computable property
   Nested levels of “information”


  SYNTACTIC PROPERTIES


   SEMANTIC PROPERTIES

  NORMATIVE PROPERTIES

1.Shannon - 2.Boltzmann - 3.Darwin
        Information ≠ thermodynamics, but

                                                Maxwell’s
                                                  demon:
                                                    a link
                                                between
                                                 thought
                                                      and
                                                entropy?
  Information “entropy” and thermodynamic entropy are different uses of the same
 term & formula. Is this a confusion, or is there a deeper relationship between them
(+/-)? And what about the properties of reference and significance? Are they illusory?

            Schrödinger:                  Shannon:                     Wiener:
            information                   information                  “Information
            +negentropy                   “entropy”                    is negative
                life                      =∑ pi log pi                 entropy”
            A tale of two entropies
“Information is physical.” — Charles Bennett
Beyond their abstract statistical similarity, thermodynamic
and informational entropy are associated with quite
dissimilar processes and phenomena (e.g. the 2nd law of
thermodynamics has no Shannonian counterpart).
But since every informing medium is constituted physically
- its informational states are physical states.
So a change in that medium’s statistical properties (e.g. its
thermodynamic entropy) also has the potential of changing
its informational properties.
This is exemplified by the fact that thermodynamic effects
can introduce “noise” into a message or can become
information to a repairman..
Reduction of the Shannon entropy of a
 physical sign medium requires work
                           reference

                          medium
 potential                                    specific
  signals                                      signal

   initial                                     reduced
  entropy    work       (noise-entropy)        entropy
Because Shannon entropy reduction employs a physical medium
this also entails that its physical entropy is also reduced.
This requires work and also entails thermodynamic openness.
The pattern (constraint, redundancy) exhibited by the received
signal with respect to the entropy of potential signals thus
necessarily re-presents the constraints created by this work.
Improbable natural forms indicate the
  work of unusual geological forces




Stone circles (Iceland)        Basalt columns (Ireland)
Highly regular (constrained) geological forms are
improbable. Thus they indicate the effects of prior work
specifically capable of generating these constraints in
contrast to the more common unorganized stone forms.
        No change of information entropy
         ≠ lack of referential information
                                   reference

                                  medium
       potential                                        specific
        signals                                          signal

         initial     no                                unchanged
        entropy     work        (noise-entropy)         entropy
      Openness to the effects of the imposition of work and therefore
      to the propagation of constraint is the ground on which
      referential information depends.
      Zero message information = no change of signal entropy = no
      extrinsic work = information about the absence of something.
...   Reference is a function of the potential for extrinsic influence.
   Far-from-equilibrium media                          light
                           When work performed




                                                                   constantly active retinal neurons
                             by a medium that is
                              sensitive to specific
metal detector


                            external influences it
                             can provide referent
                             information about a
                                 specific class of
                                            objects
                                          relevant
                                             to that
                                          process.


                                     reference
                 passive                               disrupted
                 source                                  work
                           selective sensitivity
 Significance: work that saves work
Living processes are organized around the problem of
performing work to resist the increase of entropy.
Work requires “the constrained release of energy”
through a few degrees of freedom
Resources must be obtained from the environment
natural selection is in this respect a function of
competition over work efficiency both intrinsically
and in ability to efficiently utilize the environment.
Information provides constraints that help reorganize
the constraint-generating work of the organism.
Informational significance can be measured in work
saved in achieving some functional end with respect
to work needed to achieve it without that information
Significance/usefulness = work saved




                      >

The constraints exhibited in a given medium can
channel dynamics to reduce the total work required to
achieve a pre-determined functional end state.
The emergence of interpretive dynamics

 1. Homeodynamics (thermodynamics)
    Spontaneous constraint dissipation, reduction of
    correlation, loss of symmetries, equilibration
                                                                       e
 2. Morphodynamics (“self-organization”)
    Amplification of system-internal constraints/regularities due to
    the persistent extrinsic reversal of spontaneous dissipation

  3. Teleodynamics (life and semiosis)                                 e
    Self-reproducing/maintaining constraints producing
    synergistic interdependent coupling of morphodynamics
Reciprocal catalysis (autocatalytic set)




 Lysis of molecule a    Reciprocal catalysis occurs when
 into molecules b and   one catalytic reaction produces a
 c by catalyst e        product that catalyzes a second
 releases the energy    reaction which produces a
 of the broken          product that catalyzes the first
 covalent bonds         (and may involve multiple steps)
                            17
The morphodynamics of self-assembly




 viral capsule           lipid membrane       microtubule formation




                           Self-assembly occurs
                                  when the
                              complementary
                          geometry of molecular
                            surfaces facilitates
                         spontaneous tesselation
                                into sheets,
         viral capsule   polyhedrons, tubes, etc.       microtubules


                                     18
  Morphodynamic processes that each
produce the others’ boundary constraints
1. Reciprocal catalysis plus biproduct
 • Spontaneously self-amplifying catalytic chain-reaction
   with at least one energy-liberating reaction
 ∑ Produces high locally asymmetric concentrations of a
   small number of molecular species
 ∆ Requires limited diffusion of interdependent catalysts
2. Enclosure by self-assembly
 • Spontaneous molecular tesselation into a closed
   structure due to stereochemical matching
 ∆ Produces constraint on molecular diffusion
 ∑ Requires persistently high local concentrations of a
   single species of component molecule
                            19
Autogenesis: simplest                     # self-assembly
 interpretive system
When one of the molecular
products of a reciprocal                  @
                                                 catalyzed
catalytic cycle@ tends to self-                  reaction

assemble# into a closed
structure, encapsulation of the
ensemble of reciprocal            G


catalysts becomes likely.

    G         Gn




                                      n
            tubular               G           polyhedral
                           20                                1/2
    Morphodynamic constraint-
reciprocity => autogenic work cycle
Internal reciprocally-generated boundary
conditions enable preservation of the far-
   from-equilibrium dissipative system
This reciprocity constitutes a higher-order
 formal constraint that can be preserved
 indefinitely despite change of substrates




 1st order constraint                1st order constraint




               2nd order intrinsic constraint
  The multiple realizability of self
The higher-order synergy-constraint that constitutes
autogenesis persists irrespective of changes of the
underlying substrates and irrespective of whether
the system is in dynamic change or inert.
It is therefore not vested in any particular
component substrate or physico-chemical process.
It is substrate-transferrable; multiply realizable;
and formal even though physically embodied
It constitutes the continuity of an individual unit
over time, and the information that gets reproduced
and transmitted down a lineage.
     Teleodynamics creates “self”
It constitutes an individuated (i.e. closed and
integrated) unit system because it is organized to
actively initiate work to preserve its system-
preserving-dynamical organization.
This self-preserving/reproducing disposition creates
an unambiguous self/non-self distinction with
respect to potential dissipative influences and thereby
creates an Umwelt.
This higher-order formal constraint on the synergy of
component processes is a locus of agency that is
intrinsic to the system yet not one of its components
   Adaptive autogenesis = information
                              substrate




An autogen with a capsule surface structure that binds a substrate
molecule and thereby increases shell instability in proportion to
the number of bound substrates will increase the probability of
selective dissociation in supportive conditions, and not otherwise.
= Information about the relevant state of the environment with
respect to its intrinsic tendency for self-preservation; its telos.
                                26
      Limits to autogenic complexity
A combinatorial catastrophe: A fundamental problem for
systems employing many interdependent molecular
interactions is the proliferation of competing side reactions.
As the number of molecular species that need to interact
increases (e.g. in reciprocal catalysis or self-assembly), the
number of possible cross-reactions increases geometrically.
Only a small fraction of these will be supportive of
autogenesis and the proliferation of alternative interaction
possibilities will compete with supportive interactions —
using up critical components and wasting free energy.
The increase in possible side reactions will slow the
reconstitution and decrease the probability of persistence.
So simple autogenic systems have limited evolvability.
                              27
The possible molecular interactions grow
 exponentially with increasing numbers
The increase    x                z
in molecular            a
components
creates a     f                      b         possible
                                              molecular
                                             interactions
combinatorial
catastrophe                              a-f catalysts
              e     v        w       c
making
successful                               u-z &substrates
                                                products
                        d
autogenesis
improbable      u                y
                        28
Viable autogenic systems involve only a
small fraction of the possible reactions
                    x                    z
                              a                           non-
                                                       destructive
                                                        catalytic
                                                        reaction
                f                            b
                                                       molecular
                                                         trans-
                                                       formation
     u                   v         w         c         & synthesis
                e
                                                   a-f catalysts
                              d
 Autogenic                                         u-z &substrates
                                                          products
 reactions          u                    y
 How can deleterious side reactions be selectively inhibited?
                              29
An energy / information coincidence?



            ATP-ADP



Phosphate (+) serves as the
major vehicle for energy
transfer and signaling in
living cells. Phosphates can
polymerize (++) and are
conveyed throughout cells by
three-part molecules (base-
sugar-phosphate) such as     Why are they the building
ATP.                         blocks of RNA and DNA?
                         30
Energy-capturing autogenic reaction network

                                            g g g…
               e
                                f+g
     np-p-p              +e              np-p-

            n+c                              generic energetics
                                             relaxes constraints
                                             on substrate
     np-p-           p              d’       specificity and
                                             enables increased
e.g. nucleotide      extrinsic generic       complexity and
synthesis       +e   energy source           synthetic capacity
                               31
Nucleotide storage and phosphate
protection by polymerization
 In their inert enclosed state
 autogenic systems do not
 require and may be degraded
 by free energy.
 Nucleotides can be
 sequestered and phosphate
 residues made stable by
 nucleotide polymerization.
 This allows storage for later
 use via depolymerization.
                       32
Sequence-specific protein binding
   to a polynucleotide string
        sequence-dependent binding




       randomly generated sequence
To the extent that different nucleotides are not
distinguished with respect to their phosphate
binding capacity, the polymerization of
nucleotides will be unbiased with respect to
order in the inert phase of autogenesis,
but different sequences will tend to have different
affinities for binding specific proteins.
                       33
       Alignment of catalysts on a
      polynucleotide chain can bias
     catalytic reaction probabilities

        lower reaction        higher reaction               sequential
          probability           probability                  release &
                                                            availability




                                              catalyst D
                            catalyst C
catalyst A


               catalyst B




                                                                 E
                                                                 lyst
                                                              ata
                                                           --c
— polynucleotide sequence < - -
                                         34
      Template binding order ->
     reaction network constraint
  Template structure
  can constrain
  reaction probabilities
  to minimize unuseful
  interactions
1. a+z = b+e
2. a+b+x = c+b+e
3. b+c+y = f+a+d
4. c+d+e+f = g+d+e
 template-biased reactions
                             35
... leads to sequence-specific selection
 The relative proximity and orientation of catalyst
 molecules on a polymer template will bias the
 reaction probabilities between them due to
 distance and sequential timing of release.
 Sequences that constrain catalyst interaction
 probabilities closer to the optimal interaction
 network will be preferentially retained because of
 higher reproduction and repair rates.
 The template molecule thereby offloads some
 fraction of the higher order dynamical synergy
 constraint onto a structure that is effectively
 external to autogenic dynamics but constraints it.
 A preliminary to the origin of genetic information?
                         36                            51
