Information 2014, 5, 404-423; doi:10.3390/info5030404
                                                                                        OPEN ACCESS

                                                                          information
                                                                                  ISSN 2078-2489
                                                                   www.mdpi.com/journal/information
Article

Complexity and Dynamical Depth
Terrence Deacon 1,* and Spyridon Koutroufinis 2
1
    Department of Anthropology, 232 Kroeber, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
2
    Institute for Philosophy, Literature, and History of Science and Technology,
    Technical University of Berlin, Strasse des 17. Juni 135, 10623 Berlin, Germany;
    E-Mail: kout1967@mailbox.tu-berlin.de

* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: deacon@berkeley.edu;
  Tel.: +1-510-642-3392; Fax: +1-510-643-8557.

Received: 10 June 2014 / Accepted: 30 June 2014 / Published: 14 July 2014


      Abstract: We argue that a critical difference distinguishing machines from organisms and
      computers from brains is not complexity in a structural sense, but a difference in dynamical
      organization that is not well accounted for by current complexity measures. We propose a
      measure of the complexity of a system that is largely orthogonal to computational,
      information theoretic, or thermodynamic conceptions of structural complexity. What we
      call a system’s dynamical depth is a separate dimension of system complexity that
      measures the degree to which it exhibits discrete levels of nonlinear dynamical
      organization in which successive levels are distinguished by local entropy reduction and
      constraint generation. A system with greater dynamical depth than another consists of a
      greater number of such nested dynamical levels. Thus, a mechanical or linear
      thermodynamic system has less dynamical depth than an inorganic self-organized system,
      which has less dynamical depth than a living system. Including an assessment of dynamical
      depth can provide a more precise and systematic account of the fundamental difference
      between inorganic systems (low dynamical depth) and living systems (high dynamical
      depth), irrespective of the number of their parts and the causal relations between them.

      Keywords: complexity; dynamical system; self-organization; machine; organism;
      teleodynamics; morphodynamics; non-linear; computation; information
Information 2014, 5                                                                                   405

1. Introduction

   In his influential essay “The Architecture of Complexity,” published in 1962, Herbert Simon
provides an admirably plain and seemingly self-evident view of complexity: “Roughly, by a complex
system I mean one made up of a large number of parts that interact in a non-simple way [1] (p. 468).”
Because of the non-simplicity of their interactions “given the properties of the parts and the laws of
their interaction, it is not a trivial matter to infer the properties of the whole [1] (p. 468).” Simon’s
approach to complexity has been implicitly accepted by almost all attempts to define complexity in
different sciences. Since the 1960s many analytic and quantitative definitions of complexity have been
offered. There are two main categories: The first category includes methods developed by information
theorists and mathematicians who understand complexity in terms of a measure of the number of
distinguishable components times some measure of the number of possible non-redundant
(e.g., random) arrangements of these components with respect to one another. Members of the second
category try to capture a system’s complexity in terms of the number of its physical features or the
ways these features could have been produced. Members of this second category are more diverse, and
may involve considering the work and time involved in these processes. These theories also tend to be
responses to certain apparent paradoxes that arise when the assessment is limited to information
theoretic approaches.
   For example, intuition suggests that a living frog is far more complex that if those same molecules
were mixed up in a solution where they are randomly distributed. Using a commonly accepted measure
of information capacity of the first category—information entropy, developed by Claude Shannon in
1948 [2]—it would take less information to describe the details of the living frog than the “frog soup.”
That is because there is considerable redundancy in the organization of molecules in the living frog, so
that a vast number of correlated features do not need to be repeated again and again in the description,
whereas in solution these correlations have been eliminated.
   This suggests that one should rank the complexity of both fully ordered and nearly random
phenomena near zero and rank the organization of living phenomena to be high. This is exemplified by
the often-reproduced graph depicting this qualitative ideal, shown in Figure 1. The peak in the curve
representing maximum complexity presumably marks an optimal mix of ordered and disordered
relationships. But exactly how to justify what constitutes this optimal mix is a matter of considerable
debate, as is the justification for calling this complexity. Other than merely conforming to intuition and
subjective sensibility, no widely accepted clear and simple criterion for judging this to exemplify
maximal complexity is currently available.
   In response to this and related challenges, many alternative measures of complexity in the second
category have been developed. In the following discussion we will review some of the general features
of both general categories of complexity measures, discuss their limitations, and introduce an
additional complementary form of complexity unique to organisms that appears not to be accounted
for in any of the current approaches.
Information 2014, 5                                                                                 406

     Figure 1. Graphic depiction of the intuitively ideal measure of complexity that treats both
     completely random and completely ordered distributions as minimally complex, but treats
     organism complexity (coral surface; middle image) as highly complex.




1.1. Complexity as Randomness

    In his Mathematical Theory of Communication Claude Shannon demonstrated that the information
capacity of a communication channel could be assessed in terms of the degree of unpredictability of
any potential message it could convey. In the decades that followed a number of theorists, including
Ray Solomonoff [3,4], Andrej N. Kolmogorov [5], and Gregory J. Chaitin [6], independently
developed ways to define and measure the complexity of sequences of symbols that were analogous to
Shannon’s approach to measuring information capacity. Measures of this kind of complexity came to
be variously named algorithmic information content (AIC), Kolmogorov complexity, or simply
algorithmic complexity. In these approaches the complexity or information content of a string of
symbols is equated with the length of the shortest computer program or algorithm that can generate
this string (typically defined in terms of implementation on a universal Turing machine for maximum
generality). The algorithm is considered to be a compressed description of the string. If the string
consists of values that describe states of a physical system (e.g., measure values) the algorithm is a
measure of the compressibility of an abstract description of that physical phenomenon.
    Charles Bennett [7] developed a related measure of complexity, which was also independently
developed in a paper by Chaitin [8]. Bennett called it logical depth [7]. He defines logical or
algorithmic depth as the time that a universal Turing machine requires to execute the shortest algorithm
that generates a given sequence of symbols. The logical depth of such a sequence is directly related to
its Kolmogorov complexity, but additionally it takes into account the work involved in the generation
of that sequence. There are many other algorithmic definitions of complexity [9] (pp. 63–65), but
Information 2014, 5                                                                                   407

almost all are based on related assumptions and so for the purpose of the present paper these will be
considered variants of the general AIC paradigm.
   The concepts of complexity developed by Solomonoff, Kolmogorov, Chaitin, and Bennett are very
similar, and are also related to Shannon’s measure of entropy. They treat complexity as the inverse of
compressibility and identify ways to compress a signal or its description (such as a character string) by
virtue of discovering redundancies. However, whereas Shannon entropy only takes into account simple
statistical redundancy, the various algorithmic approaches can additionally take into account more
cryptic redundancies due to recursive aspects of the computational process capable of generating that
description. In effect, AIC approaches seek to identify the most compressed, i.e., shortest possible
description of a given phenomenon.
   The AIC approach to complexity was implicit in Herbert Simon’s [1] (p. 478) idea that “a system
can be described economically” if it has redundancy. So although Simon did not explicitly define
complexity as a measure of non-redundancy in the description of a physical phenomenon, his approach
anticipated this later development. The question that remains is whether the complexity of a
description and the complexity of the phenomenon described are equivalent.
   So the question is begged whether or not these methods which apply to abstract descriptions
(typically treated as binary strings) are also adequate to assess the complexity of real physical systems.
We discern five weaknesses or limitations in the use of AIC approaches to measure physical
complexity. First, even if physical systems are understood as spatial or temporal sequences of physical
differences they “do not come readily encoded as numbers [10] (p. 189)”. Second, as Chaitin [6]
showed, it is impossible to prove that a certain algorithm is indeed the shortest possible description of
a given sequence. Third, like Shannon’s concept of information, AIC and logical depth, does not
attempt to assess the meaning or function of the descriptions they analyze but only their syntactic
aspects. Any assessment of the complexity of physical phenomena needs to also consider any semantic
(referential) and pragmatic (functionally relevant) aspects of these descriptions, especially since these
aspects are critically relevant to biological and cognitive systems. Fourth, information theoretical
concepts of complexity only characterize descriptions of physical systems, not how they came about or
how they are causally organized. In this sense they refer to the “map” and not to the “territory.” This
may or may not reflect the causal relations inside a dynamical system. Fifth—and this is the biggest
problem for all methods that connect complexity to non-redundancy or randomness—the concept of
complexity underlying AIC and logical depth is counterintuitive. The information theoretical concepts
of complexity attributes higher complexity to an entirely chaotic phenomenon than to an ordered one.
Whereas the former cannot be described by a description that is shorter than a full list of attributes
because “no aspect of its structure can be inferred from any other” and therefore “it is its own simplest
description [1] (p. 478),” the latter can be compressed because of its internal regularities. Thus, the
information-theoretical and mathematical approach to complexity only identifies complexity with
incompressibility in one dimension of organization, whereas real physical systems may involve
multiple dimensions, including their generative history and functional attributes.
   This understanding of complexity therefore produces a paradoxical problem in that it effectively
treats a maximally disordered system and the random string of characters that describes it as more
complex than ones that exhibit interesting and/or unprecedented properties, such as being alive or
Information 2014, 5                                                                                    408

being conscious. Intuition suggests instead that a thoroughly random and maximally unpredictable, i.e.,
maximally incompressible, sequence (state to state, character to character) is simple in its organization.
   Clearly, the related definitions of complexity of Kolmogorov, Chaitin, Solomonoff, and Bennett are
well-suited for analyzing the complexity of descriptions that can be rendered in abstract sequences of
symbols, numbers, or computational steps, but will not be able to account for features that are not
distinguishable and countable in the immediately present physical object of analysis. Thus they often
lead to counterintuitive results when applied to dynamical systems. In order to understand the
complexity of such systems we need a more subtle measure that more accurately reflects features of a
system’s causal properties, not just the complexity of its description (whether formal or algorithmic).

1.2. Complexity and Physical Structure

    In the last three decades natural scientists, especially physicists and biologists, have introduced
concepts of complexity that focus on the organization of natural entities and not merely on the
regularities and irregularities of their formal descriptions. These attempts to assess the relative
complexity of physical structures are diverse and often specially formulated with respect to a particular
disciplinary context. As a result, they do not exhibit clear analytic parallels but only parallels in the
problems they address. We class them together based on their inclusion of physical, not just symbolic,
attributes into the analysis. Here, we survey a few of these measures in order to exemplify their
commonalities and their disciplinary diversity.
    The simplest way of quantifying complexity on the basis of structure is to count the number of a
system’s elements and/or interactions between them [11]. For example, some biologists [12] offer
definitions of organism complexity based on the number of different cell types, the number of
components, and the organism’s morphology, i.e., the number of structural elements and their
combinations, but generally agree than an increase in number of identical components should not count
toward an increase in complexity [9] (p. 74). Others define biological complexity “related to the diversity
or lack of self-similarity” of the interactions within a hierarchically organized system [13] (p. 130), see
also [14]. Such approaches rely on the way that the system components are categorized with respect to
similarities and differences in their identified properties. And what constitutes a proper part is not
always obvious. This inevitably introduces a subjective factor into the assessment and requires that
comparisons be based on identical categorization schemes. This is not a problem for AIC measures
based upon symbol counts or algorithm steps.
    Perhaps the physical measure of complexituy that is most similar to AIC measures and yet does not
reduce to a measure of randomness is the concept of effective complexity. This concept was introduced
by Murray Gell-Mann and Seth Loyd [15–17] in order to better take into account the organized
heterogeneity of natural systems. Their analysis splits the Kolmogorov complexity or algorithmic
information content describing an object into two separate categories: its regularities and its random
features. In contrast to AIC measures, however, an object’s effective complexity is defined as the AIC
of the regularities alone, i.e., the length of the shortest algorithm that can generate the regularities of
an empirical system or the sequence of symbols describing them [18]. This measure has the advantage
of conforming to the intuition that highly regular and highly random structures are judged minimally
complex while heterogeneously ordered structures intermediate between these extremes are more
Information 2014, 5                                                                                  409

complex. The concept of effective complexity has the disadvantage of being too sensitive to subjective
criteria, since the assessment of regularities depends on an external observer who decides which parts
of the system are to be considered regular versus irregular.
    Adami and Cerf developed a related concept they called physical complexity. Their approach was
developed specifically for application in biology, though it can be applied to “any sequence of symbols
that is about a physical world or environment [11].” Physical complexity is “an instance of effective
complexity [19] (p. 1087)”, but additionally considers functional relationships with respect to the
environment in which the system exists. It is defined as the Kolmogorov complexity (AIC) of the
bio-molecular sequences (e.g., genomes) of a population that encode the adaptations of the organisms
to specific features of their environments. The physical complexity of a genetic sequence is the amount
of information coded in the genetic material that can be mapped to specific features of the environment
to which it is adapting. This information is “given by the difference between the entropy of the
population in the absence of selection, and the entropy of the population given the environment, that is,
given the selective forces that the environment engenders”. (ibid.) All entropies are calculated using
the Shannon entropy of this distribution. It is an attempt to measure that fraction of the information
encoded in a genome that enables an organism to make predictions about its environment and hence
increases its chance of survival (ibid.). Though counting coding genes appears less subjective than
counting structural regularities, the complex nonlinear relationships between genes and phenotypes
and between organisms and their environments depends on some difficult to defend simplifying
assumptions.
    Following a different logic, Bialek and Tishby [20] developed a concept that they called predictive
information. It is based on the principle of the extensivity of entropy [11]. Systems are called
“extensive” if their entropy grows linearly with the increase of the number of their elements. Since
systems that contain elements whose causal interactions differ at different levels of scale their
statistical entropy will tend to be a nonlinear function of their size. So the degree to which a system
deviates from extensivity can be used to measure the degree of the interaction diversity of its elements.
In this respect predictive information is a measure of what might also be described as network
complexity and is particularly sensitive to the presence of local inhomogeneities and long-distance
interactions. This makes it particularly well-suited for analyzing structures such as brains where there
are complicated scale-dependent connection differences.
    Another approach applicable to brain complexity called neural information was developed by
Tononi and colleagues [21]. It is related to predictive information. Despite the name, neural
information is applicable to all kinds of empirical systems not just brains. “One of its building blocks
is integration” which “is computed as the difference between the sum of the component’s individual
entropies and the joint entropy of the system as a whole [11].” The concept of integration (like
non-extensivity) also measures the degree to which a system’s entropy deviates from additivity
(i.e., linearity).
    Finally, Seth Lloyd and Heinz Pagels [10] introduced the concept of thermodynamic depth in an
effort to overcome the lack of causal relevance of the concept of logical depth and of AIC conceptions
of complexity in general. Thermodynamic depth was conceptualized as a quantity that characterizes
“the evolution of a state and not the state itself [10] (p. 187).” Lloyd and Pagels [10] proceed from the
fact that there are many possible trajectories, which can lead a system to a given macroscopic state in
Information 2014, 5                                                                                   410

its state-space. They define the depth of a system’s macroscopic state as “the amount of information
required to specify the trajectory that the system has followed to its present state [10] (p. 190).” For
example “the genetic complexity [thermodynamic depth] of an organism is proportional to the amount
of genetic information tried out and discarded by the process of natural selection on the ancestors of
the organism [10] (p. 209)” because of the number of possible ways this process could have occurred.
In this way they claim that [thermodynamic depth] “assigns low complexity to random and highly
ordered but regular states [10] (p. 208)” so that a crystal and a gas at equilibrium will both have low
thermodynamic depth because of the close values of their course-grained and fine-grained
entropies [10] (p. 190). Thermodynamic depth is correlated with the uncertainty of specifying the
possible trajectories by which a system could have arrived at its current state. This is effectively a
measure of the entropy of possible trajectories, whereas other measures of complexity are based on
possible configurations of a system’s macroscopic state. Thermodynamic depth can be as high in
non-living systems, such as computational devices or nonlinear processes, as in organisms.
    These approaches were developed in order to overcome the shortcomings of the information
theoretical approaches to complexity, and they succeed in two critical respects. Since they have been
designed to characterize real material systems they are sufficient to describe features of their physical
structure. They also avoid some of the counterintuitive assessments of a system’s complexity because,
in opposition to the information theoretical approaches, they identify a system’s complexity with the
diversity of its component physical relationships. Since they consider the regularities of a system and
not merely its irregularities they reflect aspects of what might be described as the inner coherence of a
system’s causal organization as reflected in its spatiotemporal relations. We ascribe inner coherence to
a system which allows an observer of a part of it to anticipate to a certain degree other aspects of the
same system. The parts of internally coherent systems contain information, although often vague,
about the whole system. Inner coherence enhances the compressibility of a system’s description
because it increases the ability to predict its organization from partial knowledge of it. But structural
redundancies are judged less complex by AIC standards.
    Despite their advances over AIC measures of complexity, physical approaches still suffer from a
serious limitation. Their main common characteristic is that they are designed to quantify the
complexity of phenomena by counting structural features and/or the amount of work that produced
them. They analyze a system’s phenomenal regularities and/or entropy but do not attempt to
characterize the qualitative differences of their causal organization. To be able to identify the forms of
complexity that make living and mental processes so causally distinctive we need to be able to
additionally assess these qualitative differences in causal organization. Unlike non-living processes a
living system is dynamically organized to do work to modify its own organization with respect to
interactions with its environment. So not only does this require an assessment of its composition and
the amount of work required to produce or describe it, it also requires an assessment of this dynamical
self-organization.

2. Open Systems: Self-Organization and Organisms

  The different ways that compressibility is used to assess complexity in information-theoretical as
compared to physical approaches, demonstrates both the relevance of this property and also the way
Information 2014, 5                                                                                    411

that it applies differently to descriptions as compared to actual physical structures. The role of
compressibility in assessing complexity is further complicated with respect to what are often called
complex dynamical systems. Interest in dynamical systems and “chaotic” processes developed along
with major advances in non-linear mathematics and an explosive increase in computing power (which
made realistic simulations of complex physical processes possible). As dynamical systems theories
have developed over the years to be able to more precisely describe open systems and their coupling
with the environment, research interest has focused on dissipative systems. These are thermodynamic
systems that are maintained far-from-equilibrium for some period of time. Of particular interest are
thermodynamic systems that are being constantly perturbed away from equilibrium. In the process of
continually dissipating this disturbance they can develop toward highly organized dynamical
configurations. These so-called “self-organized” systems have provided important models for
exploring the difference between simple mechanistic systems and biological systems.
   The most essential feature of self-organized processes is that their local statistical entropy decreases
which correspondingly increases their inner coherence and thus their predictability. In physical terms
we can say that they compress the trajectories of their future development into small fractions of their
state-space; regions called “attractors.” We will refer to this real compressibility as dynamical
compressibility because it is a consequence of the activity of the system itself. Dynamical
compressibility allows an external observer to create highly compressed abstract descriptions of such
systems. So, there is an intrinsic relation between the dynamical compressibility of self-organized
dynamic systems and the compressibility of the formal descriptions of those systems. As we will show
below, physical processes that spontaneously develop toward a more compressed state pose some
interesting challenges for measures of complexity that are based on the compressibility of the
formal descriptions.
   Self-organization is a technical term. Invoking the term “self” is intended to signal that the increase
of a dynamic system’s orderliness is the result of interactions among its components and not the result
of the imposition of this form of organization from some extrinsic source. However, less precise usage
often invokes a more expansive conception of self, which includes biological agency. This confuses
two very distinctive causal dynamics—those that are associated with inorganic processes that speed
their dissolution by maximizing entropy production and those associated with living processes that
preserve their organization by acting to counter degrading influences. Failure to distinguish between
these two very different classes of dynamical processes ignores a significant difference in their causal
organization: they abide by two essentially different logics of constraints. This distinction will be the
focus of the final sections of this paper.
   It is widely accepted that living systems depend on cellular and chemical dynamics that exhibit self-
organization. There are, however, good reasons to question the ability of dynamical systems models to
adequately assess the complexity of organism dynamics. In artifacts the target states that are invariably
approached by such processes play no role in the constitution of the physical systems that produce
them. In contrast this role is fundamental to the forms of causality characterizing organisms.
Self-organized processes develop in response to persistent gradients of energy and/or material that
maintain them away from thermodynamic equilibrium, but this resulting regularization maximizes the
reduction of the very gradient that produces it. In other words: Each self-organized system tends to
evolve toward a dynamical form that would return the system to equilibrium in the most efficient way
Information 2014, 5                                                                                    412

possible were the external gradients to become exhausted. This essential property of dissipative
dynamic systems is known as the principle of maximum entropy production (MEP) [22]. According to
the second law of thermodynamics all physical processes produce entropy. Self-organization is
characteristic of dynamical thermodynamic systems maintained far from equilibrium that not only
increase global entropy but also increase the rate of entropy production in a way that compensates for
any imposition of additional energy and/or material. The order that emerges inside such a system
enables it to offload the destabilizing influence of an energy/material gradient more quickly and with
less work than if its dynamics were not regularized.
    So, self-organization is paradoxically self-undermining in this respect. There is nothing internal to a
self-organized dynamical system to maintain this order in the absence of external gradients, nor any
mechanism to compensate for changes in this external support. In this respect it is not accurate to claim
that self-organized systems are the sources of their own organization, and so the term “self” is
ultimately a metaphoric use in this context. Koutroufinis [23] describes this kind of dynamics as
“self-organization without self.”
    One reason to be suspicious of the completeness of any theory of complexity based on some
measure of compressibility is that it will fail to adequately account for ongoing physical processes that
involve the sort of dynamical compression that characterized self-organized processes. Superficially
the structure of a self-organized dissipative structure (e.g., a whirlpool or a growing snow crystal) can
be highly regular and therefore algorithmically compressible, and yet this is because the process that
produces this regularity has reduced the irregularity and entropy within that structure. A descriptive
compression of an already physically compressed state eliminates critical information about the
stochastic nonlinear dynamics that produced and maintains that compressed physical form.
    This problematic situation is resolved by recognizing that there may be two complementary aspects
of complexity that are relevant to the assessment of dynamically compressed systems: one associated
with the structure of its physical features and one associated with how the regularities of its dynamical
features are generated and actively maintained.
    Below we will argue that organisms add an additional level of dynamical compression beyond what
is present in non-organic self-organizing dynamic processes. This is a consequence of the way that
living processes invert three defining features of self-organization. First, organisms do not maximize
entropy production but rather tend to more efficiently organize entropy production with respect to
the work they do to persist and reproduce. Second, because of this, their dynamical organization is not
self-undermining, even though it incorporates features of self-organization. Third, organism dynamics
is specifically self-beneficial and depends on system-internal rather than system external determinants
of its organization. These attributes cannot be a consequence of simply additively combining
self-organized processes. Together these dynamical differences contribute to the added level of
complexity that distinguishes living from non-living systems irrespective of their relative degrees of
algorithmic or physical-structural complexity.
    For these reason we require a new concept of complexity that emphasizes those characteristics of
organism dynamics that make them unique among dynamically compressed systems. It must both
account for the dynamical compression that occurs via self-organization and also the ways that living
processes diverge from all non-living processes.
Information 2014, 5                                                                                      413

3. Dynamical Depth: An Orthogonal Form of Complexity

   In an effort to clearly distinguish living dynamics from nonliving dynamics, Deacon [24] identifies
three modes of system dynamics that are distinguished by their hierarchic (i.e., nested) dependencies
and their reversals of spontaneous global dynamical tendencies to reach different kinds of stable
end-states (or attractors), if they are provided with the required time to do so. These dynamical modes
include homeodynamics (e.g., processes at or near thermodynamic equilibrium), morphodynamics
(e.g., non-chaotic dissipating processes such as exemplified by self-organizing systems), and
teleodynamics (e.g., self-preserving processes such as exemplified by living systems). These
dynamical modes define distinctive levels of what we will call dynamical depth, because they involve
the nesting of stochastic dynamical processes within one another. In this section we show how this
measure of complexity is distinguished from the various complexity measures discussed above.
   These three dynamical modes are also distinguished by differences in the ways they eliminate,
introduce, or preserve constraints. The term “constraints” refers to all factors that reduce the number of
the possible states of a system, so that its behavior resides only in a limited part of its state space. Since
entropy increases with the number of a system’s possible states, it follows that constrained systems are
not in the state of their maximum possible entropy and therefore are able to perform work. Constraints
can be imposed from outside on a system or can be generated internally, i.e., by a system’s own
dynamics. We describe the former as extrinsic and the latter as intrinsic constraints.
   Linear thermodynamic processes, which characterize homeodynamic systems, epitomize the first
level of dynamical depth. They are defined by their spontaneous tendency to eliminate constraints, and
thus increase entropy. The natural end-state of a homeodynamic system is the state of maximum
possible entropy, which is also the state of maximum possible elimination of constraints. An isolated
thermodynamic system (i.e., a multi-particle system which is energetically and materially closed, like a
gas in a fixed size container) moves always towards the state of the system’s maximum possible
entropy, which is also the state of zero entropy production or thermodynamic equilibrium. Chemical
reactions in an isolated system also tend to exhaust their “free energy” and thus their potential to
asymmetrically change from one state of chemical relationships to another. At this point the system
has reached chemical and thermodynamic equilibrium i.e., the end-state in which the concentrations of
the reactants and products do not change. Simple non-idealized mechanical systems, such as a
harmonic oscillator or a pendulum with friction, as well as compound mechanical (e.g., clockwork)
systems occupy the same level of dynamical depth because they do not generate any new constraints
but only eliminate externally imposed constraints (i.e., energetic gradients). A mechanical clockwork
degrades the potential energy which is stored in its spring. It could only generate new constraints if it
were able to reposition its own gears into other configurations as a consequence of its own internal
movements. The essential common feature of non-idealized (e.g., frictional) mechanical systems and
isolated multiple particle systems (e.g., gases) is that they both reach the state of maximum possible
elimination of constraints. At this point a homeodynamic system has exhausted its capacity to do
further work (whether mechanical, chemical, or thermodynamic). Finally, we also class among the first
level of dynamical depth all current forms of computational devices so far constructed or
conceptualized. It is easy to understand this conclusion if one considers that, in principle, all operations
of electronic computers can also be implemented (at least in principle) by mechanical devices.
Information 2014, 5                                                                                      414

   A second deeper level of dynamical depth is produced by self-organization. As noted above,
self-organization arises in the special case where an externally imposed energetic and/or material
gradient (i.e., extrinsic constraints) are introduced into a partially open dissipative system at a rate that
exceeds the rate at which that system can spontaneously dissipate them. As a result the system’s
dynamics changes in a way that allows it to increase dissipation of externally introduced energy and/or
matter, so that the rate of their dissipation matches the rate of their imposition. This is achieved when
the system’s dynamics reorganizes itself and becomes spatiotemporally regularized (i.e., dynamically
compressed) in ways that compensate for the effect of being continually driven away from equilibrium
by the external gradient. Deacon [24] terms such processes morphodynamic processes because of the
way that they internally generate these regularities; i.e., spatiotemporal patterns. So, a critical feature
that distinguishes morphodynamic processes from merely homeodynamic processes is that
morphodynamic processes generate new constraints (i.e., spatiotemporal patterns) locally. Thus
morphodynamic systems develop intrinsic constraints that dissipate the imposed extrinsic constraints.
   A well known example of intrinsic constraint generation is the pattern of hexagonal convection
cells (Bénard cells) that emerge when a thin layer of liquid (e.g., oil) is heated from below to a
temperature beyond which simple conduction can dissipate this imposed heat (see Figure 2).
Morphodynamic processes will tend to spontaneously regenerate their intrinsic constraints if random
perturbations damage their pattern so long as the supportive externally imposed gradients persist
within certain limits. Intrinsic constraints in a morphodynamic process persist because they efficiently
degrade extrinsic constraints. Since they depend on persistent extrinsic constraints intrinsic constraints
cannot contribute to their own persistence. They can only degrade these extrinsic constraints. This
special correspondence between intrinsic and extrinsic constraints does not, however, support the
system’s self-preservation. It is effectively organized in a way that would hasten its self-destruction,
were extrinsic supports removed.

      Figure 2. Depiction of Rayleigh-Bénard convection cells formed in a thin volume of liquid
      (e.g., oil) heated from the bottom and cooled from above. Correlated movement of fluid
      orthogonal to the temperature gradient is driven by density differences due to heat content
      and the hexagonal regularity emerges as the closest-packed tessellation of units per surface
      area. The result is maximization of the diffusion of heat through the liquid.
Information 2014, 5                                                                                   415

   Finally, and most critical for this analysis, at a third level of dynamical depth are what Deacon [24]
terms teleodynamic processes. Teleodynamic processes emerge from precisely complementary,
interdependent morphodynamic processes. This complementary relationship is such that the supportive
boundary conditions for each component morphodynamic process are generated by one or more of the
other morphodynamic processes in the system. As a result the otherwise highly improbable boundary
conditions that make the component morphodynamic processes possible can be preserved to become
highly probable. Such a combination of boundary constraints would otherwise be astronomically
improbable to occur spontaneously. Deacon [24] describes a molecular model system called an
autogen (or autocell [25]), which precisely exemplifies an empirically testable form of this distinctive
dynamical organization and its unique systemic attributes (see Figure 3).

     Figure 3. Left: The reaction network of a simple autogenic process. Right: Idealized
     depiction of an autogenic complex in formation. An autogen is formed when a reciprocally
     autocatalytic set of molecules (C and F) modifies available substrate molecules (A, B & D) to
     produce (along with additional Cs and Fs) a side product (G) that tends to self-assemble (#)
     into an impermeable container (a process analogous to the formation of a virus capsule).
     Such a system will tend to reconstitute itself if disrupted and reproduce duplicate systems if
     sufficiently disrupted. Modified with permission from Deacon [24].




   This complementarity and interdependence constitutes a yet higher order form of constraint on the
constraint-generation of the component morphodynamic processes. The most essential characteristic of
any teleodynamic system is the internal generation of such a higher order constraint. In other words,
teleodynamics consists in a higher order intrinsic constraint that constitutes the synergy of the lower
order morphodynamic processes. This higher order constraint increases the probability that these same
component morphodynamic processes will persist despite changes in extrinsic conditions. The result is
a tendency to behave in a way that makes this distinctive form of self-reconstituting dynamics highly
likely to persist, re-form if disrupted, and even become reproduced if the basic ingredients for the
formation of the autogen are available.
   A critical criterion for any means of quantifying relative complexity is that there must be discrete
countable features or elements. The difficulty of identifying “proper parts” or clearly distinguishable
Information 2014, 5                                                                                  416

relations has often been a problem for measures of complexity that have been developed in order to
compare biological and non-biological phenomena. This arises in part from the fact that the
relationships between organisms structures and functions (e.g., genes and adaptations) is seldom
simple and linear and because biological molecules co-produce one another. The concept of
“dynamical depth” avoids those difficulties because it does not depend on the identification of “proper
parts.” Instead, it focuses on discrete inversions of thermodynamic trends that are qualitative features
of these three forms of dynamics. Therefore, one distinctive characteristic of dynamical depth is that it
does not increase in a continuous transition, but rather in quantized increments. The transitions from
homeo- to morpho- and from morpho- to teleodynamics always occur abruptly, roughly comparable to
first order phase transitions in physics. These levels of dynamical depth refer to fundamentally
discontinuous “qualities” of systemic organization; between them there are no intermediate stages.
This discontinuity is defined by the distinct inversions of certain dynamical system tendencies
occurring at these transitions. Thus for example, isolated homeodynamic systems tend to develop to a
point where there is no further entropy production (equilibrium), morphodynamic systems tend to
increase their entropy production, and teleodynamic systems tend to develop toward minimizing the
amount of entropy production necessary to remain far-from-equilibrium (see for example, Falkner and
Falkner [26]). So, although dynamical depth does not provide a large range in magnitude, it has the
virtue of unambiguously delineated countable thresholds marking increasing constraint of lower order
dynamical processes by higher order dynamical processes.
    The progressive internalization of constraint generation with increasing levels of dynamical depth
exemplifies another defining attribute: an increase in what can be described as organizational
autonomy. Thus the organization of homeodynamic processes is entirely dependent upon extrinsically
imposed conditions, whereas the organization of morphodynamic (e.g., self-organized) processes is
additionally a function of the ways that the components of the medium in question tend to interact. As
a result morphodynamic processes generate intrinsic constraints whose forms are independent of the
form of the extrinsic constraints that drive the system to generate them. Teleodynamic systems
demonstrate an even greater degree of organizational autonomy and are the only systems that can be
described as self-organized in a non-metaphoric sense of self.
    There are several reasons to ascribe selfhood to teleodynamic systems:
   (1) The end-directedness of a teleodynamic system cannot be adequately described as an
       “attractor,” as this concept is understood in dynamical systems theories. The constrained
       dynamics that constitutes a morphodynamic attractor develops as a consequence of externally
       imposed environmental influences (i.e., extrinsic constraints). In contrast, the state toward
       which a teleodynamic system develops tends to resist environmental influences. This is because
       its higher order intrinsic constraint prevents the disruption of the synergy between the
       component morphodynamic processes that determines its unity. The teleodynamic target
       state—i.e., the self-preservation of this synergy—is in this respect a higher order attractor.
   (2) Teleodynamic systems are organized in a way that preserves and re-generates their own
       intrinsic constraints. A teleodynamic system interacts with its environment in a way that
       sustains supportive relationships with its environment and compensates for unsupportive or
       destructive relationships, e.g., by repairing or reproducing itself [24]. A teleodynamic system
Information 2014, 5                                                                                    417

      can therefore be said to include an implicit self-representation that persists despite a partial loss
      of system coherence, and with respect to which coherent organization can be re-achieved.
  (3) In contrast to morphodynamic attractors, the higher order attractor of a teleodynamic system
      plays a critical role in its own generation. Since attractor generation is a form of dynamical
      compression teleodynamic systems can be considered self-compressing systems. This is a new
      type of compression that might be described as the compression of the relationships between
      compression processes. Above we have noted that complexity theories treat description as a
      form of compression, so it is not unreasonable to describe this higher order form of
      compression as information that represents and regulates the dynamics that maintains system
      integrity with respect to forces that tend to disrupt it. In this respect we might be justified in
      saying that organisms are literally self-referring. Because of this self-referentiality
      teleodynamic organization may not be adequately describable by formalisms that are adequate
      to describe non-living dynamical systems (see Koutroufinis [23,27]).
  (4) A teleodynamic system implicitly incorporates within its organization information about those
      aspects of its environment that are specifically relevant to its self-maintenance and
      reproduction. This information is embodied in the specific organization of the set of
      compression processes that maintain system integrity with respect to potentially beneficial or
      harmful aspects of its environment. Teleodynamic systems thus have an Umwelt and not just
      “surroundings” as do merely reactive morphodynamic systems. In 1909 Jakob von Uexküll
      introduced the term Umwelt referring to those features of a living being’s environment to which
      they are sensitive. Umwelt and self are two sides of the same. This is characterized by
      biosemiotician Kalevi Kull’s [28] translation of Umwelt as “self-centered world.” In simple
      terms, this it is the creation of a self/other boundary, which implicitly incorporates a
      representation of this Umwelt.
  (5) The distinction between self-compression, self-representation, and representation of the
      environment does not imply three different activities of the system but only three aspects of the
      system’s integrated dynamics. The higher order intrinsic constraint organizes processes
      distributed over the entire system in such a coherent way that one and the same material-
      energetic process might contribute to all three activities.
   Self in this sense is a dynamical process organized in such a way that it minimizes the probability
that its organization will be lost. Inevitably, the conditions conducive to generating this distinctive
dynamical configuration are far less probable than those producing self-organized dynamics alone. The
fundamental behavioral tendency of living systems is to maintain these rare supportive conditions by
internally generating and preserving those that are least likely to arise spontaneously. This curious
causal-circularity linking living processes to the production of their own preconditions is why living
complexity is not adequately described by non-dynamical conventional measures of complexity.
   What we term dynamical depth then, is this hierarchic complexity and irreducibility of
constraint-generating dynamics, such as distinguishes teleodynamics from morphodynamics and
morphodynamics from homeodynamics. Each of these transitions is characterized by the generation of
intrinsic constraints on the relationships between processes at lower levels and as a result with
increasing autonomy from extrinsically imposed constraints. Since constraints are a prerequisite for
Information 2014, 5                                                                                    418

producing physical work, the increasing autonomy of constraint generation with dynamical depth also
corresponds to an increasing diversity of the capacity to do work. Thus the flexibility with which a
dynamical system can interact with its environment also increases with dynamical depth.
   Finally, dynamical depth is an orthogonal measure of complexity with respect to algorithmic
measures of complexity. This defines two distinct dimensions of complexity that can vary
independently. Algorithms and descriptions of considerable AIC complexity lack dynamical depth.
Algorithms and descriptions are symbolic structures. As such they are non-physical processes but
timeless abstract entities. So, they can neither be described in terms of entropy or entropy production
nor in terms of degradation or generation of constraints. In comparison any electronic/mechanical
implementation of the corresponding computation processes would exhibit a first level of dynamical
depth due to its thermodynamics. And even though the AIC complexity of a living frog may be lower
than that of its molecules homogenized in a solution, its dynamical depth will be many levels deeper.

4. Conclusions

    Throughout this discussion we have discovered again and again that the concept of compression is
critical to the definition and assessment of complexity. The concept of compression is intimately
related to both constraint and description.
    In the AIC conception of complexity, more compressible equals less complex and less compressible
equals more complex. The compressibility of a description or algorithm is in effect a measure of
constraint exhibited by the physical system being described. As Shannon’s original analysis
demonstrated, the measure of information of a received message is proportional to the constraint
exhibited in that sign/signal medium compared to its possible prior Shannon entropy. The degree of
compressibility is then related to how much information is provided by a given signal. This fits with
the common intuitive sense that the power of a description or explanation is related to its compactness
with respect to the amount of detail it accounts for.
    Analogously, a physical system that is more constrained in its dynamics than another occupies a
smaller fraction of the phase space of the system’s possible states. In this respect, the system can be
described as dynamically compressed. Since dynamical compression of a self-organized or living
system develops over time there is a progressive reduction in local entropy up to the point that it settles
into a quasi-stable low-entropy dynamical behavior (often described as an attractor). To measure some
version of the system’s AIC complexity, then, will fail to assess the amount of system entropy that was
initially reduced and is being constantly offloaded by system dynamics.
    For this reason, AIC measures of complexity, which work well for analyzing complexity in terms of
the compressibility of an adequate description, algorithm, or construction process, tend to yield
paradoxical results when applied to living processes. Above, we have surveyed a few of the many
attempts to develop a measure of physical complexity that rank both highly disordered and highly
ordered structures as low complexity and rank a mix of ordered and disordered structures as highly
complex. The difficulty with these approaches is finding a way to objectively justify which features to
count and what amounts to an optimal combination of order and randomness. Additionally, we argue
that they confound two distinct and opposed applications of the concept of compression.
Information 2014, 5                                                                                 419

   We approach this problem by paying attention to the ways that the stochastic processes in
self-organized and living systems are themselves dynamically compressed. This avoids problems that
arise due to applying an AIC compression analysis to the results of a physical compression process. A
physical system, that has developed to a state that continually minimizes its local entropy, such as
occurs in morphodynamic processes, has a low apparent AIC complexity. Therefore, assessing only its
AIC complexity effectively ignores this dynamical compression and the local system entropy that is
thereby actively kept low. At the higher levels of dynamical organization that characterizes living
organisms there are additional constraints that maintain interdependence between their component
morphodynamic compression processes. This introduces a higher order level dynamical compression
over and above these component compression processes. Since this higher order compression is what
maintains organism integrity it is in effect a form of self-compression. In order to accurately model
organism complexity, it is necessary to strictly separate the description of these dynamical
compression processes from the description of their consequent effect. Both are relevant dimensions of
organism complexity.
   The concept of dynamical depth provides an accounting of each distinct level of suppressed
dynamical complexity even though it does not assess the actual reduction of entropy at that level. With
each additional increment of dynamical depth beyond morphodynamics it is no longer possible to
preserve the strict distinction between dynamical compression and analytical compression; physical
organization and algorithmic description. This is because living (teleodynamic) processes limit the
variety of possible forms of constraint-generating processes, rather than any specific physico-chemical
process. In this respect they are like descriptive compressions or representations. This is, of course,
characteristic of the role of DNA in living organisms and is what warrants describing DNA structures as
containing information contributing to the functional design of the organism. This implicit
incorporation of a compressed self-representation explains why assessing the complexity of organisms
requires a subtler concept of complexity than is required for assessing the complexity of non-living
processes. Organisms decompress (re-expand) this information during their development by virtue of the
way this information constrains the organization of morphodynamic epigenetic processes. So to ignore
this dynamical infrastructure is to ignore the complexity of life’s complexity-generating process.
   Although in this paper we have only applied the concept of dynamical depth to three levels of
nested dynamics, it should be obvious that there can be additional higher order dynamics layered on
top of what is characteristic of simple organisms. Complex organisms may occupy different levels of
dynamical depth during different adaptive phases or life stages and may even subdivide into
components of different dynamical depth.
   For example, consider slime molds (e.g., the Dictyostelids, or cellular slime molds). Large
undifferentiated colonies of these amoeboid protists can form large gelatinous sheets of individuals,
but under stressed conditions individual amoeba secrete cAMP which acts to cause the surrounding
amoebae to aggregate toward its highest concentrations and to form into a slug-like mobile
superindividual. This aggregation is a morphodynamic process in which differential cAMP
concentration within the colony progressively constrains the uncorrelated behaviors of individual
amoebae. It is in this respect a higher-order homeodynamic-to-morphodynamic transition occurring
among individual single cell organisms that are themselves characterized by three levels of dynamical
depth. So this might be characterized as a transition from a fourth to a fifth level of dynamical depth.
Information 2014, 5                                                                                  420

This relationship is depicted in an idealized graph in Figure 4, along with a number of other
phenomena in order to illustrate progressively deeper levels of dynamical depth. The graph extends
beyond inorganic morphodynamic (i.e., self-organized) processes, protolife (autogenesis), simple
single cell organisms, such as bacteria (teleodynamic systems), to include slime molds in different
organizations and even a frog, as an exemplar of a teleodynamic system composed of interacting
teleodynamic components (cells).

     Figure 4. Idealized graphic illustration of the complexity relationships between
     representative systems exhibiting different algorithmic information content (AIC) and
     dynamical depths. AIC is depicted on a log scale due to the immense values involved.
     Dynamical depth is linear, but since each level reflects an immense reduction in entropy at
     a lower level each increment likely also involves a vast increase in the amount of reduced
     entropy. The integer values of dynamical depth are assigned subscripts to indicate levels of
     homeodynamic (h), morphodynamic (m), and teleodynamic (t) patterns of organization,
     and the double subscripts indicate higher order (recursive) dynamical depth in which
     teleodynamic unit systems (e.g., organisms) are themselves involved in homeodynamic (ht),
     morphodynamic (mt), or teleodynamic (tt) patterns of interaction. Each system’s value of
     AIC is only meant to show rank order assuming that in the ideal case they could be
     measured with the same metric. Both dimensions lack upper limits. “Frog soup” is intended
     to describe a well-mixed solution containing all the molecules making up an adult frog. It is
     uncertain how to rank the dynamical depth of human minds since they are embedded in
     elaborate spatially and temporally extended symbolic social networks, though their
     dynamical depth will inevitably be considerably greater than the other systems depicted.




   The dynamical depth of the global signaling dynamics within brains (whose neuronal components
are themselves teleodynamic units) may involve additional levels of higher order homeo-, morpho- and
Information 2014, 5                                                                                  421

even teleodynamic communicative interactions. The brain’s capacity to produce level-upon-level of
increasing dynamical depth is a consequence of the potential for massively non-linear recurrent signal
processing within a highly interconnected web of billions of incessantly active neurons. Paying
attention to this substantial increase in dynamical depth may help explain many of the striking
differences distinguishing biological cognition from computation.
    These relationships between entropy and complexity, compression and constraint, and their
counterparts in processes of description, explanation, and representation are fundamental to the
complexity that we recognize in living and mental processes. This makes the concept of dynamical
depth a critical missing link in the chain of concepts required to build a complete theory of complexity.
By ignoring the multiple levels whereby life’s compression processes give rise to dynamical and
functional organization, we exclude from analysis a vast fraction of the complexity that distinguishes
living and mental processes from inorganic mechanical and computational processes. Indeed, the very
concept of information (i.e., compressed description) is implicit in the higher order form of constraint
that characterizes teleodynamics. So a formal analysis of living and mental phenomena is
fundamentally incomplete unless it captures this semiotic-physical interwovenness created by life’s
dynamical depth.

Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the following colleagues for their many editorial comments
(alphabetical order): Diego Caleiro, Tyrone Cashman, Mark Carranza, Julie Hui, Stefan Leijnen,
Robert Logan, Jay Ogilvy, Jeremy Sherman, Alok Srivastava, Rodrigo Vanegas, Adrian Wyard,
Hajime Yamauchi.

Author Contributions

   Both authors have contributed equally to this article in analyses and writing. Both authors have read
and approved the final manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest

     The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1.    Simon, H.A. The architecture of complexity. Proc. Am. Philos. Soc. 1962, 106, 467–482.
2.    Shannon, C. The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 1948, 27, 379–423.
3.    Solomonoff, R. A formal theory of inductive inference part I. Inf. Control 1964, 7, 1–22.
4.    Solomonoff, R. A formal theory of inductive inference part II. Inf. Control 1964, 7, 224–254.
5.    Kolmogorov, A.N. Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information. Probl. Inf.
      Transm. 1965, 1, 1–7.
6.    Chaitin, G.J. Algorithmic information theory. IBM J. Res. Dev. 1977, 21, 350–359.
Information 2014, 5                                                                               422

7.  Bennett, C. Logical depth and physical complexity. In The Universal Turing Machine—a
    Half-Century Survey; Herken, R., Ed.; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1988;
    pp. 227–257.
8. Chaitin, G.J. On the length of programs for computing finite binary sequences. J. Assoc. Comput.
    Mach. 1966, 13, 547–569.
9. Christen, M. Zweifel am Rande des Chaos. Available online: http://www.encyclog.com/_upl/files/
    liz_total2.pdf (accessed on 30 April 2014). (In German)
10. Lloyd, S.; Pagels, H. Complexity as thermodynamic depth. Ann. Phys. 1988, 188, 186–213.
11. Sporns, O. Complexity. Available online: http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Complexity
    (accessed on 30 April 2014).
12. McShea, D.W. Metazoan complexity and evolution: Is there a trend? Evolution 1995, 50, 477–492.
13. Huberman, B.A. The adaptation of complex systems. In Theoretical Biology; Goodwin, B.,
    Saunders, P., Eds.; The John Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, MD, USA, 1992; pp. 124–133.
14. Huberman, B.A.; Hogg, T. Complexity and adaptation. Physica D 1986, 22, 376–384.
15. Gell-Mann, M. What is complexity? Complexity 1995, 1, 16–19.
16. Gell-Mann, M.; Lloyd, S. Effective complexity. In Nonextensive Entropy; Santa Fe Institute
    Studies on the Sciences of Complexity; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2003;
    pp. 387–398.
17. Gell-Mann, M.; Lloyd, S. Information measures, effective complexity, and total information.
    Complexity 1996, 2, 44–52.
18. Ay, N.; Müller, M.; Szkola, A. Effective complexity and its relation to logical depth. IEEE Trans.
    Inf. Theory 2010, 56, 4593–4607.
19. Adami, C. What is complexity? BioEssays 2002, 24, 1085–1094.
20. Bialek, W.; Tishby, N. Predictive information. 1999, arXiv:cond-mat/9902341v1. Available
    online: http://arxiv.org/pdf/cond-mat/9902341 (accessed on 30 April 2014).
21. Tononi, G.; Sporns, O.; Edelman, G. A measure for brain complexity: Relating functional
    segregation and integration in the nervous system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1994, 91,
    5033–5037.
22. Martyushev, L.; Seleznev, V. Maximum entropy production principle in physics, chemistry and
    biology. Phys. Rep. 2006, 426, 1–45.
23. Koutroufinis, S. Selbstorganisation ohne Selbst [Self-Organization without Self]; Pharus: Berlin,
    Germany, 1996. (in German)
24. Deacon, T.W. Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter; W.W. Norton & Co.:
    New York, NY, USA, 2012.
25. Deacon, T.W. Reciprocal linkage between self-organizing processes is sufficient for
    self-reproduction and evolvability. Biol. Theory 2006, 1, 136–149.
26. Falkner, G.; Falkner, R. The Experience of Environmental Phosphate Fluctuations by
    Cyanobacteria. In Life and Process; Koutroufinis, S., Ed.; De Gruyter: Berlin, Germany, 2014;
    pp. 73–97.
27. Koutroufinis, S. Teleodynamics: A Neo-Naturalistic Conception of Organismic Teleology.
    In Beyond Mechanism: Putting Life Back into Biology; Henning, B., Scarfe, A., Eds.; Lexington
    Books/Rowman & Littlefield: Lanham, MD, USA, 2013; pp. 309–342.
Information 2014, 5                                                                          423

28. Kull, K. Umwelt. In The Routledge Companion to Semiotics; Cobley, P., Ed.; Routledge: London,
    UK, 2010; pp. 348–349.

© 2014 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).
