See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: http://www.researchgate.net/publication/240819260



Shannon - Boltzmann - Darwin: Redefining
information (Part II)

ARTICLE in COGNITIVE SEMIOTICS · JANUARY 2008
DOI: 10.3726/81605_169




CITATIONS                                     DOWNLOADS                                               VIEWS

4                                             43                                                      64



1 AUTHOR:

            Terrence W Deacon
            University of California, Berkeley
            76 PUBLICATIONS 3,648 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE




                                                                                                       Available from: Terrence W Deacon
                                                                                                               Retrieved on: 12 July 2015
Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: redefining information. Part 2.


Terrence W. Deacon
University of California, Berkeley 2007
deacon@berkeley.edu


       Abstract: A scientifically adequate theory of semiotic processes must ultimately
       be founded on a theory of information that can unify the physical, biological,
       cognitive, and computational uses of the concept. Unfortunately, no such
       unification exists, and more importantly, the causal status of informational content
       remains ambiguous as a result. Lacking this grounding, semiotic theories have
       tended to be predominantly phenomenological taxonomies rather than dynamical
       explanations of the representational processes of natural systems. This paper
       argues that the problem of information that prevents the development of a
       scientific semiotic theory is the necessity of analyzing it as a negative
       relationship: defined with respect to absence. This is cryptically implicit in
       concepts of design and function in biology, acknowledged in psychological and
       philosophical accounts of intentionality and content, and is explicitly formulated
       in the mathematical theory of communication (aka “information theory”).
       Beginning from the base established by Claude Shannon, which otherwise ignores
       issues of content, reference, and evaluation, this two part essay explores its
       relationship to two other higher-order theories that are also explicitly based on an
       analysis of absence: Boltzmann’s theory of thermodynamic entropy (in Part 1)
       and Darwin’s theory of natural selection (in Part 2). This comparison
       demonstrates that these theories are both formally homologous and hierarchically
       interdependent. Their synthesis into a general theory of entropy and information
       provides the necessary grounding for theories of function and semiosis.




                                             1
Shannon, Boltzmann, and absence
          Part 1 of this essay began by exploring the classic paradox of representational
relationships: the fact that content is not an intrinsic property of whatever constitutes a
sign or signal. The property of something that warrants calling it information in the usual
sense is rather its linkage to something that the sign or signal is not. Classic conundrums
about the nature of thought and meaning all trace their origin to this simple and obvious
fact. This relationship has often been framed as a mapping or correspondence between a
sign or idea in the mind and this something else, not present. This superficially
reasonable account does not, however, distinguish the special nature of this relationship
and what might distinguish it from other merely physical relationships. So, to use a
classic example, the wax impression left by a signet ring is only wax, except for the mind
that interprets it to represent the ring, the office of its bearer, and its bearer. But the wax
impression is just wax and the ring is just a metallic form and their conjunction at a time
when the wax was still warm and malleable was just a physical event, like so many other
physical events where one object alters another when they are brought together.
Something more makes the wax impression a sign that conveys information: it must be
interpreted. Unfortunately, within this obvious answer a vicious regress hides. What we
invoke with an interpreting mind is just what we hope to explain. The process we call
interpretation is the generation of mental signs interpreting extrinsic signs, and we are left
with the same problem inside as outside the mental world. The problem of specifying
how a specific absent content inheres in some way in these components of the
interpretive process is no better grounded in neurological processes than it is outside of
brains.
          As we saw in Part 1, a critical advance in developing a technically precise and
practical conception of information came with Claude Shannon’s introduction of a
statistical mechanics approach to the analysis of signals and their capacity to carry
information. Unfortunately, this analysis excluded any reference to problems of defining
content or significance. But by bracketing these issues Shannon was able to provide an
unambiguous, interpretation-free measure of what might be called the information-


                                               2
bearing capacity. This analysis has stood the test of time with respect to any practical
accounting of how much information a given medium can be expected to convey to its
interpreter.
        Although Shannon’s conception of information totally ignores the issue of what
information is about, or even that it is about anything, his analysis nevertheless provides
an important clue for dealing with the absent content problem. This clue is provided by
Shannon’s negative characterization of information. Shannon’s measure of the potential
information conveyed by a given message received via a given communication channel is
necessarily inseparable from the range of signals that could have been received, but were
not. In other words, even though it ignores all issues of content and significance, Shannon
information is also necessarily defined with respect to something absent.
        In Part 1, it was further argued that the relevant physical property of the signal or
sign medium is also a negative attribute. The reduction in signal entropy has the potential
to carry information because it reflects the consequences of physical work and thus the
openness of the signal medium to extrinsic influence. In thermodynamic terms, a change
in the state of a physical system that would not otherwise occur, is inevitably
characterized by a local reduction in its Boltzmann entropy (to distinguish it from
Shannon entropy) resulting from work done on that system from outside. Since the
information-bearing capacity of a signal is proportional to the improbability of its
physical state, being in an improbable state likely reflects the effects of physical work.
However, although this relation to work is fundamental, referential information can be
conveyed both by the effect of work or evidence that no work has been done. Thus, no
news can be news that something anticipated has not yet occurred. This demonstrates that
Shannon information and referential information are not equivalent. This is because the
signal constraint is not something located in the signal medium, it is rather a relationship
between what is and what could have been its state at any given moment. A reduction in
variability is a constraint, and a constraint is not an intrinsic property but a relational
property. It is defined with respect to what is not present. So implicitly, a physical system
that exhibits constraint is in that configuration due to extrinsic influences, but likewise if
the sign medium exhibits no constraint or change from some stable state, it can be
inferred that there was no extrinsic influence doing work on it. So the relationship of


                                               3
present to absent forms of a sign medium embodies the openness of that medium to
extrinsic intervention, whether or not it has occurred.
   10) The possibility of change due to work, not its actual effect, is the signal feature on
       which reference depends: This is what allows absence itself, absence of change,
       or being in a highly probable state to be informative.


       Consider, for example, a typo in a manuscript. It can be considered a reduction of
information because it reflects a lapse in the constraint imposed by the language and
necessary to convey the intended message, and yet it is also information about the
proficiency of the typist, information that might be useful to a prospective employer. Or
consider a technician diagnosing the nature of a video hardware problem by observing
the way the image has become distorted. What is signal and what is noise is not intrinsic
to the sign medium, because this is a determination with respect to reference. But in
either case the deviation from a predicted or expected state is taken to refer to an
otherwise unobserved cause. Similarly, a sign that doesn’t exhibit the effects of extrinsic
influence—for example, setting a burglar alarm to detect motion—can provide
information that a possible event (a break-in) did not occur. In all cases, however, the
referential capacity is dependent on physical work that has, or could have, altered the
state of some medium open to extrinsic modification. This tells us that the link between
Shannon entropy and Boltzmann entropy is not mere analogy or formal parallelism. This
link is the ground of reference.


Interpretation preliminaries: making work and detecting error
       Up to this point of the analysis it has been assumed that the relationships being
described have involved signs and signals, and not merely physical events chosen at
random. But in fact, none of the criteria specified thus far (including in Part 1) actually
distinguish events and objects that convey information from those that don’t. They are
requirements for something to be information, but they do not in themselves constitute it.
Most of what we mean by physical causality involves an account of physical work, and
yet we don’t usually describe just any physical change as constituting information. This
dependence relationship between information and work has led to a promiscuity in the


                                              4
use of the term ‘information’ that can be a source of confusion. Any physical difference
can be interpreted as information about something else, whether it is the state of the mud
on someone’s shoes or the presence and evenness of the microwave background radiation
of the universe. Information is not something intrinsic to a sign, nor even just some
relationship between a sign medium and extrinsic influences. It is something extrinsic,
virtual, and possibly even discontinuous from any immediate causal history. And yet, as
we’ve seen, it depends on the possibility of physical change.
        Information, as it is understood commonly (as opposed to the more technical
Shannon information), is a difference in something that is interpreted to refer to, or mean,
something else for some interpretive purpose or other for some interpreter. This might
suggest that at some point in our discussion we will need to introduce mentalistic
concepts to cross the threshold into semiosis. Although this has been a common
strategy—one that typically causes the natural sciences to part company from the
semiotic sciences and humanities—the point of this analysis is to demonstrate that this is
not a necessary presupposition. Recognizing that information is defined at every level of
analysis—even with respect to signal properties (Shannon) and causal properties
(Shannon-Boltzmann)—in terms of something absent, can help to bridge the gap between
the merely physical and semiotic relationships that are being invoked.
        The key to reframing this problem is to shift perspective from a structural to a
dynamical approach. Although any physical difference can become significant and
provide information about something else, this requires that—as Gregory Bateson
quipped—it is a difference that makes a difference (Bateson, 1972). What does it mean to
make a difference in this sense? Bateson’s aphorism turns on the ambiguity between two
meanings of to “make” a difference: i.e. to matter and to cause to change. And it implies
that the generation of information involves making a physical alteration in the state of
things. As the previous analysis (above and Part 1) has shown, this requires performing
work to drive conditions away from some more expected outcome; thus often away from
intrinsic regularities.
        Contrary to Bateson’s implication, however, physical work can also be described
as a difference (e.g. an energy gradient such as an electric potential difference) that
makes a difference (e.g. driving another system away from equilibrium). This parallel


                                              5
between information and physical work is implicit in the Shannon-Boltzmann link
described previously. But additionally, implicit in this aphorism is the idea that the
difference that results is also work done as a consequence of the informing difference. So
the difference in some sign medium conveys information because it induces some
interpreting system to change its state and do work to alter something else. And
specifically, in the case that the something else is connected in some way to the
information.
       The thermodynamic conception of work requires a non-equilibrium state, and the
spontaneous tendency for this to progress toward equilibrium. Work results when a
physical system in an unstable dynamic state is coupled to some other system and drives
it further from its equilibrium condition. The recognition of a necessary linkage between
concepts of information and work suggests that we also need to frame the discussion of
the interpretive process in dynamical systems terms. I will argue that an interpretive
process transforms a mere causal connection into a semiotic connection by virtue of how
it organizes work in certain systems. To be capable of performing work, however, a
system must be in a non-equilibrium state. But non-equilibrium conditions are inherently
transient and self-undermining. This additionally means that any persistent non-
equilibrium dynamics is necessarily dependent on something extrinsic to itself: a larger
thermodynamic context from which the work to drive the system away from its most
probable states is derived. Thus the presence of system in a non-equilibrium state entails
environmental conditions that promoted it. Because non-equilibrium processes both
presuppose work and are the necessary sources of future work, any full explanation of
what constitutes an interpretive process must include a central role for non-equilibrium
dynamics (see, for example, the classic work by Nicolis and Prigogine 1977).
       Understanding that a process capable of generating information involves non-
equilibrium dynamics provides a way to address the referential error problem, which has
been a non-trivial problem for correspondence and mapping theories of reference, which
has been around since the classic philosophical skepticism (e.g. Hume, 1739-40, Moore,
1903, and others). Following Bickhard (1998, 2000, 2002), I will argue, however, that the
normativity behind representational error is an emergent property of the organization of




                                              6
certain non–equilibrium processes irrespective of any component causal facts. This can
lead to a very different appraisal of the problem.
       A normative consideration requires comparison, and a means for defining and
discerning between accurate and inaccurate reference. This comparison logic has its
parallel in Claude Shannon’s (1949) analysis of the signal/noise problem in the
transmission of a signal, even though Shannon’s theory is formulated irrespective of any
specific referential relationship. Recall that Shannon demonstrated that any amount of
unreliability in a communication process can be overcome by introducing a specified
degree of redundancy into the signal, enabling an interpreter to utilize the correlations
among similar components to distinguish signal from noise (so long as one can assume
non-correlation between the noise source and the signal source). For any given degree of
noise (signal error) below 100%, there is some level of redundant transmission and
redundancy-checking, that can distinguish signal from noise. Effectively, the check for
accuracy of transmission is self-consistency. But what is the check for accuracy of
representation?
       In one sense this problem can be seen as a higher order variant of the problem of
correcting for signal noise, and it submits to a parallel solution. Thus, we often use the
redundancy of interpretive consequences as a means for detecting representational error
whenever this is available. In practical terms, this is the widely employed method of fact-
checking. Comparing multiple independent reports of the same event can help to reduce
interpretive error. For example, multiple witnesses to a crime who may have only
observed some of the relevant events, and who may have poor memories of the details, or
who may be withholding or falsifying evidence, can provide accounts that be compared
and cross-checked to reconstruct the most probable course of events. Those accounts that
have concordant reference are taken to provide the most likely and most accurate
representations of what occurred.
       It is also the essence of the method of the empirical sciences. So when an
independent researcher replicates the results of another researcher’s experiments it
reinforces confidence in the prior claim. The second researcher provisionally assumes
the accuracy of the prior claims and operates accordingly. But whereas disconfirmation
can lead to serious theoretical revisions, discovering consistency between results is only


                                              7
the minimum. Using many independent methods, analogous to obtaining reports from
multiple independent witnesses, and finding consistent results is even more convincing.
This is why developing new tools for investigating the same phenomenon in different
ways provides for a considerable increase in the representational confidence that is
generated.
       The logic of fact-checking differs in an important respect from introducing signal
redundancy, however. This is because it is actually a means for increasing the entropy of
the signal, not decreasing it, as would be the case for overcoming transmission noise. To
detect representational error in this way, it is necessary to compare different and to some
extent independent sources of information, and to instead take advantage of the otherwise
uncorrelated signal diversity to overcome error. Each source of information will have its
own idiosyncrasies to contribute, analogous to noise, but all will share, in common, being
generated with respect to, and under the influence of, the same extrinsic events. So
correcting representational error entails both an increase in the entropy of the signal—
which increases the Shannon information—and taking advantage of redundancies in the
constraints imposed on these processes by something extrinsic to each, but shared in
common.
       This is what might be called a second-order interpretation, since it treats each
source of signal as an interpretive process, as well. In other words, it involves an
assessment of relationships between alternative interpretive mechanisms, to the extent
that each signal potentially reflects of some independent relationships between signal
generation and the context of its production. Ultimately, then, this entails treating the
constraints characterizing the different signal-generation systems as analogous to
redundant messages themselves. Unfortunately, assuming a common source of redundant
constraints in independent interpretations is never an infallible inference. This is because
it involves an interpretation of similarity and difference, and there can be many reasons
for not detecting difference, particularly when the Shannon entropy—instantiated by the
number, complexity, and diversity of interpretive sources—is not large.
       To explore this more carefully, consider again the example of the detective who
compares many sources of information and uses their correlations to infer a common
event, which they may or may not each indicate. Over time, as more interpretive


                                              8
techniques have become available for this purpose—e.g DNA, materials analysis, and
trace-elements detection—the interpretive redundancy increases, with an attendant
increase in interpretive confidence. The detective’s problem, or that of a jury listening to
a welter of potentially untrustworthy evidence, is to reduce the uncertainty of
interpretation; i.e. to get at the “truth.” They must generate an interpretive response to the
whole ensemble of sources of evidence and counter-evidence that best corresponds with
what actually occurred beyond direct observation. The consistency (redundancy) and
inconsistency (non-redundancy) of the evidence is not itself a guarantee that a given
interpretation is accurate. Faced with the problem of comparing alternative interpretations
of the same events, one is often forced to analyze other features of the source of the
information to determine if there are systematic biases that might be introducing spurious
or intentionally skewed levels of redundancy. Creating the false appearance of
independent sources of information is, for example, a major tool employed in propaganda
and confidence schemes.
       Hypothesis-testing is most effective when the interpretive challenge involves
objects or states of affairs that are immediately available for further exploration. In these
cases the redundancy analysis can be fairly straight-forward. Hypothesis-testing involves
behaving as though a given trial interpretation is accurate and observing the
consequences of continuing to act in accordance with that interpretation to see if the
consequences remain consistent with it. By acting in accord with a given interpretation,
causal consequences of this interpretation can be generated to act as virtual new
interpretations, each of which can be compared.
       So, for example, on suspicion that a given business is corrupt, a law enforcement
agency might set up a sting operation that will proceed as though their suspicion is true,
and observe the consequences. The concept of producing actions that test for interpretive
error, was hinted at in Bateson’s aphorism about information (cited above), and again
involves the performance of work: acting to change circumstances to produce predictable
results. All of these approaches to the problem of representational error-checking
reinforce the claim that interpretation is a dynamical process that inevitably involves the
generation of new information, in the form of new signals and new interactions that do
work with respect to those which were generated previously. Although this shifts our


                                              9
analysis upwards to a second and third order of information generation, the same core
logic that we have seen at work in Shannon’s classic analysis still applies: the
information conveyed is determined with respect to the alternatives eliminated, whether
about reliability of the signal, reliability of reference, or reliability of interpretation.


Darwinian information
        In many respects this process of error-detection is crudely analogous the logic of
natural selection, with an hypothesis as the analogue of a variant phenotype and the
selective exclusion of certain of these based on their non-concordance with others as the
analogue of selection. So an analysis of the logic of natural selection theory in terms of
its parallels with this expansion of information theory may offer clues concerning how
information can come to be reliably correlated with the physical workings of the world.
Indeed, many theorists have compared scientific research and other truth-seeking
enterprises to Darwinian processes (e.g. Karl Popper’s evolutionary epistemology, see for
example Campbell 1974) and a number of contemporary philosophers have developed
theories of function and mental content based roughly on the logic of natural selection
(e.g., Fred Dretske, 1988 and Ruth Millikin, 1984). But a number of problems with these
approaches have been uncovered, mostly having to do with information only being
defined with respect to past conditions, not current conditions. , and there are questions
about whether they can account for and detect error (see, for example, critiques by
Bickhard 1998, 2000). To sort out these problems of the interpretive generation of
information, then, we must first be sure we can answer the analogous problems posed by
evolutionary theory.
        In the standard Darwinian account of evolution by natural selection, many
individual organisms with variant forms constitute a pool of options from which a small
subset are able to successfully reproduce to generate the next generation. This subset
succeeds because of their comparatively better fittedness to prevailing environmental
conditions, and as a result of genetic inheritance the new pool of variant individuals that
is produced inherits features from the parent generation that functioned best in that
environment. By analogy to Shannon’s model of the transmission of information, the
initial variety of genotype and phenotype forms in the prior generation can be considered


                                                10
the potential entropy of the lineage, and the reduction in “transmitted” forms that occurs
due to differential reproduction and elimination processes therefore embodies
information about the selective environment. With the evolution of each generation that
is subject to selection there is therefore a decrease in the entropy of variant forms,
(though there is also the incremental generation of new variations). Comparison of this
reduced fraction of the variation of traits to the previous ancestral variety, including the
non-reproduced variants, provides an assessment of the potential information generated
in this transition. In theory, one should be able to quantify this entropy reduction for a
given population of organisms for a given number of generations, and estimate the
amount of Shannon information produced per time in the evolution of that lineage. It is
this parallelism that warrants talking of evolution in informational terms, and ultimately
for describing evolution as a process that produces new information.


   11) The measure of Darwinian information: The reduction of genotypic and
       phenotypic variety by virtue of differential survival and reproduction of certain
       organism forms (favored in a given environment) is directly analogous to the
       reduction of signal entropy in Shannon’s analysis. Thus, in principle, evolved
       information can be quantified and rates of information evolution can be
       compared.


       This reduction in “genetic” entropy is also evidence that outside influences have
been involved. This is analogous to the way the reduction of Shannon entropy points to
an outside influence constraining potential signal variety (e.g. a sender selecting a
message or environment interacting with a scientific instrument) and thus exhibits the
potential of physical work to alter the sign medium. In biological evolution, however, the
outside source of influence is typically the environment within which this process takes
place, and its role is essentially passive with respect to organism reproduction (the
process that is analogous to signal generation in Shannon’s analysis). So the work being
performed to “make a difference” in the generation of Darwinian information is not
something extrinsic to the “living signal,” but rather is intrinsic to the self-maintaining
and reproductive processes that characterize the organism. In other words, because the


                                              11
non-equilibrium dynamics of life is selectively sensitive to its environmental context, the
constraints implicit in the environment can become re-presented in the selective
preservation of some living dynamics and not others.
        Work is necessarily involved to generate information, but if the object of
reference is a passive state, the source of this work must be intrinsic to the signal
generation process itself. This organization is a characteristic shared by many scientific
instruments that serve as detectors. By incessantly generating a far-from-equilibrium
process, a device’s intrinsic instabilities do work that can be used to exemplify their
highly sensitive reactivity to certain contextual factors. A process that must continuously
do work to maintain an unstable state requires specific conditions in its environment, and
so its state can be used as an indication of the presence, absence, or change of these
conditions. Often highly specific conditions are required for maintenance of unstable
dynamics. Shifting away from these conditions can thus make a large difference because
this potential to do work can amplify any tiny difference in some critical parameter into a
large difference in the dynamics of the signal medium.
        Though highly specific sensitivity reduces the diversity of what can thereby be
conveyed by a change in this dynamic signal, it can also provide exquisite precision of
reference. The result is an effective increase in the entropy of the referential (Shannon-
Boltzmann) information, even if the signal (Shannon) entropy is low; e.g. perhaps only a
yes/no indication of crossing some threshold value. Greater precision of measurement
effectively multiplies the potential entropy implicit in the different states of the
represented object, even if only one critical threshold change of value is being signaled.
This is intuitively reasonable since the greater the certainty, the less the uncertainty; and
reduction of uncertainty is the measure of Shannon information. The canary in the mine
can thus tell the miner that although he is not yet gasping for air, that possibility is
incrementally close. Similarly, a metal detector is highly sensitive to the presence or
absence of an object capable of being attracted to a magnet, but little else, because only
conductive metals can disrupt the detector’s magnetic field. Despite the low entropy of
the signal, this specificity is what the treasure-hunter or mine sweeper wants: vastly
reduced representational uncertainty (precision of reference). While this is intuitively
obvious, it often gets ignored in technical discussions that do not distinguish these two


                                              12
levels of information. It again demonstrates the non-correlation between assessments of
information and entropy at these different levels of analysis:


   11) Referential entropy reduction does not necessary correlate with Shannon entropy
       reduction: Referential entropy is a function of the possible states of the object of
       reference, even if most of these potential differences do not correspond to
       specified differences of a coupled signal-generating medium.


       The above examples still appeal to an outside observer to interpret them as
information; life does not. Living organisms are far-from-equilibrium systems that are
dependent on transforming the physics of their interaction with the environment into
information about that environment. They also pass information about the relationship
between their internal dynamics and the environment to succeeding generations. They do
this primarily via genetic inheritance, but also through cytoplasmic overlap, social
interaction, and environmental modification. And this inherited information is
“interpreted” in the form of organism structures and processes that compensate for
variations in that relationship which tend to perturb the stability of these organism
features.
       This intrinsic interpretive capacity derives from an additional and crucial feature
that characterizes living processes over and above their far-from-equilibrium
thermodynamics: production and maintenance of the mechanisms and processes that
maintain this dynamic organization with respect to environmental fluctuations. So if we
treat reproduction as analogous to signal production, then the material, dynamical, and
structural match between these organism processes and conditions of the local
environment are the determinants of the evolved information. This is why organism
features reflect the constraints of their environments, and what justifies claiming that the
information embodied in a phenotype and its genotype is information about this
environment. But this aboutness only reflects these environmental constraints with
respect to the constraints of the formative processes critical to reproduction and self-
maintenance of that organism.




                                             13
       Both adaptations and functions are defined with respect to something they are not,
something other, and are often in service of something not yet in existence. Adaptations
are defined with respect to something about the world outside the organism that
significantly affects the organism’s means of maintaining and reproducing these
adaptations.


   12) The information of adaptation: Adaptation is defined with respect to the
       constraints on phenotypic variety that embody constraints of the environment
       which are both presupposed by its existence and yet extrinsic to its far-from-
       equilibrium processes.


The signal/noise distinction is not intrinsic
       There is one further critically important difference between the abstract logic of
communication theory and the evolutionary process: the shifting status of signal versus
noise in evolution. If we liken the transmission of traits from generation to generation via
reproduction to signal transmission over a communication channel, then mutation in
biology is the analogue of noise introduced into a communication channel. In most
communication processes noise is a nuisance. It degrades the information by introducing
new uncorrelated entropy into the signal, and this increases uncertainty about what is
signal and what is not, thereby potentially corrupting the message. But whereas the
introduction of noise decreases the potential Shannon information capacity of a channel,
it paradoxically increases the capacity for reference, because it increases total Shannon
entropy. It is as though an additional information channel is available, because noise is
also a consequence of the openness of the physical system that is being used as a sign
medium, and so it too reflects some source of signal modification besides that which the
sender provides. Of course, noise is just noise if you are only interested in what was
originally sent and not interested in the cause of the degradation of that signal. And yet,
this normative decision depends on the interpretation process. Noise can be signal to a
repairman.
       From the perspective of Shannon information, noise is a source of equivocation or
ambiguity in the signal. A noisy signal, like a text containing typos, contains signals


                                             14
replaced by uncorrelated alternatives. Shannon’s analysis showed that it is possible to
compensate for equivocation between signal and non-signal if the transmission and
interpretation processes can take advantage of signal constraints or redundancies. In the
evolution of adaptive phenotypes, however, there is no such shared expectation to go on.
Understanding how this is accomplished when there is no context of introduced
redundancy to rely upon is the critical clue to explaining how evolution ultimately
transforms noise into signal.
        So what if there is no information available in the signal to help discern
transmitted from randomly substituted bits? Consider the case of a set of instructions in
which there are word substitution errors, but in which there is no violation of meaning,
spelling, or grammar to indicate that it is inappropriate. This sometimes happens with
foreign-made devices that come with assembly or use instructions that have been poorly
translated from an unfamiliar language. In these circumstances we often provisionally
assume that the instructions are accurate and attempt to accomplish the task described. If
in the process we find that something doesn’t work out as described we may suspect error
in the instructions, and careful attention to the task described can often provide clues to
the locus of this error.
        This trial-and-error approach is also a form of hypothesis testing, as described
above. The redundancy being relied upon is between the referential information in the
communication, and the constraints of the application context. If the information
accurately represents features of some physical system (for example, the instructions
about operating some mechanical device) its interpretation in terms of the actions
performed on (or interactions with) that system will correlate well with physical
constraints required to achieve a given expected result.


    13) Representational error-detection via predictive interaction: The reference of a
        sign or signal is also susceptible to error-correction via redundancy at a higher
        level than signal organization. The reference of a signal implicitly makes a
        prediction about certain extrinsic causal possibilities. Physical or logical
        interactions with these extrinsic conditions will be constrained to either conform




                                             15
       or not conform with this prediction, and if not this will disconfirm the represented
       state.


       So the logic of natural selection is analogous in many ways to a trial and error
process, except that in natural selection there is no extrinsic source of representation to
check against. Success or failure to reproduce is all that distinguishes representational
accuracy of the information embodied in the genotype and phenotype. But reproduction
allows for further iterative testing of these interpretive consequences. So the succeeding
generations effectively stand in for the outside source of comparison necessary for error-
checking. If one’s genetic inheritance contributes to producing a body with appropriate
adaptations, it is because the constraints it embodies are in some degree of
correspondence with constraints of the environment. Unfortunately, dead men tell no
tales, as the cruel aphorism suggests. So it would seem that there is no recording of the
many failures-to-correspond; no independent representation of which were the errors and
which were not.
       What counts as useful information in biological evolution is determined after the
fact with respect to its ability to pass through the functional error-correction mechanism
of natural selection. The “accuracy” of the inheritance signal is both “tested” and refined
by the way the far-from-equilibrium dynamics that constitutes organism development,
maintenance, and reproduction conform to environmental constraints and opportunities.
Evolution is thus a generator of information for the organism and a process that rectifies
this information with its reference. Thus, although the evolutionary process is itself non-
normative, it produces organisms capable of making normative assessments of the
information they receive.


   14) Evolution generates and rectifies referential information: Interpretive processes
       do work and therefore involve non-equilibrium processes that are necessarily
       context-sensitive. The entropy of an ensemble of interpretive processes arising
       from uncorrelated sources and thus lacking prior reference (‘noise’ from the
       perspective of its source) can come to acquire reference because the constraints




                                             16
       that are serendipitously embodied by it happen to also be redundant with certain
       boundary conditions supporting this dynamics.


   15) Pragmatic convergence: The evolutionary process can progressively increase the
       functional correspondence between organism dynamics and contextual
       preconditions. To the extent that the constraints of this dynamics conform to
       environmental constraints that are consistent with its continuation, these intrinsic
       constraints embody this correspondence in the ongoing dynamics. Although this
       does not constitute information, this process is the basis of referential
       rectification.


       Students of evolution have not usually insisted that the absence of the lineages
that go extinct is what determines the functionality of the traits that persist. One could see
the surviving lineages and their adaptations through the lens of engineering design in
terms of identified functions that were designed to achieve a previously specified
purpose. But although this analogy has a superficial attractiveness, it is undermined by
the fact that few if any biological structures can be said to have only one distinguishing
function. Their fittedness, internally and externally, is irreducibly systemic because
adaptations are the remainders of a larger cohort of variants that are selected with respect
to one another and their environmental context. There is no simple mapping of genetic-
phenotypic information and adaptive function. So that which constitutes the reference of
the inherited information is ultimately defined only negatively (i.e. by constraint).
Biological function is not, then, positively constructed but is rather the evolutionary
remainder that occupies the constrained space of functional correlations that have not
been eliminated. This is the basis for novel functions to emerge in evolution as well as
the possibility for evolutionary exaptation (the shift from one adaptive function to
another). In this respect, genetic information is neither merely retrospective—i.e. about
successful adaptation in the past—nor does it anticipate future novel adaptations. It is not
an aspect of a static relationship, but emerges in process, as its interpretive consequences
perform work that may or may not turn out to support this process continuing.




                                             17
The emergent nature of information
       Although the account so far has been framed in terms of the information involved
in biological evolution, this model is generalizable to other domains. The nested
dependencies of the three levels of entropy-reduction—here characterized by Shannon’s,
Botzmann’s, and Darwin’s variations on this theme of entropy-reduction—define a
recursive architecture that demonstrates three hierarchically nested notions of
information. These three very roughly parallel the classic hierarchic distinctions between
syntax (Shannon), semantics (add Boltzmann), and pragmatics (add Darwin). They also
roughly parallel the relationship between data, content, and significance, though to
understand how these semiotic levels are interrelated we must carry this analysis out of
the realm of biology and into the domain of communication.
       The appeal to Darwinian selection as the ultimate mechanism for the generation
of new information relationships might suggest that we should take a strictly etiological
view of information. In other words, we might be tempted to argue that information is
only discernable post hoc, after selection, and after entropy reduction. But this is
misleading both for biology and for information relationships in general. As with
biological function, the specific selection history of a given representational capacity may
be necessary to explain present usage, but past correspondences are not what it is
currently about. Past correspondences have improved the chances for reliable and precise
predictive correspondence, but it is a relationship to the present condition that matters.
The very fact that information and noise are not intrinsically distinguished, and that
mutational noise can become biological information in the course of evolution,
exemplifies this property.
       This is the problem with simple etiological explanations of adaptive function and
representation, which treat information and function as retrospectively determined by
their selection history. Because information-generating processes emerge in systems
constituted by a pragmatic selection history, the ground of the correspondence between
information and context is determined negatively, so to speak, by virtue of possible
correspondences that have been eliminated, but it leaves open the issue of
correspondences never presented. No specific correspondence is embodied with full
precision and present correspondence is not guaranteed. With functional correspondence


                                             18
under-determined, novel functions can arise de novo in unprecedented contexts and
incidental properties of the sign or signal may come to serendipitously serve emergent
functions. In short, while the possibility of information generation and interpretation
depends on a specific physical selection history, the present influence of this information
on the persistence of the system that enables it may be serendipitously unrelated to this
history. This is the basis for the evolution of new function but it is also why information
is always potentially fallible.
        The evolutionary process is not, however, a normative process. Conditions can be
good or bad for an organism, or for life in general; an organism’s responses to the world
can be effective or ineffective in achieving its intrinsic ends, and its adaptational
dynamics can accurately or inaccurately link changes in organism activity with changes
in extrinsic conditions contributing to the persistence of this dynamical organization; but
evolution just occurs. So although the evolutionary process can further the pragmatic
convergence between interpreted content and extrinsic reference, information is not in
any sense available to evolution, only to the organisms that are its products. Evolution
generates the capacity to interpret something as information. This capacity is intrinsic to
a self-perpetuating far-from-equilibrium system that depends on its environment and does
work to modify that environment in a way that reinforces its persistence. Information is a
relational property defined with respect to this persistently unstable dynamical regularity,
or as the philosopher Charles Sander Peirce (1931-35) would have said, with respect to a
“habit”—understood in its most generic sense; specifically, a self-perpetuating self-
rectifying habit.
        So genetic information is about cellular chemical reaction possibilities, their roles
in constituting the organism, and how this relationship between genes and their effects
also correlated with extrinsic conditions that supported the maintenance of these
possibilities in the past. It is information about organism design and function because it
introduces critical constraints into the non-equilibrium processes that may ultimately
contribute to the perpetuation of that relationship. It is interpreted by the persistence of
the self-perpetuating process that it contributes to. It is not information about the present
world, only extrinsic signs can fill this role. The ability to make use of environmental




                                              19
features as information nevertheless depends upon this closed interpretation of genetic
information for the ability to obtain information from extrinsic sources.
       This ability to use extrinsically generated events and objects as information
derives from the special dynamics of living processes. Because organisms are constituted
by specially organized persistent far-from-equilibrium processes, they are intrinsically
incomplete. In this regard they are processes organized around absence. Not only are
biological adaptations evolved and defined with respect to features of the world extrinsic
to the organism, but in many respects these are only potential features which are also
absent from the current environment. Thus, adaptations of an organism that have to deal
with unusual conditions, like high altitude or extremes of heat or cold, may never be
expressed in a lifetime. For this reason the maintenance of intrinsically unstable far-from-
equilibrium conditions entails mechanisms that effectively anticipate the possible
variations of environmental conditions. But they do so with respect to a living process
that is at the same time incessantly asymmetrically directed contrary to high probability
states in multiple ways: they do work (a) to maintain their far-from-equilibrium state
(which supports persistence of the ability to do work), (b) to generate specific organic
forms (i.e. they constrain dynamical processes and generate structures which have highly
constrained low probability features), and (c) to achieve the specific outcome of
maintaining themselves long enough to reproduce the global organization supporting
processes a, b, and c. So with respect to these three improbably asymmetric dynamics
there are many critical extrinsic factors that are relevant. This combination of absence
and necessary relevance to an asymmetric process, incessantly interacting with and
modifying the world, is what projects the property of information into otherwise merely
physical states and events.
       Consider a non-mentalistic example: deciduous tree which alters its metabolism in
response to decreasing day length and cooling temperatures in the early months of
Autumn, resulting in the eventual withdrawal of metabolic support for its leaves so that
they dry up and eventually become severed from the branches they grew from. This
adaptation to the difficulties of winter involves a mechanism that treats these
environmental changes as information about likely future events that would have an
impact on survival and effective reproduction. Insofar as this response has, in previous


                                            20
generations, resulted in persistence of the lineage compared to others lacking it, the
mechanism has acquired interpretive reliability. The reliability of the seasonal changes in
these factors provides constrained variation to which the constraints of the tree’s
metabolic mechanisms have become tuned. But it is not merely these correlations that
constitute the informational property of these seasonal changes for the tree. The day
length and mean temperatures are also correlated, but one is not intrinsically information
about the other. It is only with respect to the end-directed improbable dynamics of the
tree’s metabolic processes that one or the other of these is informative; and specifically
informative about boundary conditions potentially affecting that dynamics.
       At one point I worked in an office near a number of trees of the same species that
had been planted as part of the landscape design for the campus. A few of these trees,
which were planted close to an automated streetlamp and next to the exhaust from the
building’s ventilation system, always were very late to change the color of their leaves
and drop them, compared to the others. On the one hand, one might argue that these few
trees were misinterpreting these artificial signs, because they don’t accurately represent
seasonal changes. On the other hand, to the extent that these artificial conditions were
nevertheless reliably predictive of local factors affecting the trees’ metabolism, one
would be justified in arguing that the interpretation was correct, because it promoted the
dynamical outcome by virtue of which the mechanism exists. This shifts the focus from
the evolved function to the immediate incremental consequence of the evolved
mechanism as the ground for referential information. The evolved mechanism constrains
the dynamics of possible interpretation, but doesn’t determine it. Each moment of
interpretation is in some way supportive or disruptive of the self-maintenance of this
dynamical trend. This means that not only is there an historical origin for the normative
property of this interpretive process, there is also an ahistorical and immediately
efficacious normative property as well. And this need not be consistent with its evolved
function. In fact, this possibility is a necessary condition for evolution, since essentially
every adaptation has evolved from prior forms and mechanisms that often served very
different adaptive functions (such as feathers originally evolving as a form of insulation).
       Function and representation are made possible by the way living processes are
intrinsically organized around absent and extrinsic factors, and the Darwinian process


                                              21
inevitably generates increasingly convoluted forms of dependency on absence.
Information is a relational property that emerges from nested layers of constraint:
constraints of signal probability (Shannon), constraints of the dynamics of signal
generation (Boltzmann), and the constraints required for self-maintaining far-from-
equilibrium end-directed dynamics (Darwin). Because information is a relationship
among levels of constraint generated by intrinsically unstable physical processes, it is
also normative with respect to those processes. But constraint is a negative property, and
thus neither something intrinsic nor determinate. This means it is intrinsically incomplete
and fallible. Yet it is these very properties that make it evolvable, and though relative,
potentially and indefinitely refinable.


Information in language
       This analysis of the concept of information addresses only the most basic
problems relevant to a theory of representation and semiotic processes in general. Many
more issues need to be addressed before we can apply some of these insights to problems
of our mental lives. But even just this generic analysis can provide a useful perspective to
reflect on issues of interest for the study of communication and language. For example,
we tend to think of word-reference in positive terms, i.e. as a correspondence relationship
between a term and some concept and between both and a selected set of objects, events,
or properties of things in the world. Arguments in the field have for this reason often
focused on trying to define the nature of this correspondence, the problem of locating or
specifying the ontology of the ‘content’ of information, or determining the status of the
objects of reference (e.g. whether a class, a general concept, or individuals). But many of
these issues can be usefully reframed in constraint terms.
       This is well illustrated by the metaphoric capacity of words to take on novel
functional roles and to generate new meanings and references. Consider a word like
‘shadow,’ which has an unambiguous meaning and refers to a commonly experienced
phenomenon. Owing to the combinatorial power of language the following metaphoric
extensions have become commonplace: a shadow of suspicion, a rain shadow, a shadow
of doubt, living in the shadow of one’s father, an apprentice shadowing his mentor,
having a shadowy past, and so forth (see also Hofstadter 2001). Such uses are not


                                             22
particularly dependent on poetic sensibilities, which tend to trade on far more obscure
and indirect metaphoric inferences, and are easily understood the first time they are
heard. This capacity is often described in terms of a finite set of abstract semantic
features whose presence or absence is invoked whenever the term is used; for example
physical, inanimate, singular, nonmaterial, etc. Thus these features are combined with
those evoked by the other terms in the various compounds. But are these features in any
fundamental way different from the corresponding descriptive words for them? It might
be complained that this analysis merely shifts the problem to explaining the semantics of
these other “features,” understood as only slightly more basic quasi-words for concepts
that are a bit easier to treat as simply present or absent. And indeed, the same kind of
metaphoric examples could be compounded using the terms for these features. Doesn’t
this merely beg the question, leaving the problem of explaining this informational
relationship untouched? But here is where considering this correspondence as analogous
to biological adaptation and exaptation may be helpful.
       Although for both organisms and languages the history of past functional
successes is constituted by specific instances of correlation with specific contexts, this
specificity is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for current functionality or
current representation. The immediate context of interpretation and use are likely unique,
only bearing a family resemblance to any previous instance that has conditioned the
current use of this information. What ultimately matters is the outcome of this immediate
process with respect to the continued coherence of that process. With respect to
biological traits the outcome will matter if it aids or diminishes the perpetuation of that
trait or habit of use, and thereby contribute to the system that this depends on. With
respect to language communication the outcome will matter to the extent that it
accomplishes some personal goal, but also to the extent that this affects the habit of
expressing the information (description, request, demand, etc.) in that particular way.
And across vast numbers of uses over many generations the cumulative usefulness,
appropriateness, and catchiness of a particular form of expression will likely also
influence its probability of recurrence. The specific past history results in some habits of
expression (of traits or word uses) being dropped, others being retained, and many
possibilities never being realized. But what is not eliminated is left available, and cannot


                                             23
then determine a neat one-to-one mapping of adaptation to environment, function to use,
word to reference; only a fuzzy correlation between two constrained and under-explored
realms. In an uncertain world, each instance is slightly different, each context is in some
measure novel, and—because of this negatively determined correlation—each use is both
susceptible to failure and to discovering novel functionality. So whereas evolution and
etiology explain the persistence of an organism trait or a linguistic usage, respectively,
these historical origins do not determine either function or reference, but merely bias the
likelihood of exhibiting some correspondence that is functional.


From information to semiosis
        Information is a property (or more accurately a three-tiered set of interdependent
proerties) of any semiotic process. As we have seen, the common denominator of all
three properties is constraint with respect to a possible entropy or range of variations. In
Peircean terms (Peirce 1931-35), Shannon information is prescinded from Shannon-
Botzmann information which is prescinded from Shannon-Botzmann-Darwin
information. The two prescinded analyses thus assume a process conception, but bracket
it from consideration to focus on successively more limited component constraint
relationships. But it is not merely process that is the critical feature, but rather a particular
topology of process characterized by persistent self-maintaining self-reconstituting far-
from-equilibrium dynamics. This special class of recursively constrained dynamics thus
confers a normative character to its component relationships because of its intrinsic
dynamical asymmetry. In addition, it is a dynamics that effectively transforms the causal
constraint of extrinsic physical relationships into constraints on the incompleteness of the
far-from-equilibrium process. Elsewhere (e.g. Deacon 2006) I have described this
dynamical incompleteness—characteristic of both living adaptations and of
representations—as a “constitutive absence,” because the constraints that define this
topology are literally constituted by something extrinsic and not included in the
components or their relationships. It is this constraint logic that is the defining
characteristic of semiosis. But it is also the logic that links the properties of serving a
function and conveying information to a specific class of physical processes, by virtue of
the absent options and reduced degrees of freedom that characterize them.


                                               24
        The Darwinian analysis largely focuses on function, which is well accounted for
in biological terms, but with respect to language this is clearly not sufficient to account
for the kind of representation that words provide, and so too for many other forms of
human-scale semiosis. The dynamical analysis provided here can be seen as providing
the functional ground out of which all semiosis must emerge, but although it explains
what might be called the extended physics of semiosis, there is a higher-order analysis
left unspecified that involves extrapolating from the information relationship to ways this
can be differently used in thought and communication. Part of this difference is
exemplified by the fact that there are different modes of representational relationships
(e.g. iconic, indexical, and symbolic) that depend on different relationships between the
features of the sign/signal medium and what they provide information about. This
broader realm of semiotic relationships is a much larger domain than merely concerns
informational relationships. In many ways, both iconic and symbolic relationships are
less and more than informational, respectively, and only indexical relationships directly
provide information. One might characterize iconic relationships as presenting the
possibility of being used to acquire information, though not being a source of
information, and one might characterize symbolic relationships as exemplifying
relationships between forms of information.
        Does this mean that we must add a fourth step to this analysis of information
beyond the contributions of Shannon, Boltzmann, and Darwin? Not exactly. There is an
important parallel between this dynamical hierarchy and the icon, index, symbol
hierarchy that can point the way to a general theory of semiosis that fully integrates the
physical-informational analysis with the representational analysis. Indeed, both exemplify
Peirce’s categorical hierarchy of prescinded relationships: Firstness, Secondness and
Thirdness; one in dynamical terms and the other in formal-correspondence terms.
Although to fully unpack this parallel logic and complete the process of unifying
dynamical and semiotic theories will require an analysis that is far beyond the scope of
this essay, the information question can itself be prescinded from the broader challenge of
formulating a thoroughly naturalized conception of semiosis. Since it is to some extent
prior to and presumed within semiotic analyses, clarifying the information-dynamics
relationship is a necessary first step.


                                             25
       In our Darwinian framework, how something was successfully interpreted in the
past into dynamical continuation becomes a source of constraints embodied in an
interpretive habit generated in the present and with respect to its own extrinsic boundary
conditions. The entropy embodied in the constraints of this inherited-persisting
sign/signal-generating process determines what fraction of the environmental entropy
will be re-presentabe in this transition from medium to medium. So in this respect the
interpretation of any new sign/signal is inevitably constrained (at a higher level) by the
functional consequences of past interpretations and the relationship between these will in
turn be a constraint interpreted by the functional consequence of aiding or impeding the
preservation of this habit. The information embodied in remembered (or inherited)
interpretation-consequence relationships is what picks out certain constraints of a current
potential source of information by virtue of the signal entropy it thereby ignores. Whether
this particular selection of signal entropy picks out the appropriate or inappropriate
information is a function of the support it provides to the persistence of the system within
which this habit of interpretation has developed. And this is determined by the higher
level selection imposed by the constraints of the environment on this system’s
requirements for persistence.
       While this ultimate interpretive level occurs external to and between organisms in
the biological world, in the analysis of mental processes this same dynamical logic must
be recapitulated in brains. This is a Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin dynamic predicated on a
lower-level Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin process. This additional convolution of the logic
embeds the representational information generating dynamic in a functional information
generating dynamic. This is what makes the semiosis of mind significantly more complex
and subtle than the semiosis of biological function alone, and it also makes semiosis as
understood mentalistically parasitic on semiosis understood functionally.
       This representational aspect of the information is thus doubly open to further
interpretive possibility. Not only can function be an emergent outcome of evolution, but
within the higher-order context of representational relationships embedded in and
dependent on functional relationships, new representations can emerge with respect to
emergent functions.




                                             26
       Emergent meanings and unprecedented referential relationships are constantly
being generated in everyday language usage, some like the metaphoric extensions noted
above, but others like the technical reuse of the term ‘energy’ that has now become a
ubiquitous fixture in modern folk physics. The penumbra of representational possibilities
that is left available is a critical prerequisite for the emergence of new meanings and the
adaptability of language. Much of this generativity is accounted for by the incredible
combinatorial use of prior representations, but even this depends on the openness of
referential possibility implicit in its function-based foundation. So attempts to coin new
terms (such as those introduced in this book in order to designate concepts for which
existing terms are unavailable) succeed best if they borrow meanings, functions, and
connotations from other words or morphemes (e.g. from ancestral languages such as
ancient Greek) and thus take advantage of the undifferentiated possibilities that they
embody. To invoke a term coined by the psychologist James Gibson, the constraints
generated by this selection history don’t pre-determine possible uses, they instead create
affordances.
       Probably the most significant contribution of this analysis of information is not,
however, this contribution to the understanding of functional and representational
openness, but rather the way that it explicitly identifies the nestedness of information
within physical processes, and thus its relationship to concepts of energy and form. This
approach bridges the classic Cartesian gulf between the extended world of physical
interactions and the presumed non-extended world of mind and representations, because
it both recognizes the essential physicality of information and yet demonstrates that what
is informative in a sign or signal is something precisely not present; and thus without
extension. At every level, the emergence of informational relationships is the result of the
constraints exemplified by via difference and produced by various pragmatic reduction
processes. Information, reference, and fittedness are each differentiated with respect to
something absent, and these relationships are progressively nested within processes
similarly organized at higher levels. From this perspective Cartesian dualism can be
traced to a failure to understand the causal significance of absence and constraint in
physical processes, leading to the identification of Mind with a disembodied realm, and a
paradoxical conception of mental causality.


                                              27
        Recognizing the centrality of this reduction-absence logic is particularly
instructive for demonstrating how easy it is to become seduced by what we might call the
fallacy of “misplaced aboutness.” This is implicit in eliminativist alternatives to Cartesian
dualism and it is ubiquitous in computational conceptions of evolution, mind, language,
and social processes. It is an analogue to the Whiteheadian fallacy of misplaced
concreteness, and involves the tendency to identify the content or ground of an
intentional relationship with some one or more of the substrates of the process; e.g. in a
quantum bit, a computer algorithm, a DNA molecule, a neural circuit, a word-object
correlation, and so on. What the present analysis purports to demonstrate is that the
representational relationship cannot be vested in any object or structure or sign vehicle, it
is not reducible to any specific physical distinction, nor is it fully constituted by a
correspondence relationship. But neither is it a primitive unanalyzable property of minds.
Instead, even simple functional and representational relationships emerge from a nested
interdependence of generative processes that are distinctive only in so far as they embody
specific absences in their dynamics and their relationships to one another. These absences
embody, in the negative, the constraints imposed on the physical substrates of signals,
thoughts, and communications that can be transferred from one substrate to another, and
which thereby play efficacious roles in the world as inherited constraints on what tends to
occur, rather than acting as pushes or pulls forcing events in one direction or another.
Constraints don’t do work, but they are the scaffolding on which the capacity to do work
depends.


Conclusions
        This is only the barest outline of an information theory that is sufficient to account
for some of the most basic features of functional and representational relationships, so it
cannot be expected to span the entire gap from biological function to conscious agency.
But considering that even very elementary accounts of biological function and
representation are currently little more than analogies to man-made machines and human
communications, even a general schema that offers a constructive rather than a merely
descriptive analogical approach is an important advance. It shows that information
theoretic and semiotic approaches to function and cognition are not incompatible. But


                                              28
until this schematic analysis can be formalized in more precise mathematical terms, many
questions about the shape of such a synthesis will remain unanswered. And even were
this to be completed, it would still be far from adequate to address the range of issues
relevant to the cognitive sciences, since many levels of complex self-organizing and
selection processes—and thus information-generating processes—intervene between the
simplest forms of functional adaptation and human symbolically mediated intentionality.
Spanning these gaps will require considerable empirical work informed by this sort of
synthetic analysis.
       Nevertheless, despite its schematic and merely descriptive form, this exploration
of the relationship between information theory, thermodynamics, and natural selection
unpacks some of the unrecognized complexity hidden within the concept of information.
By generalizing the insight captured by Claude Shannon’s equation of information with
entropy-reduction and tracing its linkage to analogues in thermodynamic and
evolutionary domains we have been able to addresses a few of the most vexing issues of
representation, reference, and normativity (i.e. usefulness). These inadequacies in current
definitions of information have posed seemingly insurmountable obstacles to formulating
a theory of representation sufficiently rich to serve as the basis for empirical science,
sufficiently subtle to explain the curious “inexistence” of content in the signs and signals
that convey it (to use Frans Brentano’s term for this special sort of absence), and
sufficiently grounded in physics to explain representational fallibility, error-checking,
information creation, and the relationship between informational and energetic processes.
By providing an account that expands traditional information theory to address these
issues of physical efficacy, representation, and normativity, this argument provides a
necessary first step toward a scientific semiotic theory.




References:
Bateson, Gregory (1972) Steps to an ecology of mind. New York: Ballantine Books.
Bickhard, Mark H. (1998) Levels of Representationality. Journal of Experimental and
       Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 10(2), 179-215.
Bickhard, Mark H. (2000) Autonomy, Function, and Representation. Communication and


                                             29
       Cognition — Artificial Intelligence, 17(3-4), 111-131.
Bickhard, Mark H. (2002) The Biological Emergence of Representation. In T. Brown, L.
       Smith (Ed.) Emergence and Reduction: Proceedings of the 29th Annual
       Symposium of the Jean Piaget Society. Erlbaum, pp. 105-131.
Deacon, Terrence W. (2006) Emergence: The Hole at the Wheel’s Hub. In P. Clayton &
       P. Davies (eds.) The Re-Emergence of Emergence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       pp. 111-150.
Dretske, Fred I. (1988) Explaining Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hofstadter, Douglas (2001) Analogy as the Core of Cognition. In The Analogical Mind:
       Perspectives from Cognitive Science, edited by Dedre Gentner, Keith J. Holyoak,
       and Boicho N. Kokinov, Cambridge MA: The MIT Press/Bradford Book, pp.
       499-538.
Hume, David (1978) A Treatise of Human Nature. Index by L. A. Selby-Bigge; Notes by
       P. H. Nidditch. Oxford.
Millikan, Ruth G. (1984) Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories.
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moore, George E. (1903). Principia Ethica. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nicolis, G., Prigogine, I. (1977) Self-Organization in Nonequilibrium Systems. New
       York: Wiley.
Peirce, Charles S. (1931-35) Collected Papers, Vol. 1-6, edited by Charles Hartshorne
       and Paul Weiss. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.




                                           30
