                                                                      T E R R E N C E W. D E A C O N
                                                                 University of California, Berkeley


                           8
                           What is missing from theories
                           of information?


                          Theories of information that attempt to sort out problems con-
                   cerning the status and efﬁcacy of its content – as it is understood
                   in thoughts, meanings, signs, intended actions, and so forth – have
                   so far failed to resolve a crucial dilemma: how what is represented
                   could possibly have physical consequences. The legacy of this has
                   been played out in various skeptical paradigms that either conclude
                   that content is fundamentally relativistic, holistic, and ungrounded
                   or else is merely epiphenomenal and ineffectual except for its arbi-
                   trary correlation with the physical properties of the signs that convey
                   it. In this chapter I argue that the apparent conundrums that make
                   this notion controversial arise because we begin our deliberations
                   with the fallacious assumption that in order for the content of infor-
                   mation to have any genuine real world consequences it must have
                   substantial properties, and so must correspond to something present
                   in some form or other. By contrast, I will show that this assump-
                   tion is invalid and is the ultimate origin of these absurd skeptical
                   consequences.
                          The crucial property of content that must be taken into account
                   is exactly the opposite: its absence. But how is it possible for a speciﬁc
                   absence to have deﬁnite causal consequences? A crucial clue is provided
                   by Claude Shannon’s analysis of information in terms of constraint on
                   the entropy (possible variety) of signs/signals (Shannon, 1948; Shannon
                   and Weaver, 1949). In other words, the capacity to convey information
                   is dependent on a relationship to something that is speciﬁcally not
                   produced. But such a change in the Shannon entropy of a physical
                   medium is also necessarily a physical change, and this must be a prod-
                   uct of extrinsic work. In addition, contra Shannon, even when there is
                   no change in Shannon entropy where a change is possible, this can be
                   informative because it indicates the absence of some speciﬁc form of                    123




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 123                                                                     4/26/2010 4:23:52 PM
         124          Terrence W. Deacon


                      extrinsic inﬂuence. Both conditions are determined with respect to a
                      potential inﬂuence on the form of the semiotic medium that is extrin-
                      sic to it. These explicit extrinsic sources of potential signal constraint
                      constitute the ground of the referential capacity by which informa-
                      tion is deﬁned. Moreover, I will argue that a process capable of inter-
                      preting the reference implicit in such signal constraints depends on
                      coupling the context-dependent signal generation process to a speciﬁc
                      extrinsic source of that constraint that is relevant to the existence and
                      maintenance of this interpretive process. Such a linking relationship
                      is provided by a self-sustaining non-equilibrium thermodynamic pro-
                      cess, such as that characterizing living organisms. Such a process is
                      capable of interpreting something as information about something
                      else because such systems are necessarily open to and dependent on
                      a precise correlation between intrinsic dynamics and extrinsic condi-
                      tions. Thus constraints exhibited in certain substrates, which are in
                      some way correlated both with maintenance of this unstable condi-
                      tion and with non-intrinsic or absent conditions that are relevant to
                      this maintenance, can “matter” to its persistence. Failure to explain
                      this relationship to absence is why past efforts to reduce information
                      to a measurable physical substrate (Shannon information) or to treat it
                      as a primitive nonphysical phenomenon (versions of phenomenology)
                      both led to absurd consequences.


                               8 .1 I N T R O D U C T I O N

                      It is often said that we are living in the “information age,” but although
                      we use the concept of information almost daily without confusion,
                      and we build machinery (computers) and network systems to move,
                      analyze, and store it, I believe that we still do not really know what
                      it is. The ubiquity of the concept of information in our present age is
                      largely a consequence of the invention, perfection, and widespread
                      use of computers and related devices. In our everyday lives informa-
                      tion is a necessity and a commodity. We routinely measure the infor-
                      mation capacity of silicon, magnetic, or laser data-storage devices, and
                      ﬁnd ourselves guarding, sharing, or selling information. The import-
                      ance of understanding and managing information has penetrated to
                      the most technical and most mundane realms of daily life. Molecular
                      biologists have recently mapped the molecular information “con-
                      tained” in the human genome, and the melding of computer technol-
                      ogy with molecular biology has spawned an entirely new ﬁeld, dubbed
                      bioinformatics, that promises radical new medical technologies and




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 124                                                             4/26/2010 4:23:52 PM
                                                 What is missing from theories of information?       125

                   unprecedented threats to privacy. Even household users of internet
                   communication are sensitive to the information bandwidth of the
                   cable and wireless networks that they depend on for connection to
                   the outside world.
                          It is my contention, however, that we are currently working
                   with a set of assumptions about information that are just barely sufﬁ-
                   cient to handle the tracking of its most minimal physical and logical
                   attributes, but which are insufﬁcient to understand either its deﬁning
                   representational character or its pragmatic consequences. For more
                   than half a century we have known how to measure the information-
                   conveying capacity of any given communication medium, and yet we
                   cannot give an account of how this relates to the content that this
                   signal may or may not represent. These are serious shortcomings that
                   impede progress in a broad range of endeavors, from the study of basic
                   biological processes to the analysis of global economics.
                          It is a disturbing fact that, despite the centrality of the concept
                   in our daily lives, we are entirely lacking a clear physical account that
                   explains how information about some abstract concept can have mas-
                   sive and sometimes devastating physical consequences. Consider the
                   concept of “patriotism.” Despite the fact that there is no speciﬁc phys-
                   ical object or process that constitutes the content of this word, and
                   nothing intrinsic to the sound of the word or its production by a brain
                   that involves more than a tiny amount of energy, its use can contrib-
                   ute to the release of vast amounts of energy unleashed to destroy life
                   and demolish buildings (as in warfare). This is evidence that we are
                   both woefully ignorant of a fundamental causal principle in the uni-
                   verse and in desperate need of such a theory.
                          In many ways, we are in a position analogous to the early-
                   nineteenth-century physicists in the heyday of the industrial age (with
                   its explosive development of self-powered machines for transporta-
                   tion, industry, timekeeping, etc.), whose conception of energy was still
                   framed in terms of ethereal substances, such as “caloric,” “phlogis-
                   ton,” and the “élan vital” that were presumably transferred from place
                   to place to animate machines and organisms. The colloquial notion
                   of information is likewise conceived of in substance-like terms, as for
                   example when we describe movement, storage, or sales of information.
                   The development of the general concept of energy took many decades
                   to clarify, even though the exploitation of energy was a deﬁning fea-
                   ture of that era. The concept was ultimately demystiﬁed by recogniz-
                   ing that energy was not a substance, but rather a constant dynamical
                   parameter that was transformed and yet conserved in processes of




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 125                                                               4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         126          Terrence W. Deacon


                      induced change. The conceptions of energy as ineffable ether or as
                      special substance were abandoned for a dynamical relational account.
                      With this reframing, many once-mysterious phenomena became sub-
                      ject to exact analysis and the basis for myriad new technologies.
                             Similarly, I argue that in order to develop a full scientiﬁc under-
                      standing of information we will be required to give up thinking about
                      it, even metaphorically, as some artifact or commodity. To make sense
                      of the implicit representational function that distinguishes informa-
                      tion from other merely physical relationships, we will need to ﬁnd a
                      precise way to characterize its deﬁning non-intrinsic feature – its ref-
                      erential content – and show how it can be causally efﬁcacious despite
                      its physical absence. The enigmatic status of this relationship was elo-
                      quently, if enigmatically, framed by Brentano’s use of the term “inex-
                      istence” when describing mental phenomena.
                               Every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the Scholastics
                               of the Middle Ages called the intentional (or mental) inexistence of an
                               object, and what we might call, though not wholly unambiguously,
                               reference to a content, direction toward an object (which is not to be
                               understood here as meaning a thing), or immanent objectivity.
                                 This intentional inexistence is characteristic exclusively of mental
                               phenomena. No physical phenomenon exhibits anything like it. We
                               can, therefore, deﬁne mental phenomena by saying that they are those
                               phenomena which contain an object intentionally within themselves
                               (Brentano, 1874).

                             As I will argue below, both the engineer’s identiﬁcation of infor-
                      mation with the reduction of signal uncertainty and the intuitively
                      attractive phenomenological conception of information as an irredu-
                      cible “aboutness” relationship that is “always already there,” simply
                      take this enigmatic relationship to something not-quite-existent for
                      granted. The ﬁrst takes it for granted but then proceeds to bracket it
                      from consideration to deal with physically measurable features of the
                      informational medium. The second treats it as an unanalyzed primi-
                      tive, and brackets its necessary physicality and efﬁcacy from consider-
                      ation in order to focus on intrinsic attributes. Neither characterization
                      provides criteria that explicitly distinguish merely physical or logical
                      relationships from those that convey information.
                             The concept of information is a central unifying concept in the
                      sciences. It plays crucial roles in physics, computation and control the-
                      ory, biology, cognitive neuroscience, and of course the social sciences.
                      It is, however, employed somewhat differently in each ﬁeld, to the
                      extent that the aspects of the concept that are most relevant to each




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 126                                                                       4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
                                                 What is missing from theories of information?        127

                   may be almost entirely non-overlapping. More seriously, the most
                   precise and technical deﬁnition used in communication engineering,
                   computational theory, and quantum physics completely ignores those
                   features that distinguish information from any other causal relation-
                   ship. This promiscuity threatens to make the concept of information
                   either so amorphous that it provides no insight into the physical
                   distinctiveness of living and mental relationships, or else licenses a
                   retreat into a sort of methodological dualism.
                          Ultimately, the concept of information has been a victim of a
                   philosophical impasse that has a long and contentious history: the
                   problem of specifying the ontological status of the representations
                   or contents of our thoughts. The problem that lingers behind deﬁn-
                   itions of information boils down to a simple question: How can the
                   content (aka meaning, reference, signiﬁcant aboutness) of a sign or
                   thought have any causal efﬁcacy in the world if it is by deﬁnition not
                   intrinsic to whatever physical object or process represents it? In other
                   words, there is a paradox implicit in representational relationships.
                   The content of a sign or signal is not an intrinsic property of whatever
                   physically constitutes it. Rather, exactly the opposite is the case. The
                   property of something that warrants calling something information,
                   in the usual sense, is that it is something that the sign or signal convey-
                   ing it is not. I will refer to this as “the absent content problem.” Classic
                   conundrums about the nature of thought and meaning all trace their
                   origin to this simple and obvious fact.
                          This relationship has often been framed as a mapping or corres-
                   pondence between a sign or idea in the mind and this something else,
                   which is not present. As countless critics have pointed out, however,
                   this superﬁcially reasonable account fails to identify any features of
                   this relationship that distinguish it from other merely physical rela-
                   tionships. Consider the classic example of a wax impression left by
                   a signet ring in wax. Except for the mind that interprets it, the wax
                   impression is just wax, the ring is just a metallic form, and their con-
                   junction at a time when the wax was still warm and malleable was
                   just a physical event in which one object alters another when they are
                   brought into contact. In these facts there is nothing to distinguish it
                   from any other physical interaction. Something more makes the wax
                   impression a sign that conveys information. It must be interpreted
                   by someone. Unfortunately, this obvious answer is ultimately circular.
                   What we invoke with an interpreting mind is just what we hope to
                   explain. The process we call interpretation is the generation of men-
                   tal signs interpreting extrinsic signs. So we are left with the same




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 127                                                                4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         128          Terrence W. Deacon


                      problem inside as outside the mental world. The problem of specifying
                      how a speciﬁc content is both not physically present and yet inheres
                      in some way in the sign and interpretive process is no better grounded
                      in neurological processes than it is outside of brains.


                               8 .2 M E A N I N G S O F I N F O R M A T I O N

                      There is, additionally, a troublesome ambiguity in the term “infor-
                      mation” that tends to confuse the analysis. This term is used to talk
                      about a number of different kinds of relationships, and often inter-
                      changeably without discerning between them. It can refer to the
                      sign or signal features themselves, irrespective of any meaning or
                      reference, as in the information content in bits (binary digits) of the
                      computer ﬁle encoding this chapter. This is sometimes called syn-
                      tactic information. It can refer to what these bits refer to, as in the
                      ideas I am hoping to communicate. This is sometimes called seman-
                      tic information. And it can refer to that aspect of these ideas that is
                      news to you the reader, and thus not merely redundant as it might be
                      to experts in the ﬁeld. This is sometimes called pragmatic informa-
                      tion. Currently, the ﬁrst of these meanings has grown in prominence,
                      mostly as a result of our contemporary familiarity with, and depend-
                      ence on, computing.
                             This document was created on multiple computers, and in the
                      process I have shared draft versions back and forth with colleagues
                      by sending the information over the Internet. But what exactly was
                      sent? The answer is: a series of high and low voltage values, crudely
                      analogous to Morse code, organized into sets of eight 1s and 0s that
                      together code for an alpha-numeric character or some operation with
                      respect to these. The computers at each end of the process are set up
                      to encode and decode this sequence of shifts in voltage in the same
                      way. For the user, this is accomplished invisibly. All we see are letters
                      arranged on the screen. Clearly using the terms above we can say that
                      syntactic information is being exchanged back and forth, in the form
                      of numbers of distinguishable signals, and hopefully these signals also
                      convey semantic and pragmatic information as well.
                             But would we still call it information in any of these senses if
                      there were no people involved? And to make it a bit more like sci-
                      ence ﬁction, would we still call it information if by wild coincidence
                      a large collection of molecules just spontaneously came together to
                      make two computers organized just this way, sending signals back




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 128                                                            4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
                                                          What is missing from theories of information?               129

                   and forth identical to those I have recently sent?1 This would certainly
                   not qualify as semantic or pragmatic information. What if the signal
                   was composed of randomly generated gibberish rather than English?
                   Would this exclude it from even being described as syntactic informa-
                   tion? Presumably, for any ﬁnite length of randomly generated signals
                   a suitable code could be deﬁned that would change it into English
                   text. Does this possibility change anything? Ultimately, there is noth-
                   ing intrinsic to such a string of signals to distinguish it from encrypted
                   English. Is the potential to be translated into a form that could be
                   assigned a meaning sufﬁcient to make it information? If so, then any
                   signal, from any source, however produced and sent, would qualify as
                   syntactic information.
                          In current computer technology, the rapidly ﬂipping voltages
                   that constitute the operations of a computer can be translated to and
                   from the pattern of microscopic pits burned into a plastic disk or to
                   and from the magnetically modiﬁed pattern of iron particles embed-
                   ded in the surface of a spinning hard disk. But what if we happened
                   upon a naturally occurring pattern of burn pits or magnetized iron
                   atoms in a rock corresponding exactly to these patterns. Would these
                   constitute the same information? Although they might be described
                   as identical syntactic information they would not be likely to con-
                   vey identical semantic information. Can it be information at all if it
                   derives from a random process? Actually, yes. The chemical reactions
                   caused by unknown molecules in a water sample being tested for
                   contamination, or the radio waves reaching Earth from an exploding
                   star, are typical of the sorts of signals that scientists are able to use as
                   information. Both the patterns that we deliberately create in order to
                   convey an idea and those we discover in nature, can convey informa-
                   tion. Ultimately, this demonstrates that almost anything can qualify as
                   information in the syntactic sense, because this is only an assessment
                   of the potential to inform.
                          This most basic notion of information corresponds to the con-
                   temporary theory of information, originally dubbed the “mathem-
                   atical theory of communication” by its discoverer Claude Shannon
                   (1948). As we will see, Shannon’s deﬁnition is more precise than this,
                   but in essence it shows us why it is possible to treat any physical dis-
                   tinction as potential information, whether made by humans or the
                   product of some mindless natural process. It speciﬁes what features of

                           1
                               The absurdity of this happening should also tell us something about the complex-
                               ity hiding behind the notion of information being used here.




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 129                                                                                4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         130          Terrence W. Deacon


                      a physical material or process are necessary for it to serve as a medium
                      for transmitting or storing information. So, in this sense, when we
                      use the term “information” to refer to signals transmitted over a wire,
                      or ink marks on paper, or the physical arrangement of objects at a
                      crime scene, we are using a sort of shorthand. Without these physical
                      features there is no information, but we are actually referring to some-
                      thing more than the physical pattern; something not present to which
                      these present features correspond.
                            Identifying the features of physical processes that are the neces-
                      sary conditions for something to be able to provide information helps
                      to make sense of the enterprise of the natural sciences. Scientiﬁc
                      observation and experiment are directed to the task of probing the
                      patterns of things to discover information about how they came to
                      have the properties they have. And the same physical objects or events
                      can yield new information with each change of interpretive apparatus.
                      This open-endedness is the result of there usually being vastly more
                      information potential in natural phenomena than can ever be inter-
                      preted. To a brilliant sleuth equipped with the latest tools for mater-
                      ials analysis and DNA testing, almost everything at a crime scene can
                      become a source of information. But being able to specify what phys-
                      ical properties can potentially serve to provide information does not
                      help us to discern how it is that they can be about something else.


                               8 .3 L O C A T I N G T H E I N F O R M A T I O N I N I N F O R M A T I O N P R O C E S S I N G

                      Shannon’s analysis of the logical properties that determine the infor-
                      mation capacity of a physical medium helps make sense of the con-
                      cept of information in computer theory. In the most general sense,
                      the possibility of computing depends on being able to assign referen-
                      tial value to some feature of a physical process and to map a speciﬁc
                      logical operation to some physical manipulation of that feature with
                      respect to others that have also been assigned reference. In this sense,
                      one can even talk about arbitrary mechanical operations (or other
                      physical processes) as potential computers. Just as one could come
                      up with a coding scheme that could interpret an arbitrary sequence
                      of signals as an English sentence, so it is possible to ﬁnd a mapping
                      between an arbitrary physical process and some symbol manipulation
                      process. Of course some physical processes and mechanical (or elec-
                      tronic, or quantum) devices are better than others for this, especially
                      when we desire ﬂexibility in possible mappings. This mapping rela-
                      tionship – assigning reference – is crucial for distinguishing between




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 130                                                                                              4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
                                                What is missing from theories of information?       131

                   computing and other merely physical processes. All physical processes
                   are potential computations, but no physical process is intrinsically a
                   computation.
                          It is in this most general sense that we can also describe men-
                   tal processes as computing. And yet missing from this analogy is
                   precisely the mapping relationship that distinguishes thought from
                   computing. There is no separate homunculus external to the compu-
                   tation that assigns reference to the relevant physical differences of
                   neural dynamics. Computation is generally described in terms of a
                   syntactic conception of information, and yet it implicitly presupposes
                   a semantic conception, although it can give no account of it. It is some-
                   times assumed that this referential mapping can be provided by the
                   equivalent of robotic embodiment, so that the input and output of
                   the computing is grounded in physical world constraints. But this can
                   also be seen as an extension of the physical mechanism underlying
                   the computation to include causal events “outside” some arbitrarily
                   deﬁned boundary separating the “computing device” and the physical
                   environment.
                          Describing both physical and mental relationships in computa-
                   tional terms is only problematic if this presupposition of mapping is
                   ignored or assumed to be intrinsic. The result is either eliminative
                   reduction or cryptic panpsychism, respectively. In either case, if any
                   physical event is considered to be a computation and the mind is
                   merely a special purpose computer, then the mind–body problem dis-
                   solves. But there is a troubling implication to this collapse of the con-
                   cept of information to its syntactic meaning only. In such a uniformly
                   informational universe there is no meaning, purpose, value, or agency.
                   In this informational cosmology, networks of informational causality
                   are still just as blindly mechanical as in any Laplacian universe.
                          To escape this deﬂationary view of an information universe
                   blindly mechanistically computing us, many have turned to quan-
                   tum physics to loosen the bonds of mechanistic determinism, both in
                   discussions of consciousness and in terms of information processes.
                   Quantum events appear postponable until they are observed, and
                   quantum objects can be both independent and correlated (entangled)
                   at the same time. Thus notions of causality and of information about
                   that causality appear to be inextricably linked at this level of scale.
                          For example, in the dominant (although not the only) interpret-
                   ation of quantum mechanics, events in the world at the quantum level
                   become real (in the sense of being susceptible to classical analysis)
                   only when they are measured. Before such an intervention, no explicit




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 131                                                              4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         132          Terrence W. Deacon


                      single state exists, only a ﬁeld of potentiality. This is exempliﬁed by
                      the famous Schrödinger’s cat paradox, in which the prior death of a
                      cat in a closed box is dependent on an as-yet-unmeasured quantum
                      state. In this interpretation it is presumed that neither macroscopic
                      state exists until the quantum event is later measured (that is, by an
                      observer). Measurement information about this quantum state is thus
                      treated as a fundamental causal determinant of the transition from
                      quantum indeterminacy to classical determinism. Similarly, another
                      strange quantum phenomenon – quantum entanglement – shares
                      other features with the correspondence relationship associated with
                      information. In simpliﬁed terms, this involves an apparent instant-
                      aneous correspondence of measurement consequences between par-
                      ticles that are separated and non-interacting. So one might also argue
                      that it exempliﬁes a sort of intrinsic representation relationship.
                             These are counterintuitive phenomena, which challenge our
                      normal conceptions of causality, but do they explain the higher-order
                      senses of information? Unfortunately, they do not actually resolve the
                      paradox of the absent content. These features in the quantum realm
                      (for example, superposition, entanglement) resemble correspondence-
                      mapping relationships. Thus we might be tempted to see this as a
                      referential relationship that is intrinsic to the quantum physical rela-
                      tionship. But physical correlation is not aboutness. Whereas measure-
                      ments of particles that affect measurements of other particles exist
                      in something like a correspondence relationship, this alone does not
                      make one about the other, except to an external observer interpreting
                      it. The aboutness does not exist in the interstices between indeter-
                      minate quantum events any more than between the gears of a clock,
                      because it is not an intrinsic feature. So in both classical and quantum
                      computation only the syntactic concept of information is invoked.
                      There is nothing intrinsic to computation processes that distinguish
                      them from other physical processes, and nothing intrinsic to the quan-
                      tum or classical physical features that are manipulated in computa-
                      tions that make them about other features of the world.


                               8 .4 I S I N F O R M A T I O N P H Y S I C A L ?

                      There is something correct about the link between information and
                      the fabric of causal processes of the world – whether determinate or
                      intrinsically statistical – but there is something missing too. There is
                      something more that we assume when we describe something as infor-
                      mation, and indeed something absent from the physical processes and




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 132                                                           4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
                                                What is missing from theories of information?       133

                   patterns that we recognize as conveying (though not fully constitut-
                   ing) information.
                           The search for a link between information and physical causality
                   in general requires that we identify a precise physically measurable
                   correlate of information. This is necessary in order to solve engineer-
                   ing problems that involve information systems and to address scien-
                   tiﬁc issues concerning the assessment of information processes in
                   natural systems. A ﬁrst solution to these practical challenges was for-
                   mally provided by a Bell Labs researcher in the 1940s: Shannon and
                   Weaver (1949). His “mathematical theory of communication” demon-
                   strated that the capacity of a communication medium to convey or
                   store information could be precisely measured, and that even infor-
                   mational error-correction can be accomplished without any reference
                   to informational content. This laid the foundation for all of modern
                   information technology, but it also left us with a deﬂationary theory
                   of information, from which content, reference, and signiﬁcance are
                   excluded and irrelevant.
                           Claude Shannon’s introduction of a statistical approach to the
                   analysis of signals and their capacity to carry information has stood
                   the test of time with respect to any practical accounting of how much
                   information a given medium can be expected to store or convey to an
                   interpreter. Unfortunately, because this analysis excluded any refer-
                   ence to problems of deﬁning content or signiﬁcance, it has led to the
                   rather different uses of the term that we have been struggling to deﬁne
                   and which are often a source of theoretical sleight of hand. By bracket-
                   ing issues of reference and signiﬁcance Shannon was able to provide
                   an unambiguous, interpretation-free measure of what might be called
                   the information-bearing capacity (as distinguished from information
                   itself ). Not only does this work for human-made communication proc-
                   esses, it also usefully conveys the potentiality of any physical distinc-
                   tion to provide information, such as might be discovered by scientiﬁc
                   experiment or detective work. But for this purpose it had to stop short
                   of conveying any sense of how information could come to be about
                   something. And there is good reason to have avoided this. For different
                   interpreters or for different scientiﬁc instruments the same physical
                   distinction can provide information about different things, or can be
                   irrelevant and uninformative. What something is about and how this
                   relationship is mediated are explicitly a function of external relations
                   and thus are not able to be mapped to any intrinsic properties.
                           Information is by deﬁnition something in relation to something
                   else, but in colloquial use the term can either refer to what is conveyed




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 133                                                              4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         134          Terrence W. Deacon


                      or what provides the conveyance. If, as in Shannon’s sense, it refers
                      only to the latter, then its aboutness and its signiﬁcance are assumed
                      potentialities but are temporarily ignored. The danger of being inex-
                      plicit about this bracketing of interpretive context is that one can treat
                      the sign as though it is intrinsically signiﬁcant, irrespective of any-
                      thing else, and thus end up reducing intentionality to mere physics, or
                      else imagine that physical distinctions are intrinsically informational
                      rather than informational only post hoc, that is, when interpreted.
                             However, although Shannon’s conception of information totally
                      ignores the issue of what information is about, or even that it is about
                      anything, his analysis nevertheless provides an important clue for
                      dealing with the absent-content problem, speciﬁcally by showing
                      that absence could have a function at all. This clue is provided by
                      Shannon’s negative characterization of information. Shannon’s meas-
                      ure of the potential information conveyed by a given message received
                      via a given communication channel is inseparable from the range of
                      signals that could have been received but were not. More precisely,
                      Shannon information is deﬁned as the amount of uncertainty that is
                      removed with the receipt of a given signal. So to measure information
                      requires comparing the potential variety of signals that could have
                      been transmitted to what was transmitted. Perhaps the most import-
                      ant contribution of this analysis was his recognition that measuring
                      the potential signal variety was mathematically analogous to measur-
                      ing the entropy of a physical system, such as an ideal gas. Following
                      the advice of the mathematician John von Neumann, he decided to
                      call this variety of possible states the “entropy” of the signal medium
                      (or “channel,” as he described it, using the model of a communication
                      channel between a sender and recipient of a message). This decision,
                      like the decision to deﬁne information capacity with respect to signal
                      constraint, has led to many confused debates about the physical cor-
                      relates of information. But these analogies are also important hints for
                      expanding the concept of information so that it can again embrace the
                      very features that had to be excluded from this engineering analysis.


                               8 .5 T W O E N T R O P I E S

                      By deﬁning information in negative terms with respect to the poten-
                      tial variety of what could have occurred, Shannon has inadvertently
                      pointed us toward the relevant physical property of the signal or sign
                      medium that provides access to what it is about, which is also a nega-
                      tive attribute. The key to seeing this link is simply recognizing that the




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 134                                                             4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
                                                 What is missing from theories of information?        135

                   representing medium, whatever form it takes, is necessarily a phys-
                   ical medium. It is something present that is taken to be about some-
                   thing not immediately present. The reduction in signal entropy has
                   the potential to carry information because it reﬂects the consequences
                   of physical work and thus the openness of this physical signal medium
                   to extrinsic inﬂuence. In thermodynamic terms (Boltzmann, 1866),
                   a change in the state of a physical system that would not otherwise
                   occur is inevitably characterized by a local reduction in its physical
                   entropy (I will describe this as “Boltzmann entropy” to distinguish it
                   from Shannon entropy) resulting from work done on that system from
                   outside. According to Shannon, the information-bearing capacity of a
                   signal is proportional to the improbability of its current physical state.
                   But an information medium is a physical medium, and a physical sys-
                   tem in an improbable state reﬂects the effects of prior physical work,
                   which perturbed it from some more probable state or states. In this
                   way, the Shannon information embodied in signal constraints impli-
                   citly represents this work. It is in this sense that Shannon entropy is
                   intimately related to Boltzmann entropy. It is explicitly the change in
                   the Boltzmann entropy of the medium that is the basis of signal ref-
                   erence, because this is necessarily a reﬂection of some extrinsic inﬂu-
                   ence (Deacon, 2007, 2008).
                          However, the relationship is more subtle than just the conse-
                   quence of physical work to change a signal medium. Although this
                   relation to work is fundamental, referential information can be con-
                   veyed both by the effect of work and the evidence that no work has
                   been done (Deacon, 2007, 2008). Thus, no news can be news that
                   something anticipated has not yet occurred. This demonstrates that
                   Shannon information and referential information are not equivalent.
                   This is again because the signal constraint is not something located
                   in the signal medium: it is rather a relationship between what is and
                   what could have been its state at any given moment. A reduction in
                   variability is a constraint, and a constraint is in this case not an intrin-
                   sic property but a relational property. It is deﬁned with respect to what
                   is not present. So implicitly, a physical system that exhibits constraint
                   is in that conﬁguration because of extrinsic inﬂuences – but like-
                   wise if the sign medium exhibits no constraint or change from some
                   stable state, it can be inferred that there was no extrinsic inﬂuence
                   doing work on it. The relationship of present to absent forms of a sign
                   medium embodies the openness of that medium to extrinsic interven-
                   tion, whether or not any interaction has occurred. Importantly, this
                   also means that the possibility of change due to work, not its actual




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 135                                                                4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         136          Terrence W. Deacon


                      effect, is the signal feature on which reference depends. This is what
                      allows absence itself, absence of change, or being in a highly probable
                      state to be informative.
                             Consider, for example, a typo in a manuscript. It can be consid-
                      ered a reduction of referential information because it reﬂects a lapse
                      in the constraint imposed by the language that is necessary to convey
                      the intended message, and yet it is also information about the proﬁ-
                      ciency of the typist, information that might be useful to a prospective
                      employer. Or consider a technician diagnosing the nature of a video
                      hardware problem by observing the way the image has become dis-
                      torted. What is signal and what is noise is not intrinsic to the sign
                      medium, because this is a determination with respect to reference.
                      But in either case the deviation from a predicted or expected state is
                      taken to refer to an otherwise unobserved cause. Similarly, a sign that
                      does not exhibit the effects of extrinsic inﬂuence – for example, set-
                      ting a burglar alarm to detect motion – can equally well provide infor-
                      mation that a possible event (a break-in) did not occur. Or consider
                      the thank you note not sent, or the tax return not submitted on time.
                      Here, even the absence of a communication is a communication that
                      can carry signiﬁcance and have dire consequences.
                             In all cases, however, the referential capacity of the informa-
                      tional vehicle is dependent on physical work that has, or could have,
                      altered the state of some medium open to extrinsic modiﬁcation.
                      This tells us that the link between Shannon entropy and Boltzmann
                      entropy is not mere analogy or formal parallelism. It is the ground of
                      reference.


                               8 .6 D A R W I N I S M A N D I N T E R P R E T A T I O N

                      Up to this point of the analysis it has been assumed that the relation-
                      ships being described have involved signs and signals, and not merely
                      physical events chosen at random. But in fact, none of the criteria spe-
                      ciﬁed thus far actually distinguishes events and objects that convey
                      information from those that do not. They are requirements for some-
                      thing to be information about something else, but they do not in
                      themselves constitute it. Shannon described the necessary conditions
                      for something to have the potential to convey information: providing
                      a syntactical conception. Even the linkage to physical work, while a
                      necessary requirement for referential capacity, is like Shannon’s cri-
                      terion, only a necessary but not sufﬁcient feature of reference: that
                      is, a semantic conception of information. But of course, not just any




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 136                                                           4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
                                                What is missing from theories of information?       137

                   alteration of entropy constitutes a reference relationship. Although
                   any physical difference can be interpreted as information about some-
                   thing else – whether it is the state of the mud on someone’s shoes or
                   the presence and evenness of the microwave background radiation of
                   the universe – this is not an intrinsic feature, but something entirely
                   relative to how it is interpreted. This post-hoc dependency does not
                   diminish the necessity of these attributes. It merely demonstrates that
                   they are not sufﬁcient. And yet, as we have seen, reference depends on
                   the responsiveness of the information medium to physical change.
                          A physical difference becomes informational when it plays
                   a modulatory role in a dynamic process. The potential to inform is
                   dependent on the Shannon–Boltzmann criteria just discussed, but this
                   potential is only actualized as it inﬂuences a speciﬁcally structured
                   dynamical process. Although we commonly talk about this as an inter-
                   pretive process, invoking folk psychological assumptions, this is still
                   for the most part a mere promissory note for a missing theory about
                   what dynamical organization is sufﬁcient to constitute such a pro-
                   cess. And this heuristic immediately becomes problematic when we
                   attempt to expand the usage to domains such as molecular biology, in
                   which the presence of a homuncular interpreter cannot be invoked.
                          A key insight into the conditions for interpretation was provided
                   by Gregory Bateson in an oft-cited aphorism proposed as a charac-
                   terization of information: Information is “a difference that makes a
                   difference” (Bateson, 1972). It is no coincidence that this phrase also
                   would be an apt description of mechanical or thermodynamic work.
                   Implicit in this phrase is the notion that information can be used to
                   change things. And in this sense it has the potential to control work.
                   So putting this idea about the physical basis of interpretation together
                   with the Boltzmannian criterion for referentiality we have: “a medium
                   that is susceptible to being modiﬁed by physical work, which is used
                   to modify the state of some other dynamical system because of that
                   system’s sensitivity to changes of this medium, and which is differen-
                   tially capable of performing work with respect to such a change.”
                          This is a complicated deﬁnition, but even so it lacks detail con-
                   cerning the nature of such a dynamical architecture, and so it is still
                   incomplete in a couple of important respects. These have to do with
                   informational relevance and the notion of function from which the
                   normative aspect of information arises: that is, the pragmatic con-
                   ception of information. Before trying to address these limitations,
                   however, we need to ﬂesh out the requirements for a system with
                   the capability to differentially perform work with respect to a given




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 137                                                              4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         138          Terrence W. Deacon


                      signal state. This is because these requirements will ultimately pro-
                      vide grounding for these additional features, and the basis upon which
                      the possibility for speciﬁc reference can arise.
                              It is a simple rule of thermodynamics that to be capable of per-
                      forming work a system must be in a non-equilibrium state. So, any full
                      explanation of what constitutes an interpretive process must include
                      a central role for non-equilibrium dynamics. But non-equilibrium
                      conditions are inherently transient and self-undermining. For a non-
                      equilibrium process to persist, it must rely on supportive environmen-
                      tal conditions (for example, a source of free energy and raw materials) to
                      make up for this spontaneous degradation. In this sense, like the signal
                      medium, it must be open to inﬂuences extrinsic to itself: for example,
                      a larger thermodynamic context to which it is well ﬁtted. Thus the
                      presence of a system maintaining a persistent non-equilibrium state
                      capable of performing work with respect to a source of information
                      entails the presence of environmental conditions that promote it.
                              This is important for the constitution of an interpretive process
                      for two additional reasons. First, the openness to context of an inter-
                      preting system cannot merely be sensitivity, as is the case for an infor-
                      mation medium. Persistence of a non-equilibrium thermodynamic
                      system requires a quite speciﬁc matching of dynamical organization
                      with extrinsic supportive conditions. In other words, there must be
                      a necessary correspondence in form between system and context.
                      Second, for a dynamical non-equilibrium system to be persistent there
                      must be some maintenance of self-similarity and thus boundedness to
                      it. It must have a unit identity in at least a loose sense.
                              Understanding that a process capable of generating information
                      necessarily involves non-equilibrium dynamics also provides a way to
                      address the normativity issue that is implicit in a pragmatic concep-
                      tion of information. Normativity in its various aspects has been a non-
                      trivial problem for correspondence and mapping theories of reference.
                      Following Bickhard (1998, 2000, 2003), I would argue that the norma-
                      tivity that deﬁnes representational error is an emergent property of
                      the relationship of the Shannon–Boltzmann referential relationship
                      with respect to the organization of the non-equilibrium processes that
                      interpret it. This follows because of the intrinsic dependence on spe-
                      ciﬁc environmental conditions that are required for such a dynamical
                      system to persist. To the extent that a particular signal interpretation
                      effectively contributes to this end, and thus aids the successful main-
                      tenance of this supportive correlation, then that particular interpret-
                      ive response to that particular state of the signal medium will also




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 138                                                             4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
                                                 What is missing from theories of information?       139

                   persist. Of course, the opposite is also possible; hence the possibility
                   of misinterpretation.
                          But even in the simplest case this presupposes a non-equilibrium
                   process that is precisely organized with respect to both supportive
                   environmental conditions and to some feature of that environment
                   that tends to correlate with those conditions. The establishment of
                   such a reliable relationship is then the transformation of an incidental
                   physical relationship into an information relationship. It is probably
                   the case that this matching of speciﬁc referential relationship with a
                   speciﬁc dynamical modiﬁcation of the capacity to perform work can
                   be achieved spontaneously only by an evolutionary process. Not sur-
                   prisingly, then, this analysis suggests that the generation of informa-
                   tion in the full sense is an emergent property of life. Of course, this
                   does not exclude the inﬁnitely many ways that information can be
                   generated and manipulated, indirectly, with respect to living proc-
                   esses. Yet these, too, must at least indirectly embody these same basic
                   criteria. It is in this sense that both the syntactic (Shannon) and seman-
                   tic (Shannon–Boltzmann) conceptions of information are ultimately
                   dependent on a pragmatic (Shannon–Boltzmann–Darwin) conception
                   (Deacon 2007, 2008). In this way, the process of evolution, in its most
                   general form, can be understood as the necessary originative source
                   for information. Where there is no evolutionary dynamic there is no
                   information in the full sense of the concept.


                           8.7 INFORMATION EVOLVES

                   The claim that evolution itself constitutes an information creation
                   process needs to be unpacked in order to complete this analysis. There
                   is yet an additional curious – but in hindsight not unexpected – par-
                   allel between the Shannonian determination of information cap-
                   acity and the evolutionary determination of ﬁttedness. Both involve
                   the relationship between a potential and a realized variety. Natural
                   selection depends on the generation of functionally uncorrelated (aka
                   “random”) variety of forms (genotypes and phenotypes) followed by
                   the reduction of this variety due to death or the failure to reproduce.
                   In our analysis of the Shannon–Boltzmann relationship, the referen-
                   tial potential of a signal medium was shown to be a consequence of
                   the way extrinsic factors reduce its potential variety (entropy). In the
                   process of natural selection an analogous role is played by conditions
                   in the environment that favor the reproduction and persistence of
                   some variants and not others. It is in this sense that we feel justiﬁed




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 139                                                               4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         140          Terrence W. Deacon


                      in claiming that the traits that are present in any given generation
                      of organisms are adaptations to (favorably correlated with) certain of
                      those conditions. Metaphorically speaking, they could be said to be
                      “about” those conditions.
                             There are deep disanalogies, however, that are crucial to explain-
                      ing why this process generates new information. First, the initial
                      variety is not signal variety, not merely variations of some passive sub-
                      strate. The variety that is subject to the constraining inﬂuence of nat-
                      ural selection involves variation of processes and structures associated
                      with the interpretive system itself. Second, the non-equilibrium dynam-
                      ics of organisms competing with one another to extract or sequester
                      resources is the source of the work that is the basis for this reduction
                      in population “entropy.” And third, the variety that is subject to selec-
                      tion is being generated anew in each generation by virtue of what in
                      Shannonian terms would be considered noise (that is, mutations and
                      recombinations) introduced into the signal (that is, genetic inherit-
                      ance). Thus what amounts to uncorrelated corruptions of the genetic
                      signal and incidental physical attributes can become information to
                      the extent that they result in variations of the interpretive–adaptive
                      process that happen to embody correlated predictive correspondences
                      between the dynamics of interpretation and the supportive conditions
                      enabling this interpretation. The capability of the Darwinian process
                      to generate new information about organism–environment (and by
                      extension the interpreter–context) interdependency is the ultimate
                      demonstration of the post-hoc nature of information. This evolution-
                      ary transformation of noise into information is the ultimate demon-
                      stration that what makes something information is not intrinsic to
                      any features of the information-conveying medium itself. It is irredu-
                      cibly relational and systemic, and at every level of analysis dependent
                      on a relationship to something not present.


                               8 .8 C O N C L U S I O N S

                      The “intentional inexistence” of the content of a thought, the imagined
                      signiﬁcance of a coincidental event, the meaning of a reading from a
                      scientiﬁc instrument, the portent of the pattern of tea leaves, and so
                      on, really is something that is not there. In this sense the Cartesian-
                      derived notion that the content of mind is without extension, whereas
                      the brain processes that realize this content do have extension, is at
                      least partly correct. But to say that this absent content is extensionless
                      is not quite right. The non-produced signal (that is, reduced entropy)




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 140                                                             4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
                                                What is missing from theories of information?       141

                   that is the basis for Shannonian informative capacity, the non-present
                   work that was or was not the basis for the reference of this signal, and
                   the interpretive options (organism trait variations) selected in an evo-
                   lutionary process, all have a deﬁnite negative extension in the sense
                   that something speciﬁc and explicit is missing. In other words, like the
                   space within a container, these are absences that are useful because of
                   the way what is present can exemplify them.
                          The nearly universal tendency to attribute intentional phenom-
                   ena to a disembodied realm is a reﬂection of this negative deﬁning
                   feature, but the apparent paradoxes this creates with respect to the
                   physical efﬁcacy of informational content is the result of misinterpret-
                   ing this negative feature as though it is in some way substantial in
                   a separate disembodied realm. The modern shift to abandoning all
                   consideration of intentionality in deﬁnitions of information, as the
                   concept has come to be used in the sciences, in order to focus entirely
                   on the material–logical attributes of signal differences has corres-
                   pondingly stripped the concept of its distinctive value and has led to
                   a reduction of information relationships to relationships of physical
                   difference. As a result this most common and undeniable feature of
                   our existence is often treated as though it is epiphenomenal. Even
                   the recent efforts to reframe intentionality with respect to its embodi-
                   ment, effectively recapitulates a cryptic form of dualism in terms of
                   a variant of dual aspect theory. But avoiding addressing the “inexist-
                   ence” problem in these ways guarantees that the real-world efﬁcacy of
                   information remains inexplicable.
                          Like so many other “hard problems” in philosophy, I believe that
                   this one, too, appears to have been a function of asking the wrong sort
                   of questions. Talking about cognition in terms of the mind–brain –
                   implying a metaphysically primitive identity – or talking about mind
                   as the software of the brain – implying that mental content can be
                   reduced to syntactic relationships embodied in and mapped to neural
                   mechanics – both miss the point. The content that constitutes mind
                   is not in the brain, nor is it embodied in neuronal processes in bodies
                   interacting with the outside world. It is, in a precisely deﬁnable sense,
                   that which determines which variations of neural signaling processes
                   are not occurring, and that which will in a round-about and indirect
                   way help reinforce and perpetuate the patterns of neural activity that
                   are occurring. Informational content distinguishes semiosis from mere
                   physical difference. And it has its inﬂuence on worldly events by virtue
                   of the quite precise way that it is not present. Attempts to attribute a
                   quasi-substantial quality to information or to reduce it to some speciﬁc




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 141                                                              4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
         142          Terrence W. Deacon


                      physical property are not only doomed to incompleteness, they ultim-
                      ately ignore its most fundamental distinctive characteristic.


                               REFERENCES

                      Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology,
                          Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
                          Press.
                      Bickhard, M. H. (1998). Levels of representationality. Journal of Experimental and
                          Theoretical Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 10(2): 179–215.
                      Bickhard, M. H. (2000). Autonomy, function, and representation. Communication
                          and Cognition – Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 17(3–4): 111–131.
                      Bickhard, M. H. (2003). The biological emergence of representation. In Emergence
                          and Reduction: Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium of the Jean Piaget Society,
                          eds T. Brown and L. Smith. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 105–131.
                      Boltzmann, L. (1866). The Second Law of Thermodynamics. Reprinted in Ludwig
                          Boltzmann: Theoretical Physics and Philosophical Problems, Selected Writings, ed.
                          B. McGuinness, trans. P. Foulkes (1974). Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Co.,
                          13–32.
                      Brentano, F. (1874). Psychology From an Empirical Standpoint. London: Routledge &
                          Kegan Paul, 88–89.
                      Deacon, T. (2007). Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: Redeﬁning information. Part 1.
                          Cognitive Semiotics, 1: 123–148.
                      Deacon, T. (2008). Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: Redeﬁning information. Part 2.
                          Cognitive Semiotics, 2: 167–194.
                      Shannon, C. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System
                          Technical Journal, 27: 279–423, 623–656.
                      Shannon, C., and Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication.
                          Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.




9780521762250c08_p123-142.indd 142                                                                          4/26/2010 4:23:53 PM
