    Decoherence and the Transition
           from Quantum
       to Classical—Revisited
                                                                   Wojciech H. Zurek




            This paper has a somewhat unusual origin and, as a consequence, an unusual struc-
         ture. It is built on the principle embraced by families who outgrow their dwellings and
         decide to add a few rooms to their existing structures instead of starting from scratch.
         These additions usually “show,” but the whole can still be quite pleasing to the eye,
         combining the old and the new in a functional way.
            What follows is such a “remodeling” of the paper I wrote a dozen years ago
         for Physics Today (1991). The old text (with some modifications) is interwoven with
         the new text, but the additions are set off in boxes throughout this article and serve as a
         commentary on new developments as they relate to the original. The references appear
         together at the end.
            In 1991, the study of decoherence was still a rather new subject, but already at that
         time, I had developed a feeling that most implications about the system’s “immersion”
         in the environment had been discovered in the preceding 10 years, so a review was in
         order. While writing it, I had, however, come to suspect that the small gaps in the land-
         scape of the border territory between the quantum and the classical were actually not
         that small after all and that they presented excellent opportunities for further advances.
            Indeed, I am surprised and gratified by how much the field has evolved over the last
         decade. The role of decoherence was recognized by a wide spectrum of practicing
         physicists as well as, beyond physics proper, by material scientists and philosophers.




2                                                                     Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
The study of the predictability sieve, investigations of the interface between
chaotic dynamics and decoherence, and most recently, the tantalizing glimpses of
the information-theoretic nature of the quantum have elucidated our understanding
of the Universe. During this period, Los Alamos has grown into a leading center
for the study of decoherence and related issues through the enthusiastic participation
of a superb group of staff members, postdoctoral fellows, long-term visitors, and
students, many of whom have become long-term collaborators. This group includes,
in chronological order, Andy Albrecht, Juan Pablo Paz, Bill Wootters, Raymond
Laflamme, Salman Habib, Jim Anglin, Chris Jarzynski, Kosuke Shizume,
Ben Schumacher, Manny Knill, Jacek Dziarmaga, Diego Dalvit, Zbig Karkuszewski,
Harold Ollivier, Roberto Onofrio, Robin Blume-Kohut, David Poulin, Lorenza
Viola, and David Wallace.
   Finally, I have some advice to the reader. I believe this paper
should be read twice: first, just the old text alone; then—and
only then—on the second reading, the whole thing. I would also
recommend to the curious reader two other overviews: the draft
of my Reviews of Modern Physics paper (Zurek 2001a) and
Les Houches Lectures coauthored with Juan Pablo Paz
(Paz and Zurek 2001).




Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                        3
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



                                                                   Introduction

                                 Quantum mechanics works exceedingly well in all practical applications. No example
                              of conflict between its predictions and experiment is known. Without quantum physics,
                              we could not explain the behavior of the solids, the structure and function of DNA,
                              the color of the stars, the action of lasers, or the properties of superfluids. Yet nearly
                              a century after its inception, the debate about the relation of quantum physics to the
                              familiar physical world continues. Why is a theory that seems to account with precision
                              for everything we can measure still deemed lacking?
                                 The only “failure” of quantum theory is its inability to provide a natural framework
                              for our prejudices about the workings of the Universe. States of quantum systems evolve
                              according to the deterministic, linear Schrödinger equation

                                      d                                                                                (1)
                                 ih      ψ =Hψ .
                                      dt

                              That is, just as in classical mechanics, given the initial state of the system and its
                              Hamiltonian H, one can, at least in principle, compute the state at an arbitrary time.
                              This deterministic evolution of |ψ〉 has been verified in carefully controlled experiments.
                              Moreover, there is no indication of a border between quantum and classical at which
                              Equation (1) would fail (see cartoon on the opener to this article).
                                  There is, however, a very poorly controlled experiment with results so tangible and
                              immediate that it has enormous power to convince: Our perceptions are often difficult to
                              reconcile with the predictions of Equation (1). Why? Given almost any initial condition,
                              the Universe described by |ψ〉 evolves into a state containing many alternatives that are
                              never seen to coexist in our world. Moreover, while the ultimate evidence for the choice
                              of one alternative resides in our elusive “consciousness,” there is every indication that
                              the choice occurs much before consciousness ever gets involved and that, once made, the
                              choice is irrevocable. Thus, at the root of our unease with quantum theory is the clash
                              between the principle of superposition—the basic tenet of the theory reflected in the
                              linearity of Equation (1)—and everyday classical reality in which this principle appears
                              to be violated.
                                  The problem of measurement has a long and fascinating history. The first widely
                              accepted explanation of how a single outcome emerges from the multitude of potentiali-
                              ties was the Copenhagen Interpretation proposed by Niels Bohr (1928), who insisted
                              that a classical apparatus is necessary to carry out measurements. Thus, quantum theory
                              was not to be universal. The key feature of the Copenhagen Interpretation is the dividing
                              line between quantum and classical. Bohr emphasized that the border must be mobile so
                              that even the “ultimate apparatus”—the human nervous system—could in principle be
                              measured and analyzed as a quantum object, provided that a suitable classical device
                              could be found to carry out the task.
                                  In the absence of a crisp criterion to distinguish between quantum and classical,
                              an identification of the classical with the macroscopic has often been tentatively accepted.
                              The inadequacy of this approach has become apparent as a result of relatively recent
                              developments: A cryogenic version of the Weber bar—a gravity-wave detector— must
                              be treated as a quantum harmonic oscillator even though it may weigh a ton (Braginsky
                              et al. 1980, Caves et al. 1980). Nonclassical squeezed states can describe oscillations of
                              suitably prepared electromagnetic fields with macroscopic numbers of photons (Teich
                              and Saleh 1990). Finally, quantum states associated with the currents of superconducting
                              Josephson junctions involve macroscopic numbers of electrons, but still they can tunnel
                              between the minima of the effective potential corresponding to the opposite sense of
                              rotation (Leggett et al. 1987, Caldeira and Leggett 1983a, Tesche 1986).



4                                                                                        Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                      Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



    If macroscopic systems cannot be always safely placed on the classical side of the
boundary, then might there be no boundary at all? The Many Worlds Interpretation (or
more accurately, the Many Universes Interpretation), developed by Hugh Everett III with
encouragement from John Archibald Wheeler in the 1950s, claims to do away with the
boundary (Everett 1957, Wheeler 1957). In this interpretation, the entire universe is
described by quantum theory. Superpositions evolve forever according to the Schrödinger
equation. Each time a suitable interaction takes place between any two quantum systems,
the wave function of the universe splits, developing ever more “branches.”
    Initially, Everett’s work went almost unnoticed. It was taken out of mothballs over a
decade later by Bryce DeWitt (1970) and DeWitt and Neill Graham (1973), who man-
aged to upgrade its status from “virtually unknown” to “very controversial.” The Many
Worlds Interpretation is a natural choice for quantum cosmology, which describes the
whole Universe by means of a state vector. There is nothing more macroscopic than the
Universe. It can have no a priori classical subsystems. There can be no observer “on the
outside.” In this universal setting, classicality must be an emergent property of the
selected observables or systems.
    At first glance, the Many Worlds and Copenhagen Interpretations have little in
common. The Copenhagen Interpretation demands an a priori “classical domain” with a
border that enforces a classical “embargo” by letting through just one potential outcome.
The Many Worlds Interpretation aims to abolish the need for the border altogether.
Every potential outcome is accommodated by the ever-proliferating branches of the
wave function of the Universe. The similarity between the difficulties faced by these two
viewpoints becomes apparent, nevertheless, when we ask the obvious question, “Why do
I, the observer, perceive only one of the outcomes?” Quantum theory, with its freedom
to rotate bases in Hilbert space, does not even clearly define which states of the
Universe correspond to the “branches.” Yet, our perception of a reality with alterna-
tives—not a coherent superposition of alternatives—demands an explanation of when,
where, and how it is decided what the observer actually records. Considered in this
context, the Many Worlds Interpretation in its original version does not really abolish
the border but pushes it all the way to the boundary between the physical Universe and
consciousness. Needless to say, this is a very uncomfortable place to do physics.
    In spite of the profound nature of the difficulties, recent years have seen a growing con-
sensus that progress is being made in dealing with the measurement problem, which is the
usual euphemism for the collection of interpretational conundrums described above. The
key (and uncontroversial) fact has been known almost since the inception of quantum the-
ory, but its significance for the transition from quantum to classical is being recognized
only now: Macroscopic systems are never isolated from their environments. Therefore—as
H. Dieter Zeh emphasized (1970)—they should not be expected to follow Schrödinger’s
equation, which is applicable only to a closed system. As a result, systems usually
regarded as classical suffer (or benefit) from the natural loss of quantum coherence, which
“leaks out” into the environment (Zurek 1981, 1982). The resulting “decoherence” cannot
be ignored when one addresses the problem of the reduction of the quantum mechanical
wave packet: Decoherence imposes, in effect, the required “embargo” on the potential out-
comes by allowing the observer to maintain records of alternatives but to be aware of only
one of the branches—one of the “decoherent histories” in the nomenclature of Murray
Gell-Mann and James Hartle (1990) and Hartle (1991).
    The aim of this paper is to explain the physics and thinking behind this approach.
The reader should be warned that this writer is not a disinterested witness to this devel-
opment (Wigner 1983, Joos and Zeh 1985, Haake and Walls 1986, Milburn and Holmes
1986, Albrecht 1991, Hu et al. 1992), but rather, one of the proponents. I shall, neverthe-
less, attempt to paint a fairly honest picture and point out the difficulties as well as the
accomplishments.



Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                     5
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited




                               Decoherence in Quantum Information Processing

    Much of what was written in the introduction              science of quantum information processing. This last
    remains valid today. One important development is         development is discussed elsewhere in this issue, so
    the increase in experimental evidence for the validity    I shall not dwell on it here.
    of the quantum principle of superposition in various
    contexts including spectacular double-slit experi-        The application of quantum physics to information
    ments that demonstrate interference of fullerenes         processing has also transformed the nature of interest
    (Arndt et al. 1999), the study of superpositions in       in the process of decoherence: At the time of my orig-
    Josephson junctions (Mooij et al.1999, Friedman et        inal review (1991), decoherence was a solution to the
    al. 2000), and the implementation of Schrödinger’s        interpretation problem—a mechanism to impose an
    “kittens” in atom interferometry (Chapman et al.          effective classicality on de facto quantum systems. In
    1995, Pfau et al. 1994), ion traps (Monroe et al.         quantum information processing, decoherence plays
    1996) and microwave cavities (Brune et al. 1996).         two roles. Above all, it is a threat to the quantumness
     In addition to confirming the superposition principle    of quantum information. It invalidates the quantum
    and other exotic aspects of quantum theory (such as       superposition principle and thus turns quantum com-
    entanglement) in novel settings, these experiments        puters into (at best) classical computers, negating the
    allow—as we shall see later—for a controlled              potential power offered by the quantumness of the
    investigation of decoherence.                             algorithms. But decoherence is also a necessary
                                                              (although often taken for granted) ingredient in quan-
    The other important change that influenced the per-       tum information processing, which must, after all, end
    ception of the quantum-to-classical “border territory”    in a “measurement.”
    is the explosion of interest in quantum information
    and computation. Although quantum computers were          The role of a measurement is to convert quantum
    already being discussed in the 1980s, the nature of the   states and quantum correlations (with their
    interest has changed since Peter Shor invented his        characteristic indefiniteness and malleability) into
    factoring algorithm. Impressive theoretical advances,     classical, definite outcomes. Decoherence leads to
    including the discovery of quantum error correction       the environment-induced superselection (einselection)
    and resilient quantum computation, quickly followed,      that justifies the existence of the preferred pointer
    accompanied by increasingly bold experimental for-        states. It enables one to draw an effective border
    ays. The superposition principle, once the cause of       between the quantum and the classical in straightfor-
    trouble for the interpretation of quantum theory, has     ward terms, which do not appeal to the “collapse of
    become the central article of faith in the emerging       the wave packet” or any other such deus ex machina.




                                                         Correlations and Measurements

                                   A convenient starting point for the discussion of the measurement problem and, more
                                generally, of the emergence of classical behavior from quantum dynamics is the analysis
                                of quantum measurements due to John von Neumann (1932). In contrast to Bohr, who
                                assumed at the outset that the apparatus must be classical (thereby forfeiting claims that
                                quantum theory is universal), von Neumann analyzed the case of a quantum apparatus.
                                I shall reproduce his analysis for the simplest case: a measurement on a two-state sys-
                                tem S (which can be thought of as an atom with spin 1/2) in which a quantum two-state
                                (one bit) detector records the result.
                                   The Hilbert space HS of the system is spanned by the orthonormal states |↑〉 and |↓〉,
                                while the states |d↑〉 and |d↓〉 span the HD of the detector. A two-dimensional HD is the
                                absolute minimum needed to record the possible outcomes. One can devise a quantum



6                                                                                          Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                      Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



(a)                                                                                              Figure 1. A Reversible
                                                                                                 Stern-Gerlach Apparatus
                                                                                                 The “gedanken” reversible
                       S                         N                                  S            Stern-Gerlach apparatus in (a)
                                                                                                 splits a beam of atoms into two
      A                                                                                    B     branches that are correlated
                       N                         S       z                          N            with the component of the spin
                                                                 y                               of the atoms (b) and then
                                                             x                                   recombines the branches
                                                                                                 before the atoms leave the
(b)                                                                                              device. Eugene Wigner (1963)
                                                                                                 used this gedanken experiment
                                                                         Detector
                                                                                                 to show that a correlation
                                                                     *                           between the spin and the loca-
                                                                                                 tion of an atom can be
                                                                                                 reversibly undone. The intro-
      A                                                                                    B     duction of a one-bit (two-state)
                                                                                                 quantum detector that changes
                                                                                                 its state when the atom passes
                                                                                                 nearby prevents the reversal:
                                                                                                 The detector inherits the corre-
                                                                                                 lation between the spin and the
                                                                                                 trajectory, so the Stern-Gerlach
                                                                                                 apparatus can no longer undo
                                                                                                 the correlation. (This illustration was
                                                                                                 adapted with permission from Zurek
detector (see Figure 1) that “clicks” only when the spin is in the state |↑〉, that is,           1981.)



   |↑〉 |d↓〉 → |↑〉 |d↑〉 ,                                                                   (2)

and remains unperturbed otherwise (Zeh 1970, Wigner 1963, Scully et al. 1989).
   I shall assume that, before the interaction, the system was in a pure state |ψS〉 given by

   |ψS〉 = α|↑〉 + β|↓〉 ,                                                                    (3)

with the complex coefficients satisfying |α|2 + |β|2 = 1. The composite system starts as

   |Φi〉 = |ψS〉|d↓〉 .                                                                       (4)

Interaction results in the evolution of |Φi〉 into a correlated state |Φc〉:

   |Φi〉 = (α|↑〉 + β|↓〉)|d↓〉 ⇒ α|↑〉|d↑〉 + β|↓〉|d↓〉 = |Φc〉 .                                 (5)

This essential and uncontroversial first stage of the measurement process can be accom-
plished by means of a Schrödinger equation with an appropriate interaction. It might be
tempting to halt the discussion of measurements with Equation (5). After all, the corre-
lated state vector |Φc〉 implies that, if the detector is seen in the state |d↑〉, the system is
guaranteed to be found in the state |↑〉. Why ask for anything more?
    The reason for dissatisfaction with |Φc〉 as a description of a completed measurement
is simple and fundamental: In the real world, even when we do not know the outcome of
a measurement, we do know the possible alternatives, and we can safely act as if only
one of those alternatives has occurred. As we shall see in the next section, such an
assumption is not only unsafe but also simply wrong for a system described by |Φc〉.
    How then can an observer (who has not yet consulted the detector) express his
ignorance about the outcome without giving up his certainty about the “menu” of the



Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                                     7
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



                              possibilities? Quantum theory provides the right formal tool for the occasion: A density
                              matrix can be used to describe the probability distribution over the alternative outcomes.
                                 Von Neumann was well aware of these difficulties. Indeed, he postulated (1932) that,
                              in addition to the unitary evolution given by Equation (1), there should be an ad hoc
                              “process 1”—a nonunitary reduction of the state vector—that would take the pure, cor-
                              related state |Φc〉 into an appropriate mixture: This process makes the outcomes inde-
                              pendent of one another by taking the pure-state density matrix:

                                 ρc = |Φc〉〈Φc| = |α|2|↑〉〈↑||d↑〉〈d↑| + αβ*|↑〉〈↓||d↑〉〈d↓|

                                         + α∗β|↓〉〈↑|d↓〉〈d↑| + |β|2|↓〉〈↓||d↓〉〈d↓| ,                                      (6)

                              and canceling the off-diagonal terms that express purely quantum correlations (entangle-
                              ment) so that the reduced density matrix with only classical correlations emerges:

                                 ρr = |α|2|↑〉〈↑||d↑〉〈d↑| + |β|2|↓〉〈↓||d↓〉〈d↓| .                                         (7)

                              Why is the reduced ρr easier to interpret as a description of a completed measurement
                              than ρc? After all, both ρr and ρc contain identical diagonal elements. Therefore, both
                              outcomes are still potentially present. So what—if anything—was gained at the substan-
                              tial price of introducing a nonunitary process 1?


                                       The Question of Preferred Basis: What Was Measured?

                                 The key advantage of ρr over ρc is that its coefficients may be interpreted as classical
                              probabilities. The density matrix ρr can be used to describe the alternative states of a
                              composite spin-detector system that has classical correlations. Von Neumann’s
                              process 1 serves a similar purpose to Bohr’s “border” even though process 1 leaves all
                              the alternatives in place. When the off-diagonal terms are absent, one can nevertheless
                              safely maintain that the apparatus, as well as the system, is each separately in a definite
                              but unknown state, and that the correlation between them still exists in the preferred
                              basis defined by the states appearing on the diagonal. By the same token, the identities
                              of two halves of a split coin placed in two sealed envelopes may be unknown but are
                              classically correlated. Holding one unopened envelope, we can be sure that the half it
                              contains is either “heads” or “tails” (and not some superposition of the two) and that the
                              second envelope contains the matching alternative.
                                 By contrast, it is impossible to interpret ρc as representing such “classical ignorance.”
                              In particular, even the set of the alternative outcomes is not decided by ρc! This circum-
                              stance can be illustrated in a dramatic fashion by choosing α = –β = 1/√2 so that the
                              density matrix ρc is a projection operator constructed from the correlated state

                                 |Φc〉 = (|↑〉|d↑〉 – |↓〉|d↓〉)/√2 .                                                        (8)

                              This state is invariant under the rotations of the basis. For instance, instead of the eigen-
                              states of |↑〉 and |↓〉 of σ̂z one can rewrite |Φc〉 in terms of the eigenstates of σ̂x:

                                 |〉 = (|↑〉 + |↓〉)/√2 ,                                                                (9a)

                                 |⊗〉 = (|↑〉 – |↓〉)/√2 .                                                                (9b)




8                                                                                         Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                     Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



This representation immediately yields

   |Φc〉 = – (|〉|d〉 – |⊗〉|d⊗〉)/√2 ,                                             (10)

   where

   |d〉 = (|d↓〉 – |d↑〉)/√2 and |d⊗〉 = (|d↑〉 + |d↓〉)/√2                           (11)

are, as a consequence of the superposition principle, perfectly “legal” states in the
Hilbert space of the quantum detector. Therefore, the density matrix

   ρc = |Φc〉〈Φc|

could have many (in fact, infinitely many) different states of the subsystems on the
diagonal.
   This freedom to choose a basis should not come as a surprise. Except for the
notation, the state vector |Φc〉 is the same as the wave function of a pair of maxi-
mally correlated (or entangled) spin-1/2 systems in David Bohm’s version (1951)
of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) paradox (Einstein et al. 1935). And the
experiments that show that such nonseparable quantum correlations violate Bell’s
inequalities (Bell 1964) are demonstrating the following key point: The states of
the two spins in a system described by |Φc〉 are not just unknown, but rather they
cannot exist before the “real” measurement (Aspect et al. 1981, 1982). We con-
clude that when a detector is quantum, a superposition of records exists and is a
record of a superposition of outcomes—a very nonclassical state of affairs.


                   Missing Information and Decoherence

    Unitary evolution condemns every closed quantum system to “purity.” Yet, if the
outcomes of a measurement are to become independent events, with consequences
that can be explored separately, a way must be found to dispose of the excess infor-
mation and thereby allow any orthogonal basis—any potential events and their
superpositions—to be equally correlated. In the previous sections, quantum correla-
tion was analyzed from the point of view of its role in acquiring information. Here,
I shall discuss the flip side of the story: Quantum correlations can also disperse
information throughout the degrees of freedom that are, in effect, inaccessible
to the observer. Interaction with the degrees of freedom external to the system—
which we shall summarily refer to as the environment—offers such a possibility.
    Reduction of the state vector, ρc ⇒ ρr, decreases the information available to
the observer about the composite system SD. The information loss is needed if
the outcomes are to become classical and thereby available as initial conditions to
predict the future. The effect of this loss is to increase the entropy H = –Trρ lgρ
by an amount

   ∆H = H(ρr) – H(ρc) = – (|α|2 lg|α|2 + |β|2 lg|β|2) .                          (12)

   Entropy must increase because the initial state described by ρc was pure,
H(ρc) = 0, and the reduced state is mixed. Information gain—the objective of the
measurement—is accomplished only when the observer interacts and becomes
correlated with the detector in the already precollapsed state ρr.




Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                    9
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



                                 To illustrate the process of the environment-induced decoherence, consider a
                              system S, a detector D, and an environment E. The environment is also a quantum
                              system. Following the first step of the measurement process—establishment of a
                              correlation as shown in Equation (5)—the environment similarly interacts and
                              becomes correlated with the apparatus:

                                 |Φc〉| E0〉 = (α|↑〉|d↑〉 + β|↓〉|d↓〉)| E 0〉 ⇒ α|↑〉|d↑〉| E ↑〉 + β|↓〉|d↓〉| E ↓〉 = |Ψ〉 .      (13)

                                 The final state of the combined SDE “von Neumann chain” of correlated systems
                              extends the correlation beyond the SD pair. When the states of the environment |Ei〉
                              corresponding to the states |d↑〉 and |d↓〉 of the detector are orthogonal, 〈Ei|Ei′〉 = δii′,
                              the density matrix for the detector-system combination is obtained by ignoring (tracing
                              over) the information in the uncontrolled (and unknown) degrees of freedom

                                 ρDS = TrE |Ψ〉〈Ψ| = Σ i〈Ei|Ψ〉〈Ψ|Ei′〉 = |α|2|↑〉〈↑||d↑〉〈d↑| + |β|2|↓〉〈↓||d↓〉〈d↓| = ρr .   (14)

                                 The resulting ρr is precisely the reduced density matrix that von Neumann called for.
                              Now, in contrast to the situation described by Equations (9)–(11), a superposition of the
                              records of the detector states is no longer a record of a superposition of the state of the
                              system. A preferred basis of the detector, sometimes called the “pointer basis” for obvi-
                              ous reasons, has emerged. Moreover, we have obtained it—or so it appears—without
                              having to appeal to von Neumann’s nonunitary process 1 or anything else beyond the
                              ordinary, unitary Schrödinger evolution. The preferred basis of the detector—or for that
                              matter, of any open quantum system—is selected by the dynamics.
                                 Not all aspects of this process are completely clear. It is, however, certain that the
                              detector–environment interaction Hamiltonian plays a decisive role. In particular, when
                              the interaction with the environment dominates, eigenspaces of any observable Λ that
                              commutes with the interaction Hamiltonian,

                                     [Λ, Hint] = 0 ,                                                                    (15)

                              invariably end up on the diagonal of the reduced density matrix (Zurek 1981, 1982).
                              This commutation relation has a simple physical implication: It guarantees that the
                              pointer observable Λ will be a constant of motion, a conserved quantity under the evolu-
                              tion generated by the interaction Hamiltonian. Thus, when a system is in an eigenstate
                              of Λ, interaction with the environment will leave it unperturbed.
                                 In the real world, the spreading of quantum correlations is practically inevitable. For
                              example, when in the course of measuring the state of a spin-1/2 atom (see Figure 1b), a
                              photon had scattered from the atom while it was traveling along one of its two alterna-
                              tive routes, this interaction would have resulted in a correlation with the environment
                              and would have necessarily led to a loss of quantum coherence. The density matrix of
                              the SD pair would have lost its off-diagonal terms. Moreover, given that it is impossible
                              to catch up with the photon, such loss of coherence would have been irreversible. As we
                              shall see later, irreversibility could also arise from more familiar, statistical causes:
                              Environments are notorious for having large numbers of interacting degrees of freedom,
                              making extraction of lost information as difficult as reversing trajectories in the
                              Boltzmann gas.




10                                                                                         Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                    Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited




                                    Quantum Discord—A Measure of Quantumness

    The contrast between the density matrices in               tumness: In quantum physics, the state collapses into
    Equations (6) and (7) is stark and obvious. In particu-    one of the eigenstates of the measured observable.
    lar, the entanglement between the system and the           Hence, a state of the object is redefined by a measure-
    detector in ρc is obviously quantum—classical sys-         ment. Thus, the joint entropy can be defined in terms
    tems cannot be entangled. The argument against the         of the conditional entropy only after the measurement
    “ignorance” interpretation of ρc still stands. Yet we      used to access, say, D, has been specified. In that
    would like to have a quantitative measure of how           case,
    much is classical (or how much is quantum) about the
    correlations of a state represented by a general density   H |dk〉(S, D) = (H(D) + H(S|D))|dk〉 .
    matrix. Such a measure of the quantumness of corre-
    lation was devised recently (Ollivier and Zurek 2002).     This type of joint entropy expresses the ignorance
    It is known as quantum discord. Of the several closely     about the pair (S, D) after the observable with the
    related definitions of discord, we shall select one that   eigenstates {|dk〉} has been measured on D. Of course,
    is easiest to explain. It is based on mutual informa-      H |dk〉(S, D) is not the only way to define the entropy
    tion—an information-theoretic measure of how much          of the pair. One can also compute a basis-independent
    easier it is to describe the state of a pair of objects    joint entropy H (S, D), the von Neumann entropy of
    (S, D) jointly rather than separately. One formula for     the pair. Since these two definitions of joint entropy
    mutual information I(S:D) is simply                        do not coincide in the quantum case, we can define a
                                                               basis-dependent quantum discord
    I(S:D) = H(S) + H(D) – H(S, D),
                                                               δ |dk〉(S|D) = I – J = (H (D) + H (S|D))|dk〉 – H (S,D)
    where H(S) and H(D) are the entropies of S and D,
    respectively, and H(S, D) is the joint entropy of the      as the measure of the extent by which the underlying
    two. When S and D are not correlated (statistically        density matrix describing S and D is perturbed by a
    independent),                                              measurement of the observable with the eigenstates
                                                               {|dk〉}. States of classical objects—or classical corre-
    H(S, D) = H(S) + H(D),                                     lations—are “objective:” They exist independent of
                                                               measurements. Hence, when there is a basis {|d̂k〉}
    and I(S:D) = 0. By contrast, when there is a perfect       such that the minimum discord evaluated for this basis
    classical correlation between them (for example, two       disappears,
    copies of the same book), H(S, D) = H(S) = H(D)
    = I(S:D). Perfect classical correlation implies that,      δ̂ (S|D) = min{|dk〉}(H(S,D) – (H(D) + H(S|D))|dk〉 = 0,
    when we find out all about one of them, we also know
    everything about the other, and the conditional            the correlation can be regarded as effectively classical
    entropy H(S|D) (a measure of the uncertainty about         (or more precisely, as “classically accessible through
    S after the state of D is found out) disappears.           D”). One can then show that there is a set of probabil-
    Indeed, classically, the joint entropy H (S, D) can        ities associated with the basis {|dk〉} that can be treat-
    always be decomposed into, say H (D), which meas-          ed as classical. It is straightforward to see that, when
    ures the information missing about D, and the condi-       S and D are entangled (for example, ρc = |φc 〉〈φc|),
    tional entropy H (S|D). Information is still missing       then δ̂ > 0 in all bases. By contrast, if we consider ρr,
    about S even after the state of D has been deter-          discord disappears in the basis {|d↑〉, |d↓〉} so that the
    mined: H(S, D) = H(D) + H(S|D). This expression            underlying correlation is effectively classical.
    for the joint entropy suggests an obvious rewrite of
    the preceding definition of mutual information into a      It is important to emphasize that quantum discord is
    classically identical form, namely,                        not just another measure of entanglement but a gen-
                                                               uine measure of the quantumness of correlations. In
    J(S:D) = H(S) + H(D) – (H(D) + H(S|D)).                    situations involving measurements and decoherence,
                                                               quantumness disappears for the preferred set of states
    Here, we have abstained from the obvious (and per-         that are effectively classical and thus serves as an
    fectly justified from a classical viewpoint) cancella-     indicator of the pointer basis, which as we shall see,
    tion in order to emphasize the central feature of quan-    emerges as a result of decoherence and einselection.




Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                          11
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



                                                          Decoherence: How Long Does It Take?

                                        A tractable model of the environment is afforded by a collection of harmonic oscilla-
                                    tors (Feynman and Vernon 1963, Dekker 1981, Caldeira and Leggett 1983a, 1983b,
                                    1985, Joos and Zeh 1985, Paz et al. 1993) or, equivalently, by a quantum field (Unruh
                                    and Zurek 1989). If a particle is present, excitations of the field will scatter off the parti-
                                     cle. The resulting “ripples” will constitute a record of its position, shape, orientation,
                                     and so on, and most important, its instantaneous location and hence its trajectory.
               ∆x
                                         A boat traveling on a quiet lake or a stone that fell into water will leave such an
     χ+                        χ–    imprint on the water surface. Our eyesight relies on the perturbation left by the objects
                                     on the preexisting state of the electromagnetic field. Hence, it is hardly surprising that
                         δ
                                     an imprint is left whenever two quantum systems interact, even when “nobody is
                                     looking,” and even when the lake is stormy and full of preexisting waves, and the field
                                     is full of excitations—that is, when the environment starts in equilibrium at some finite
                                     temperature. “Messy” initial states of the environment make it difficult to decipher the
Figure 2. A “Schrödinger             record, but do not preclude its existence.
Cat” State or a Coherent                A specific example of decoherence—a particle at position x interacting with a scalar
Superposition                       field ϕ (which can be regarded as a collection of harmonic oscillators) through the
This cat state ϕ (x), the coher-
                                    Hamiltonian
ent superposition of two
Gaussian wave packets of
Equation (18), could describe          Hint =  x dφ/dt                                                                        (16)
a particle in a superposition
of locations inside a Stern-
Gerlach apparatus (see              has been extensively studied by many, including the investigators just referenced. The
Figure 1) or the state that         conclusion is easily formulated in the so-called “high-temperature limit,” in which only
develops in the course of           thermal-excitation effects of the field φ are taken into account and the effect of zero-
a double-slit experiment.           point vacuum fluctuations is neglected.
                                       In this case, the density matrix ρ(x, x′) of the particle in the position representation
The phase between the two
components has been chosen
to be zero.
                                    evolves according to the master equation


                            Von Neumann Equation   6444   Relaxation
                                                               74448              Decoherence
                              644474448                                      6444      4744448
                                    i                          ∂    ∂            γ kBT
                                                 − γ ( x − x′) −                        ( x − x′) 2 ρ ,
                                                                               2 m
                                   − [ H , ρ]
                          .
                         ρ=                                             ρ −                                                   (17)
                                    h 24
                                   14     3                     ∂x ∂x′       144
                                                                                    2
                                                                                  h 42444          3
                               .                   1444        24443
                              p = −FORCE = ∇V                .
                                                            p = −γ p         Classical Phase Space


                                    where H is the particle’s Hamiltonian (although with the potential V(x) adjusted because
                                    of Hint), γ is the relaxation rate, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature
                                    of the field. Equation (17) is obtained by first solving exactly the Schrödinger equation
                                    for a particle plus the field and then tracing over the degrees of freedom of the field.
                                        I will not analyze Equation (17) in detail but just point out that it naturally separates
                                    into three distinct terms, each of them responsible for a different aspect of the effectively
                                    classical behavior. The first term—the von Neumann equation (which can be derived
                                    from the Schrödinger equation)—generates reversible classical evolution of the expecta-
                                    tion value of any observable that has a classical counterpart regardless of the form of ρ
                                    (Ehrenfest’s theorem). The second term causes dissipation. The relaxation rate γ = η/2m
                                    is proportional to the viscosity η = 2/2 due to the interaction with the scalar field. That
                                    interaction causes a decrease in the average momentum and loss of energy. The last term
                                    also has a classical counterpart: It is responsible for fluctuations or random “kicks” that
                                    lead to Brownian motion. We shall see this in more detail in the next section.



12                                                                                               Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                      Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited


     (a)                                                               (b)




                                                      x1                                                              x1
                         x                                                             x


   For our purposes, the effect of the last term on quantum superpositions is of great-           Figure 3. Evolution of the
est interest. I shall show that it destroys quantum coherence, eliminating off-diagonal           Density Matrix for the
terms responsible for quantum correlations between spatially separated pieces of the              Schrödinger Cat State in
wave packet. It is therefore responsible for the classical structure of the phase space,          Figure 2
                                                                                                  (a)This plot shows the density
as it converts superpositions into mixtures of localized wave packets which, in the
                                                                                                  matrix for the cat state in
classical limit, turn into the familiar points in phase space. This effect is best illus-         Figure 2 in the position repre-
trated by an example. Consider the “cat” state shown in Figure 2, where the wave                  sentation ρ(x, x′) = ϕ(x)ϕ*(x).
function of a particle is given by a coherent superposition of two Gaussians:                     The peaks near the diagonal
ϕ (x) = (χ+(x) + χ– (x))/21/2 and the Gaussians are                                               (green) correspond to the two
                                                                                                  possible locations of the parti-
                                                                                                  cle. The peaks away from the
                              ∆x  2                                                           diagonal (red) are due to quan-
                          x ±                                                                  tum coherence. Their existence
                                2  
   χ ± ( x ) = x ± ~ exp −              .                                                        and size demonstrate that the
                             4δ 2                                                        (18)
                                                                                                  particle is not in either of the
                                      
                                                                                                two approximate locations but
                                                                                                  in a coherent superposition of
                                                                                                  them. (b) Environment-induced
    For the case of wide separation (∆x > > δ), the corresponding density matrix                  decoherence causes decay of
ρ(x, x′) = ϕ (x) ϕ*(x′) has four peaks: Two on the diagonal defined by x = x′, and two            the off-diagonal terms of
off the diagonal for which x and x′ are very different (see Figure 3). Quantum coherence          ρ(x, x′). Here, the density matrix
is due to the off-diagonal peaks. As those peaks disappear, position emerges as an                in (a) has partially decohered.
                                                                                                  Further decoherence would
approximate preferred basis.
                                                                                                  result in a density matrix with
    The last term of Equation (17), which is proportional to (x – x′)2, has little effect on
                                                                                                  diagonal peaks only. It can then
the diagonal peaks. By contrast, it has a large effect on the off-diagonal peaks for which        be regarded as a classical
(x – x′)2 is approximately the square of the separation (∆x)2. In particular, it causes the       probability distribution with an

                                               ( )
                                                                                                  equal probability of finding the
                                                  ~ 2γ mk BT h 2 (∆x ) ρ +− = τ D−1ρ + .
                                             d +−                     2
off-diagonal peaks to decay at the rate         ρ                                                 particle in either of the loca-
                                             dt                                                   tions corresponding to the
It follows that quantum coherence will disappear on a decoherence time scale (Zurek 1984).        Gaussian wave packets.



              λ  2             h     2
    τ D ≅ γ −1 dB  = τ R             ,
                                        
               ∆x          ∆x 2mk BT 
                                                                                           (19)


where λdB = h/(2mkBT )–1/2 is the thermal de Broglie wavelength. For macroscopic
objects, the decoherence time τD is typically much less than the relaxation time τR = γ –1.



Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                                13
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



                              For a system at temperature T = 300 kelvins with mass m = 1 gram and separation
                              ∆x = 1 centimeter, the ratio of the two time scales is τD/τR ~ 10–40! Thus, even if the
                              relaxation rate were of the order of the age of the Universe, ~1017 seconds, quantum
                              coherence would be destroyed in τD ~ 10–23 second.
                                  For microscopic systems and, occasionally, even for very macroscopic ones, the deco-
                              herence times are relatively long. For an electron (me = 10–27 grams), τD can be much
                              larger than the other relevant time scales on atomic and larger energy and distance scales.
                              For a massive Weber bar, tiny ∆x (~10–17 centimeter) and cryogenic temperatures sup-
                              press decoherence. Nevertheless, the macroscopic nature of the object is certainly crucial
                              in facilitating the transition from quantum to classical.



                                                          Experiments on Decoherence

                                   A great deal of work on master equations and their derivations in different
                                   situations has been conducted since 1991, but in effect, most of the results
                                   described above stand. A summary can be found in Paz and Wojchiech Zurek
                                   (2001) and a discussion of the caveats to the simple conclusions regarding
                                   decoherence rates appears in Anglin et al. (1997).

                                   Perhaps the most important development in the study of decoherence is on the
                                   experimental front. In the past decade, several experiments probing decoher-
                                   ence in various systems have been carried out. In particular, Michel Brune,
                                   Serge Haroche, Jean-Michel Raimond, and their colleagues at École Normale
                                   Supérieure in Paris (Brune et al. 1996, Haroche 1998) have performed a series
                                   of microwave cavity experiments in which they manipulate electromagnetic
                                   fields into a Schrödinger-cat-like superposition using rubidium atoms. They
                                   probe the ensuing loss of quantum coherence. These experiments have con-
                                   firmed the basic tenets of decoherence theory. Since then, the French scientists
                                   have applied the same techniques to implement various quantum information-
                                   processing ventures. They are in the process of upgrading their equipment
                                   in order to produce “bigger and better” Schrödinger cats and to study their
                                   decoherence.

                                   A little later, Wineland, Monroe, and coworkers (Turchette et al. 2000) used
                                   ion traps (set up to implement a fragment of one of the quantum computer
                                   designs) to study the decoherence of ions due to radiation. Again, theory was
                                   confirmed, further advancing the status of decoherence as both a key ingredi-
                                   ent of the explanation of the emergent classicality and a threat to quantum
                                   computation. In addition to these developments, which test various aspects of
                                   decoherence induced by a real or simulated “large environment,” Pritchard
                                   and his coworkers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have carried
                                   out a beautiful sequence of experiments by using atomic interferometry in
                                   order to investigate the role of information transfer between atoms and
                                   photons (see Kokorowski et al. 2001 and other references therein). Finally,
                                   “analogue experiments” simulating the behavior of the Schrödinger equation in
                                   optics (Cheng and Raymer 1999) have explored some of the otherwise diffi-
                                   cult-to-access corners of the parameter space.

                                   In addition to these essentially mesoscopic Schrödinger-cat decoherence
                                   experiments, designs of much more substantial “cats” (for example,
                                   mirrors in superpositions of quantum states) are being investigated in
                                   several laboratories.




14                                                                                       Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                                 Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



                             Classical Limit of Quantum Dynamics

   The Schrödinger equation was deduced from classical mechanics in the Hamilton-
Jacobi form. Thus, it is no surprise that it yields classical equations of motion when h
can be regarded as small. This fact, along with Ehrenfest’s theorem, Bohr’s correspon-
dence principle, and the kinship of quantum commutators with the classical Poisson
brackets, is part of the standard lore found in textbooks. However, establishing the quan-
tum–classical correspondence involves the states as well as the equations of motion.
Quantum mechanics is formulated in Hilbert space, which can accommodate localized
wave packets with sensible classical limits as well as the most bizarre superpositions.
By contrast, classical dynamics happens in phase space.
   To facilitate the study of the transition from quantum to classical behavior, it is con-
venient to employ the Wigner transform of a wave function ψ(x):

                             ∞                               
   W ( x , p) =
                    1
                   2πh
                         ∫−∞ e ipy hψ ∗ x + 2y  ψ  x − 2y  dy ,                         (20)

which expresses quantum states as functions of position and momentum.
   The Wigner distribution W(x, p) is real, but it can be negative. Hence, it cannot be
regarded as a probability distribution. Nevertheless, when integrated over one of the two vari-
ables, it yields the probability distribution for the other (for example, ∫ W(x, p)dp = |ψ (x)|2.
For a minimum uncertainty wave packet, ψ (x) = π –1/4δ –1/2exp{– (x – x0)2/2δ 2 + ip0 x/h},
the Wigner distribution is a Gaussian in both x and p:

                          
    W ( x , p) =
                   1
                      exp −
                              ( x − x 0 ) 2 − ( p − p0 ) 2δ 2  .                             (21)
                   πh           δ2                h2          

    It describes a system that is localized in both x and p. Nothing else that Hilbert space
has to offer is closer to approximating a point in classical phase space. The Wigner dis-
tribution is easily generalized to the case of a general density matrix ρ (x, x′):

                          −∞                         y
   W ( x , p) =          ∫ e
                    1            ipy h          y
                                         ρ  x − , x +  dy ,
                   2πh   −∞                    2     2 
                                                                                                (22)

where ρ(x, x′) is, for example, the reduced density matrix of the particle discussed before.
   The phase-space nature of the Wigner transform suggests a strategy for exhibiting
classical behavior: Whenever W (x, p) represents a mixture of localized wave packets—
as in Equation (21)—it can be regarded as a classical probability distribution in the
phase space. However, when the underlying state is truly quantum, as is the superposi-
tion in Figure 2, the corresponding Wigner distribution function will have alternating
sign—see Figure 4(a). This property alone will make it impossible to regard the function
as a probability distribution in phase space. The Wigner function in Figure 4(a) is



   W ( x , p) ~
                ( W+ + W−)
                           +
                             1      p 2δ 2 x 2 
                               exp −       −      ⋅ cos
                                                           ∆x p ,                             (23)
                         2                  πh       h2       δ 2      h   

where the Gaussians W+ and W – are Wigner transforms of the Gaussian wave packets
χ+ and χ–. If the underlying state had been a mixture of χ+ and χ– rather than a super-
position, the Wigner function would have been described by the same two Gaussians
W+ and W –, but the oscillating term would have been absent.



Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                               15
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited


Figure 4. Wigner                            (a)                                               (a′)
Distributions and Their                   Positive peak       Interference term
Decoherence for Coherent
Superpositions                                                                  p
(a) The Wigner distribution
W (x, p ) is plotted as a function
of x and p for the cat state of
Figure 2. Note the two separate
                                                                                                                            x
positive peaks as well as the         Negative contribution             x
oscillating interference term
in between them. This distribu-             (b)                                               (b′)
tion cannot be regarded as a                                                    t = 0.001
classical probability distribu-                                              p                                           p
tion in phase space because it
has negative contributions.
(b–e) Decoherence produces
diffusion in the direction of the
momentum. As a result, the
negative and positive ripples                                               x                                           x
of the interference term in
                                            (c)                                               (c′)
W (x, p ) diffuse into each other
and cancel out. This process is                                                 t = 0.02
almost instantaneous for open
macroscopic systems. In the
appropriate limit, the Wigner
function has a classical
structure in phase space and
evolves in accord with the
equations of classical dynam-               (d)                                               (d′)
ics. (a′–e′) The analogous
                                                                                    t = 0.1
initial Wigner distribution and
its evolution for a superposi-
tion of momenta are shown.
The interference terms disap-
pear more slowly on a time
scale dictated by the dynamics
of the system: Decoherence is               (e)                                               (e′)
caused by the environment                                                           t = 0.4
coupling to (that is, monitor-
ing) the position of the
system—see Equation(16).
So, for a superposition of
momenta, it will start only after
different velocities move
the two peaks into different
locations.                              The equation of motion for W(x, p) of a particle coupled to an environment can be
                                     obtained from Equation (17) for ρ(x, x′):

                                        ∂W      p ∂       ∂V ∂         ∂          ∂ 2W
                                            = −      W+         W + 2γ     pW + D 2       ,                                       (24)
                                         ∂t     m ∂x      ∂x ∂p        ∂p         ∂p
                                              144424443             14243       12
                                                                                4 4  3
                                               Liouville Equation    Friction Decoherence



                                     where V is the renormalized potential and D = 2mγ kBT = ηkBT. The three terms of this
                                     equation correspond to the three terms of Equation (17).
                                        The first term is easily identified as a classical Poisson bracket {H, W}. That is,



16                                                                                                   Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                      Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited




                                                 The Predictability Sieve
    Since 1991, understanding the emergence of preferred          time, the set of preferred states is reasonably insensitive
    pointer states during the process of decoherence has          to the precise value of t), one can consider them as good
    advanced a great deal. Perhaps the most important             candidates for the classical domain. Figure A illustrates
    advance is the predictability sieve (Zurek 1993, Zurek        an implementation of the predictability sieve strategy
    et al. 1993), a more general definition of pointer states     using a different, simpler measure of predictability—
    that obtains even when the interaction with the envi-         purity (Trρ2)—rather than the von Neumann entropy,
    ronment does not dominate over the self-Hamiltonian           which is much more difficult to compute.
    of the system. The predictability sieve sifts through
    the Hilbert space of a system interacting with its envi-                                        –1
                                                                                                                 Lo
    ronment and selects states that are most predictable.                                                  0       g
                                                                                                                    10 Ω
                                                                                                                         t
    Motivation for the predictability sieve comes from the                                                           1
    observation that classical states exist or evolve pre-                                                                              2
    dictably. Therefore, selecting quantum states that                                                                                  1.0
    retain predictability in spite of the coupling to the                                                                           0.8
    environment is the obvious strategy in search of clas-
                                                                                                                               0.8
    sicality. To implement the predictability sieve, we




                                                                                                                                    Tr ρ 2
                                                                                                                              0.8
    imagine a (continuously infinite) list of all the pure                                                                  0.8
    states {|ψ〉} in the Hilbert space of the system in                                                                    0.8




                                                                                                                      4
    question. Each of them would evolve, after a time t,
    into a density matrix ρ|ψ〉(t). If the system were isolat-




                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                             s




                                                                                                     0
    ed, all the density matrices would have the form                                                     g 10
                                                                                                     Lo




                                                                                              –2
    ρ|ψ〉(t) = |ψ(t)〉〈ψ(t)| of projection operators, where




                                                                                        –4
    |ψ(t)〉 is the appropriate solution of the Schrödinger
    equation. But when the system is coupled to the
                                                                  Figure A. The Predictability Sieve for the
    environment (that is, the system is “open”), ρ|ψ〉(t)          Underdamped Harmonic Oscillator
    is truly mixed and has a nonzero von Neumann                  One measure of predictability is the so-called purity
    entropy. Thus, one can compute                                Trρ2, which is plotted as a function of time for mix-
    H(ρ|ψ〉(t)) = –Trρ|ψ〉(t) logρ|ψ〉(t), thereby defining a        tures of minimum uncertainty wave packets in an
    functional on the Hilbert space HS of the system,             underdamped harmonic oscillator with γ/ω = 10–4. The
    |ψ〉 → H(|ψ〉, t).                                              wave packets start with different squeeze parameters
                                                                  s. Trρ2 serves as a measure of the purity of the
    An obvious way to look for predictable, effectively clas-     reduced density matrix ρ. The predictability sieve
                                                                  favors coherent states (s = 1), which have the shape
    sical states is to seek a subset of all {|ψ〉} that minimize   of a ground state, that is, the same spread in position
    H(|ψ〉, t) after a certain, sufficiently long time t. When     and momentum when measured in units natural for
    such preferred pointer states exist, are well defined (that   the harmonic oscillator. Because they are the most
    is, the minimum of the entropy H(|ψ〉,t) differs signifi-      predictable (more than the energy eigenstates), they
    cantly for pointer states from the average value), and are    are expected to play the crucial role of the pointer
    reasonably stable (that is, after the initial decoherence     basis in the transition from quantum to classical.




if ρ(x, p) is a familiar classical probability density in phase space, then it evolves
according to:
   ∂w    ∂w ∂H ∂w ∂H
      =−      +      = { H ,w} = Lw                                                          (25)
   ∂t    ∂x ∂p ∂p ∂x

where L stands for the Liouville operator. Thus, classical dynamics in its Liouville
form follows from quantum dynamics at least for the harmonic oscillator case,
which is described rigorously by Equations (17) and (24). (For more general V(x),
the Poisson bracket would have to be supplemented by quantum corrections of order
h.) The second term of Equation (24) represents friction. The last term results in the
diffusion of W(x, p) in momentum at the rate given by D.



Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                                             17
           Quantum Chaos and Phase-Space Aspects of the Quantum-Classical Correspondence

Classical mechanics “happens” in phase space. It is
therefore critically important to show that quantum                           (a)
theory can—in the presence of decoherence—reproduce
the basic structure of classical phase space and that it            20
can emulate classical dynamics. The argument put
forward in my original paper (1991) has since been
amply supported by several related developments.

The crucial idealization that plays a key role in classi-
cal physics is a “point.” Because of Heisenberg’s prin-
ciple, ∆x ∆p ≥ h/2, quantum theory does not admit                       0




                                                                    p
states with simultaneously vanishing ∆x and ∆p.
However, as the study of the predictability sieve has
demonstrated, in many situations relevant to the classi-
cal limit of quantum dynamics, one can expect decoher-
ence to select pointer states that are localized in both
∆x and ∆p, that is, approximate minimum uncertainty
wave packets. In effect, these wave packets are a quan-             –20
                                                                      –6                       0                            6
tum version of points, which appear naturally in the                                          x
underdamped harmonic oscillator coupled weakly to the
environment (Zurek et al. 1993, Gallis 1996). These
results are also relevant to the transition from quantum
to classical in the context of field theory with the added
twist that the kinds of states selected will typically dif-   sions of classically chaotic systems (refer to Figure A).
fer for bosonic and fermionic fields (Anglin and Zurek        This outcome was expected. In order for the quantum to
1996) because bosons and fermions tend to couple dif-         classical correspondence to hold, the coherence length
ferently to their environments. Finally, under suitable       lC of the quantum state must satisfy the following
circumstances, einselection can even single out energy        inequality: lC = h/(2Dλ)1/2 << χ, where λ is the
eigenstates of the self-Hamiltonian of the system, thus       Lyapunov exponent, D is the usual coefficient describ-
justifying in part the perception of “quantum jumps”          ing the rate of decoherence, and χ is the scale on which
(Paz and Zurek 1999).                                         the potential V(x) is significantly nonlinear:

Quantum chaos provides an intriguing arena for the dis-             V′
cussion of the quantum-classical correspondence. To             ≅         .
                                                                    V ′′′
begin with, classical and quantum evolutions from the
same initial conditions of a system lead to very different
phase-space “portraits.” The quantum phase-space por-         When a quantum state is localized on scales small com-
trait will depend on the particular representation used,      pared to χ (which is the import of the inequality above),
but there are good reasons to favor the Wigner distribu-      its phase space evolution is effectively classical, but
tion. Studies that use the Wigner distribution indicate       because of chaos and decoherence, it becomes irre-
that, at the moment when the quantum-classical corre-         versible and unpredictable. Nevertheless—as argued in
spondence is lost in chaotic dynamics, even the averages      this volume by Tanmoy Bhattacharya, Salman Habib,
computed using properties of the classical and quantum        and Kurt Jacobs (on page XX)—one can even recover
states begin to differ (Karkuszewski et al. 2002).            more or less classical trajectories by modeling a contin-
                                                              uous measurement. However, this is an extra ingredient
Decoherence appears to be very effective in restoring         not in the spirit of the decoherence approach as it
correspondence. This point, originally demonstrated           invokes the measurement process without explaining it.
almost a decade ago (Zurek and Paz 1994, 1995) has
since been amply corroborated by numerical evidence           A surprising corollary of this line of argument is the
(Habib et al. 1998). Basically, decoherence eradicates        realization (Zurek and Paz 1994) that the dynamical
the small-scale interference accompanying the rapid           second law—entropy production at the scale set by the
development of large-scale coherence in quantum ver-          dynamics of the system and more or less independent of




18                                                                                      Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                                Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited




           (b)                                                                 (c)


20                                                                    20




                                                                         0




                                                                     p
p




    0




–20                                                                  –20
  –6                             0                          6          –6                          0                          6
                                 x                                                                 x




        Figure A. Decoherence in a Chaotic Driven Double-Well System
        This numerical study (Habib et al. 1998) of a chaotic driven double-well system described by the Hamiltonian H = p2/2m – Ax2 +
        Bx4+ Fx cos(ωt) with m = 1, A = 10, B = 0.5, F = 10, and ω = 6.07 illustrates the effectiveness of decoherence in the transition
        from quantum to classical. These parameters result in a chaotic classical system with a Lyapunov exponent λ ≅ 0.5. The three
        snapshots taken after 8 periods of the driving force illustrate phase space distributions in (a) the quantum case, (b) the classical
        case, and (c) the quantum case but with decoherence (D = 0.025). The initial condition was always the same Gaussian, and in
        the quantum cases, the state was pure. Interference fringes are clearly visible in (a), which bears only a vague resemblance to
        the classical distribution in (b). By contrast, (c) shows that even modest decoherence helps restore the quantum-classical corre-
        spondence. In this example the coherence length lC is smaller than the typical nonlinearity scale, so the system is on the bor-
        der between quantum and classical. Indeed, traces of quantum interference are still visible in (c) as blue “troughs,” or regions
        where the Wigner function is still slightly negative. The change in color from red to blue shown in the legends for (a) and (c) cor-
        responds to a change from positive peaks to negative troughs. In the ab initio classical case (b), there are no negative troughs.


        the strength of the coupling to the environment—is a                 This point was to some extent anticipated by the plots of
        natural and, indeed, an inevitable consequence of deco-              the Wigner functions of Schrödinger cats (see
        herence. This point has been since confirmed in numeri-              Figures 4a and 4a′ in this article)a version of which
        cal studies (Miller and Sarkar 1999, Pattanayak 1999,                appeared in the 1991 Physics Today version of this
        Monteoliva and Paz 2000).                                            paper—the interference term of the Wigner function has
                                                                             a sub-Planck structure.
        Other surprising consequences of the study of Wigner
        functions in the quantum-chaotic context is the realiza-             A lot has happened in establishing phase-space aspects
        tion that they develop phase space structure on the scale            of quantum-classical correspondence, but a lot more
        associated with the sub-Planck action a = h2/A << h,                 remains to be done. (A more thorough summary of the
        where A is the classical action of the system, and that this         past accomplishments and remaining goals can be found
        Planck action is physically significant (Zurek 2001b).               in Zurek 2001b).
        This can be seen in Figure A part (a), where a small black
        square with the area of h is clearly larger than the small-
        est “ripples” in the image.




        Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                               19
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



                                  Classical equations of motion are a necessary but insufficient ingredient of the classical
                              limit: We must also obtain the correct structure of the classical phase space by barring all but
                              the probability distributions of well-localized wave packets. The last term in Equation (24)
                              has precisely this effect on nonclassical W(x, p). For example, the Wigner function for the
                              superposition of spatially localized wave packets—Figure 4(a)—has a sinusoidal modulation
                              in the momentum coordinate produced by the oscillating term cos((∆x/h)p). This term, how-
                              ever, is an eigenfunction of the diffusion operator ∂ 2/∂p 2 in the last term of Equation (24).
                              As a result, the modulation is washed out by diffusion at a rate
                                                      ∂2 
                                                      D 2 W 
                                                                        2 mγ kBT (∆x )
                                         .                                               2
                                   −1    W             ∂p     
                                  τD = −         =                  =                        .
                                         W               W                    h2
                                  Negative valleys of W(x, p) fill in on a time scale of order τD, and the distribution
                              retains just two peaks, which now correspond to two classical alternatives—see Figures 4(a)
                              to 4(e). The Wigner function for a superposition of momenta, shown in Figure 4(a′), also
                              decoheres as the dynamics causes the resulting difference in velocities to damp out the
                              oscillations in position and again yield two classical alternatives—see Figures 4(b′) to 4(e′).
                                  The ratio of the decoherence and relaxation time scales depends on h2/m—see
                              Equation (19). Therefore, when m is large and h small, τD can be nearly zero—decoher-
                              ence can be nearly instantaneous—while, at the same time, the motion of small patches
                              (which correspond to the probability distribution in classical phase space) in the smooth
                              potential becomes reversible. This idealization is responsible for our confidence in classi-
                              cal mechanics, and, more generally, for many aspects of our belief in classical reality.
                                  The discussion above demonstrates that decoherence and the transition from quantum
                              to classical (usually regarded as esoteric) is an inevitable consequence of the immersion of
                              a system in an environment. True, our considerations were based on a fairly specific
                              model—a particle in a heat bath of harmonic oscillators. However, this is often a reason-
                              able approximate model for many more complicated systems. Moreover, our key conclu-
                              sions—such as the relation between the decoherence and relaxation time scales in
                              Equation (19)—do not depend on any specific features of the model. Thus, one can hope
                              that the viscosity and the resulting relaxation always imply decoherence and that the tran-
                              sition from quantum to classical can be always expected to take place on a time scale of
                              the order of the above estimates.

                                                     Quantum Theory of Classical Reality

                                  Classical reality can be defined purely in terms of classical states obeying classical laws.
                              In the past few sections, we have seen how this reality emerges from the substrate of quan-
                              tum physics: Open quantum systems are forced into states described by localized wave
                              packets. They obey classical equations of motion, although with damping terms and fluctu-
                              ations that have a quantum origin. What else is there to explain?
                                  Controversies regarding the interpretation of quantum physics originate in the clash
                              between the predictions of the Schrödinger equation and our perceptions. I will therefore
                              conclude this paper by revisiting the source of the problem—our awareness of definite out-
                              comes. If these mental processes were essentially unphysical, there would be no hope of
                              formulating and addressing the ultimate question—why do we perceive just one of the
                              quantum alternatives?—within the context of physics. Indeed, one might be tempted to fol-
                              low Eugene Wigner (1961) and give consciousness the last word in collapsing the state vec-
                              tor. I shall assume the opposite. That is, I shall examine the idea that the higher mental
                              processes all correspond to well-defined, but at present, poorly understood information-pro-
                              cessing functions that are being carried out by physical systems, our brains.



20                                                                                               Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                       Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited



    Described in this manner, awareness becomes susceptible to physical analysis. In partic-
ular, the process of decoherence we have described above is bound to affect the states of the
brain: Relevant observables of individual neurons, including chemical concentrations and
electrical potentials, are macroscopic. They obey classical, dissipative equations of motion.
Thus, any quantum superposition of the states of neurons will be destroyed far too quickly
for us to become conscious of the quantum “goings on.” Decoherence, or more to the point,
environment-induced superselection, applies to our own “state of mind.”
    One might still ask why the preferred basis of neurons becomes correlated with the clas-
sical observables in the familiar universe. It would be, after all, so much easier to believe in
quantum physics if we could train our senses to perceive nonclassical superpositions. One
obvious reason is that the selection of the available interaction Hamiltonians is limited and
constrains the choice of detectable observables. There is, however, another reason for this
focus on the classical that must have played a decisive role: Our senses did not evolve for
the purpose of verifying quantum mechanics. Rather, they have developed in the process in
which survival of the fittest played a central role. There is no evolutionary reason for per-
ception when nothing can be gained from prediction. And, as the predictability sieve illus-
trates, only quantum states that are robust in spite of decoherence, and hence, effectively
classical, have predictable consequences. Indeed, classical reality can be regarded as nearly
synonymous with predictability.
    There is little doubt that the process of decoherence sketched in this paper is an impor-
tant element of the big picture central to understanding the transition from quantum to clas-
sical. Decoherence destroys superpositions. The environment induces, in effect, a superse-
lection rule that prevents certain superpositions from being observed. Only states that sur-
vive this process can become classical.
    There is even less doubt that this rough outline will be further extended. Much work
needs to be done both on technical issues (such as studying more realistic models that could
lead to additional experiments) and on problems that require new conceptual input (such as
defining what constitutes a “system” or answering the question of how an observer fits into
the big picture).
    Decoherence is of use within the framework of either of the two interpretations: It can
supply a definition of the branches in Everett’s Many Worlds Interpretation, but it can also
delineate the border that is so central to Bohr’s point of view. And if there is one lesson to
be learned from what we already know about such matters, it is that information and its
transfer play a key role in the quantum universe.
    The natural sciences were built on a tacit assumption: Information about the universe can
be acquired without changing its state. The ideal of “hard science” was to be objective and
provide a description of reality. Information was regarded as unphysical, ethereal, a mere
record of the tangible, material universe, an inconsequential reflection, existing beyond and
essentially decoupled from the domain governed by the laws of physics. This view is no
longer tenable (Landauer 1991). Quantum theory has put an end to this Laplacean dream
about a mechanical universe. Observers of quantum phenomena can no longer be just pas-
sive spectators. Quantum laws make it impossible to gain information without changing the
state of the measured object. The dividing line between what is and what is known to be has
been blurred forever. While abolishing this boundary, quantum theory has simultaneously
deprived the “conscious observer” of a monopoly on acquiring and storing information: Any
correlation is a registration, any quantum state is a record of some other quantum state.
When correlations are robust enough, or the record is sufficiently indelible, familiar classical
“objective reality” emerges from the quantum substrate. Moreover, even a minute interaction
with the environment, practically inevitable for any macroscopic object, will establish such a
correlation: The environment will, in effect, measure the state of the object, and this suffices
to destroy quantum coherence. The resulting decoherence plays, therefore, a vital role in
facilitating the transition from quantum to classical.



Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                     21
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited


                                              The Existential Interpretation
The quantum theory of classical reality has developed sig-         In particular one can show that the predictability sieve also
nificantly since 1991. These advances are now collectively         works in this setting (Dalvit et al. 2001).
known as the existential interpretation (Zurek 2001a). The
basic difference between quantum and classical states is           The overarching open question of the interpretation of quan-
that the objective existence of the latter can be taken for        tum physics—the “meaning of the wave function”—appears
granted. That is, a system’s classical state can be simply         to be in part answered by these recent developments.
“found out” by an observer originally ignorant of any of           Two alternatives are usually listed as the only conceivable
its characteristics. By contrast, quantum states are hope-         answers. The possibility that the state vector is purely epis-
lessly “malleable”—it is impossible in principle for an            temological (that is, solely a record of the observer’s knowl-
observer to find out an unknown quantum state without              edge) is often associated with the Copenhagen Interpretation
perturbing it. The only exception to this rule occurs when         (Bohr 1928). The trouble with this view is that there is no
an observer knows beforehand that the unknown state is             unified description of the Universe as a whole: The classical
one of the eigenstates of some definite observable. Then           domain of the Universe is a necessary prerequisite, so both
and only then can a nondemolition measurement                                classical and quantum theory are necessary and
(Caves et al. 1980) of that observable be                                         the border between them is, at best, ill-defined.
devised such that another observer who                                               The alternative is to regard the state vector
knew the original state would not notice                                               as an ontological entity—as a solid
any perturbations when making a con-                                                    description of the state of the Universe
firmatory measurement.                                                                    akin to the classical states. But in this
                                                                                          case (favored by the supporters of
                                                          
If the unknown state cannot be found                                                      Everett’s Many Worlds Interpretation),
out—as is indeed the case for isolated                                                   everything consistent with the universal
                                                        
quantum systems—then one can make a                                                      state vector needs to be regarded as
                                                         
persuasive case that such states are sub-                                               equally “real.”
jective, and that quantum state vectors are                
                                                            
merely records of the observer’s knowledge                                          The view that seems to be emerging from
about the state of a fragment of the Universe                                     the theory of decoherence is in some sense
(Fuchs and Peres 2000). However, einselection is                              somewhere in between these two extremes.
capable of converting such malleable and “unreal”                       Quantum state vectors can be real, but only when the
quantum states into solid elements of reality. Several ways to     superposition principle—a cornerstone of quantum behav-
argue this point have been developed since the early discus-       ior—is “turned off” by einselection. Yet einselection is
sions (Zurek 1993, 1998, 2001a). In effect, all of them rely       caused by the transfer information about selected observ-
on einselection, the emergence of the preferred set of pointer     ables. Hence, the ontological features of the state
states. Thus, observers aware of the structure of the              vectors—objective existence of the einselected states—is
Hamiltonians (which are “objective,” can be found out with-        acquired through the epistemological “information transfer.”
out “collateral damage”, and in the real world, are known
well enough in advance) can also divine the sets of preferred      Obviously, more remains to be done. Equally obviously,
pointer states (if they exist) and thus discover the preexisting   however, decoherence and einselection are here to stay. They
state of the system.                                               constrain the possible solutions after the quantum–classical
                                                                   transition in a manner suggestive of a still more radical view
One way to understand this environment-induced objective           of the ultimate interpretation of quantum theory in which
existence is to recognize that observers—especially human          information seems destined to play a central role. Further
observers—never measure anything directly. Instead, most           speculative discussion of this point is beyond the scope of
of our data about the Universe is acquired when information        the present paper, but it will be certainly brought to the fore
about the systems of interest is intercepted and spread            by (paradoxically) perhaps the most promising applications
throughout the environment. The environment preferentially         of quantum physics to information processing. Indeed,
records the information about the pointer states, and hence,       quantum computing inevitably poses questions that probe
only information about the pointer states is readily available.    the very core of the distinction between quantum and classi-
This argument can be made more rigorous in simple mod-             cal. This development is an example of the unpredictability
els, whose redundancy can be more carefully quantified             and serendipity of the process of scientific discovery:
(Zurek 2000, 2001a).                                               Questions originally asked for the most impractical of
                                                                   reasons—questions about the EPR paradox, the quantum-
This is an area of ongoing research. Acquisition of informa-       to-classical transition, the role of information, and the
tion about the systems from fragments of the environment           interpretation of the quantum state vector—have become
leads to the so-called conditional quantum dynamics, a sub-        relevant to practical applications such as quantum cryptogra-
ject related to quantum trajectories (Carmichael 1993).            phy and quantum computation.


22                                                                                              Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                                Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited


                                         Acknowledgments

   I would like to thank John Archibald Wheeler for many inspiring and enjoyable
discussions on “the quantum” and Juan Pablo Paz for the pleasure of a long-standing
collaboration on the subject.


                                          Further Reading
Albrecht, A., 1992. Investigating Decoherence in a Simple System. Phys. Rev. D 46 (12): 5504.
Anglin, J. R., and W. H. Zurek. 1996. Decoherence of Quantum Fields: Pointer States and Predictability.
    Phys. Rev. D 53 (12): 7327.
Anglin, J. R., J. P. Paz, and W. H. Zurek. 1997. Deconstructing Decoherence. Phys. Rev. A 55 (6): 4041.
Arndt, M., O. Nairz, J. VosAndreae, C. Keller, G. van der Zouw, A. Zeilinger. 1999. Wave-Particle Duality of
    C-60 Molecules. Nature 401 (6754): 680.
Aspect, A., J. Dalibard, and G. Roger. 1982. Experimental Test of Bell’s Inequalities Using Time-Varying
    Analyzers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 49: 1804.
Aspect, A., P. Grangier, and G. Rogier. 1981. Experimental Tests of Realistic Local Theories via Bell’s
    Theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett. 47: 460.
Bell. J. S. 1964. On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen Paradox. Physics 1: 195.
Bohm, D. 1951. In Quantum Theory. Chap. 22, p. 611. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bohr, N. 1928. The Quantum Postulate and Recent Development of Atomic Theory. Nature 121: 580.
    Reprinted in Quantum Theory and Measurement. Edited by Wheeler, J. A., and W. H. Zurek. Princeton,
    NJ: Princeton University Press.
Braginsky, V. B., Y. I. Vorontsov, and K. S. Thorne. 1980. Quantum Nondemolition Measurements. Science 209: 547.
Brune, M., E. Hagley, J. Dreyer, X. Maitre, C. Wunderlich, J. M. Raimond, and S. Haroche. 1996.
    Observing the Progressive Decoherence of the “Meter” in a Quantum Measurement. Phys. Rev. Lett.
    77: 4887.
Caldeira, A. O., and A. J. Leggett. 1983a. Path Integral Approach to Quantum Brownian Motion. Physica A.
    121: 587.
———. 1983b. Quantum Tunneling in a Dissipative System. Ann. Phys. (N. Y.) 149 (2): 374.
———. 1985. Influence of Damping on Quantum Interference: An Exactly Soluble Model. Phys. Rev. A 31:
    1059.
Carmichael, H. J. 1993. An Open Systems Approach to Quantum Optics. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Caves, C. M., K. S. Thorne, R. W. P. Drewer, V. D. Sandberg, and M. Zimmerman. 1980. On the Measurement
    of a Weak Classical Force Coupled to a Quantum-Mechanical Oscillator. 1. Issues of Principle.
    Rev. Mod. Phys. 52: 341.
Chapman, M. S., T. D. Hammond, A. Lenef, J. Schmiedmayer, R. A. Rubenstein, E. Smith , and D. E.
    Pritchard. 1995. Photon Scattering from Atoms in an Atom Interferometer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (21): 3783.
Cheng, C. C., and M. G. Raymer. 1999. Long-Range Saturation of Spatial Decoherence in Wave-Field
    Transport in Random Multiple-Scattering Media. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (24): 4807.
Dalvit, D. A. R., J. Dziarmaga, W. H. Zurek. 2001. Unconditional Pointer States from Conditional Master
    Equations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (3): 373.
Dekker, H. 1981. Classical and Quantum Mechanics of the Damped Harmonic Oscillator. Phys. Rep. 80: 1.
DeWitt, B. S. 1970. Quantum Mechanics and Reality. Phys. Today 23: 30.
DeWitt, B. S., and N. Graham, eds. 1973. The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton:
    Princeton University Press.
Einstein, A., B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen. 1935. Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be
    Considered Complete? Phys. Rev. 47: 777.
Everett III, H. 1957. “Relative State” Formulation of Quantum Mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 29: 454.
Feynman, R. P., and F. L.Vernon. 1963. The Theory of a General Quantum System Interacting with a Linear
    Dissipative System. Ann. Phys. 24: 118.
Friedman, J. R., V. Patel, W. Chen, S. K. Tolpygo, and J. E. Lukens. 2000. Quantum Superposition of Distinct
    Macroscopic States. Nature 406 (6791): 43.
Fuchs, C. A., and A. Peres. 2000. Quantum Theory Needs No “Interpretation”. Phys. Today 53 (3): 70.
Gallis, M. R. 1996. Emergence of Classicality via Decoherence Described by Lindblad Operators. Phys. Rev.
    A 53 (2): 655.
Gell-Mann, M., and J. B. Hartle. 1990. Quantum Mechanics in the Light of Quantum Cosmology. In
    Complexity, Entropy, and the Physics of Information. p. 425. Edited by W. H. Zurek. Redwood City:
    Addison-Wesley.
Griffiths, R. B. 1984. Consistent Histories and the Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. J. Stat. Phys. 36:
    219.




Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                              23
Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited


                              Haake, F., and D. F. Walls. 1986. In Quantum Optics IV. Edited by J. D. Harvey, and D. F. Walls. Berlin:
                                  Springer Verlag.
                              Habib, S., K. Shizume, and W. H. Zurek. 1998. Decoherence, Chaos, and the Correspondence Principle.
                                  Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (20): 4361.
                              Haroche, S. 1998. Entanglement, Mesoscopic Superpositions and Decoherence Studies with Atoms and
                                  Photons in a Cavity. Physica Scripta T76: 159.
                              Hartle, J. B. 1991. The Quantum Mechanics of Cosmology. In Quantum Cosmology and Baby Universes:
                                  Proceedings of the 1989 Jerusalem Winter School. Edited by S. Coleman, J. B. Hartle, T. Piran, and
                                  S. Weinberg. Singapore: World Scientific.
                              Hu, B. L., J. P. Paz, and Y. Zhang. 1992. Quantum Brownian Motion in a General Environment: Exact Master
                                  Equation with Nonlocal Dissipation and Colored Noise. Phys. Rev. D 45: 2843.
                              Joos, E., and H. D. Zeh. 1985. The Emergence of Classical Properties Through Interaction with the
                                  Environment. Z. Phys. B 59: 223.
                              Karkuszewski, Z. P., J. Zakrzewski, and W. H. Zurek. 2002. Breakdown of Correspondence in Chaotic
                                  Systems: Ehrenfest Versus Localization Times. Phys. Rev. A 65 (4): 042113.
                              Kokorowski, D. A., A. D. Cronin, T. D. Roberts, and D. E. Pritchard. 2001. From Single-to Multiple-Photon
                                  Decoherence in an Atom Interferometer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (11): 2191.
                              Landauer, R. 1991. Information is Physical. Phys. Today 44 (5): 23.
                              Leggett, A. J., S. Chakravarty, A. T. Dorsey, M. P. A. Fisher, A. Garg, and W. Zwerger. 1987. Dynamics of
                                  the Dissipative System. Rev. Mod. Phys. 59: 1.
                              Milburn, G. J., and C. A. Holmes. 1986. Dissipative Quantum and Classical Liouville Mechanics of the
                                  Unharmonic Oscillator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 56: 2237.
                              Miller, P. A., and S. Sarkar. 1999. Signatures of Chaos in the Entanglement of Two Coupled Quantum Kicked
                                  Tops. Phys. Rev. E 60: 1542.
                              Monroe, C., D. M. Meekhof, B. E. King, and D. J. Wineland. 1996. A “Schrodinger Cat” Superposition State
                                  of an Atom. Science 272 (5265): 1131.
                              Monteoliva, D., and J. P. Paz. 2000. Decoherence and the Rate of Entropy Production in Chaotic Quantum
                                  Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (16): 3373.
                              Mooij, J. E., T. P. Orlando, L. Levitov, L. Tian, C. H. van der Wal, and S. Lloyd. 1999. Josephson Persistent-
                                  Current Qubit. Science 285 (5430): 1036.
                              Myatt, C. J., B. E. King, Q. A. Turchette, C. A. Sackett, D. Kielpinski, W. M. Itano, et al. 2000. Decoherence
                                  of Quantum Superpositions Through Coupling to Engineered Reservoirs. Nature 403: 269.
                              Ollivier, H., and W. H. Zurek. 2002. Quantum Discord: A Measure of the Quantumness of Correlations.
                                  Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (1): 017901.
                              Omnès, R. 1990. From Hilbert Space to Common Sense. Ann. Phys. 201: 354.
                              ———. 1992. Consistent Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 64: 339.
                              Pattanayak, A. K. 1999. Lyapunov Exponents Entropy Production and Decoherence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (22):
                                  4526.
                              Paz, J. P., and W. H. Zurek. 1993. Environment-Induced Decoherence, Classicality, and Consistency of
                                  Quantum Histories. Phys. Rev. D 48 (6): 2728.
                              ———. 1999. Quantum Limit of Decoherence: Environment Induced Superselection of Energy Eigenstates.
                                  Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (26): 5181.
                              ———. 2001. In Coherent Atomic Matter Waves, Les Houches Lectures. Edited by R. Kaiser, C. Westbrook,
                                  and F. Davids. Vol. 72, p. 533. Berlin: Springer.
                              Paz, J. P., S. Habib, and W. H. Zurek. 1993. Reduction of the Wave Packet: Preferred Observable and
                                  Decoherence Time Scale. Phys. Rev. D 47: 488.
                              Pfau, T., S. Spälter, Ch. Kurtsiefer, C. R. Ekstrom, and J. Mlynek. 1994. Loss of Spatial Coherence by a
                                  Single Spontaneous Emission. Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 (9): 1223.
                              Scully, M. O., B. G. Englert, and J. Schwinger. 1989. Spin Coherence and Humpty-Dumpty. III. The Effects of
                                  Observation. Phys. Rev. A 40: 1775.
                              Teich, M. C., and B. E. A. Saleh. 1990. Squeezed and Antibunched Light. Phys. Today 43 (6): 26.
                              Tesche, C. D. 1986. Schroedinger’s Cat: A Realization in Superconducting Devices. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.
                                  480: 36.
                              Turchette, Q. A., C. J. Myatt, B. E. King, C. A. Sackett, D. Kielpinski, W. M. Itano, et al. 2000. Decoherence
                                  and Decay of Motional Quantum States of a Trapped Atom Coupled to Engineered Reservoirs.
                                  Phys. Rev. A 62: 053807.




24                                                                                                  Los Alamos Science Number 27 2002
                                                              Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical—Revisited


Unruh, W. G., and W. H. Zurek. 1989. Reduction of a Wave Packet in Quantum Brownian Motion.
   Phys. Rev. D.40:1071.
Von Neumann, J. 1932. Mathematische Grundlagen der Quanten Mechanik. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. English
   translation by R. T. Beyer. 1955. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton:
   Princeton University Press.
Wheeler, J. A. 1957. Assessment of Everett’s “Relative State” Formulation of Quantum Theory.
   Rev. Mod. Phys. 29: 463.
Wheeler, J. A., and W. H. Zurek, eds. 1983. Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton: Princeton
   University Press.
Wigner, E. P. 1932. On the Quantum Correction for Thermodynamic Equilibrium. Phys. Rev. 40: 749.
———. 1961. Remarks on the Mind-Body Question. In The Scientist Speculates. p. 284. Edited by I. J. Good.
   London: Heineman.
———. 1963. The Problem of Measurement. Am. J. Phys. 31: 615.
———. 1983. In Quantum Optics, Experimental Gravitation, and the Measurement Theory. Edited by
   P. Meystre, and M. O. Scully. p. 43. New York: Plenum Press.                                                Wojciech Hubert Zurek was
Zeh, H. D. 1970. On the Interpretation of Measurement in Quantum Theory. Found. Phys. 1: 69.                   educated in Kraków, in his native
Zurek, W. H. 1981. Pointer Basis of Quantum Apparatus: Into What Mixture Does the Wave Packet Collapse?        Poland (M. Sc., 1974) and in Austin,
   Phys. Rev. D 24: 1516.                                                                                      Texas (Ph. D. in physics, 1979).
———. 1982. Environment-Induced Superselection Rules. Phys. Rev. D 26: 1862.                                    He was a Richard Chace Tolman
———. 1984. Reduction of the Wave Packet: How Long Does It Take? In Frontiers of Nonequilibrium                 Fellow at the California Institute
   Statistical Physics. Edited by P. Meystre, and M. O. Scully. New York : Plenum.                             of Technology and a J. Robert
———. 1991. Decoherence and the Transition From Quantum to Classical. Phys. Today 44 (10): 36.                  Oppenheimer Fellow at the
———. 1993. Preferred States, Predictability, Classicality, and the Environment-Induced Decoherence.            Los Alamos National Laboratory.
   Prog. Theor. Phys. 89 (2): 281.                                                                             In 1996, Wojciech was selected as
———. 1998. Decoherence, Chaos, Quantum-Classical Correspondence, and the Algorithmic Arrow of Time.            a Los Alamos National Laboratory
   Physica Scripta T76: 186.                                                                                   Fellow. He is a Foreign Associate
———.2000. Einselection and Decoherence from an Information Theory Perspective. Ann. Phys. (Leipzig)            of the Cosmology Program of the
   9 (11–12): 855.                                                                                             Canadian Institute of Advanced
———. 2001a. Decoherence, Einselection, and the Quantum Origins of the Classical. http://eprints.lanl.gov.      Research and the founder of the
   quant-ph/0105127                                                                                            Complexity, Entropy, and Physics
———. 2001b. Sub-Planck Structure in Phase Space and its Relevance for Quantum Decoherence.                     of Information Network of the
   Nature 412: 712.                                                                                            Santa Fe Institute. His research
Zurek, W. H., and J. P. Paz. 1994. Decoherence, Chaos, and the Second Law. Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (16): 2508.     interests include decoherence,
———. 1995. Quantum Chaos: A Decoherent Definition. Physica D 83 (1–3): 300.                                    physics of quantum and classical
Zurek, W. H., S. Habib, and J. P. Paz. 1993. Coherent States via Decoherence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (9): 1187.   information, foundations of statisti-
                                                                                                               cal and quantum physics and
                                                                                                               astrophysics.




Number 27 2002 Los Alamos Science                                                                                                               25
