                                    I
            THE PRINCIPLE OF SUPERPOSITION
§ 1. Waves and Particles
In the application of classical electrodynamics to atomic phenomena
one meets with difficulties of a very fundamental nature, which show
that the classical theory is irreconcilable with the facts. For instance,
it is quite hopeless on the basis of classical ideas to try to account
for the remarkable stability of atoms and molecules that is required
in order that substances may have definite physical and chemical
properties. These difficulties have necessitated a modification of some
of the most fundamental laws of nature and have led to a new system
of mechanics, called quantum mechanics, since its most striking
 (although not its most important) differences from the old mechanics
apparently show a discontinuity in certain physical processes and
a discreteness in certain dynamical variables.
   Classical electrodynamics forms a self-consistent and very elegant
theory, and one might be inclined to think that no modification of
it would be possible which did not introduce arbitrary features and
completely spoil its beauty. This is not so, however, since quantum
mechanics, after passing through many stages and having its funda­
mental concepts changed more than once, has now reached a form in
which it can be based on general laws and is, although not yet quite
complete, even more elegant and pleasing than the classical theory
in those problems with which it deals. This is brought about by the
fact that the changes made in the classical theory are very few in
number, although they are of a fundamental nature and involve the
introduction of entirely new concepts, and are such that practically
all the features of the classical theory to which it owes its attractive­
ness can be taken over unchanged into the new theory.
   The necessity for a fundamental departure from the laws and con­
cepts of classical mechanics is seen most clearly by a consideration
of experimentally established facts on the nature of light. On the
one hand the phenomena of interference and diffraction can be
explained only on the basis of a wave theory of light; on the other,
phenomena such as photo-electric emission and scattering by free
electrons show that light is composed of small particles, which are
called photons, each having a definite energy and momentum de-
  3595                             B
2            T H E P R I N C I P L E OF S U P E R P O S I T I O N   §1
pending on the frequency of the light. These photons appear to have
just as real an existence as electrons, or any other particles known
in physics. A fraction of a photon is never observed, so that we may
safely assume it cannot exist.
   To obtain a consistent theory of light which shall include inter­
ference and diffraction phenomena, we must consider the photons as
being controlled by waves, in some way which cannot be understood
from the point of view of ordinary mechanics. This intimate con­
nexion between waves and particles is of very great generality in the
new quantum mechanics. It occurs not only in the case of light. All
particles are connected in this way with waves, which control them
and give rise to interference and diffraction phenomena under suitable
conditions. The influence of the waves on the motion of the particles
is less noticeable the more massive the particles and only in the case
of photons, the lightest of all particles, is it easily demonstrated.
   The waves and particles should be regarded as two abstractions
which are useful for describing the same physical reality. One must
not picture this reality as containing both the waves and particles
together and try to construct a mechanism, acting according to
classical laws, which shall correctly describe their connexion and
account for the motion of the particles. Any such attempt would be
quite opposed to the principles by which modern physics advances.
What quantum mechanics does is to try to formulate the underlying
laws in such a way that one can determine from them without
ambiguity what will happen under any given experimental condi­
tions. It would be useless and meaningless to attempt to go more
deeply into the relations between waves and particles than is required
for this purpose.

§ 2. The Polarization of Photons
Although the idea of a physical reality being describable by both
particles and waves, which are connected in some curious manner, is
of far-reaching importance and wide applications, yet it is only a
special case of a much more general principle, the Principle of Super­
position. This principle forms the fundamental new idea of quantum
mechanics and the basis of the departure from the classical theory.
   In order to lead up to an explanation of this principle, we shall
first take a very simple special case of it, which is provided by a con­
sideration of the polarization of light. It is known experimentally
§2             SINGLE-PHOTON EXPERIMENTS                             3
that when plane-polarized light is used for ejecting photo-electrons,
there is a preferential direction for the electron emission. Thus the
polarization properties of light are closely connected with its corpus­
cular properties and one must ascribe a polarization to the photons.
One must consider, for instance, a beam of light plane polarized in
a certain direction as consisting of photons each of which is plane
polarized in that direction and a beam of circularly polarized light
as consisting of photons each circularly polarized. Every photon is
in a certain state of polarization, as we shall say. The difficulty is
now how we are to fit in these ideas with the known facts about the
resolution of light into polarized components and the recomposition
of these components.
   Suppose, for instance, that we have a beam of plane-polarized light
passing through a polariscope and getting resolved into two com­
ponents polarized at angles of a and a+Jw with the direction of
polarization of the incident beam. The intensities of the two com­
ponents will be, according to classical optics, respectively cos2a and
sin2* times that of the original beam. Let us say that a photon of
the original beam is in the state of polarization 0 and a photon in
one or other of the two components is in the state a or
respectively. The question that now arises is: What must we con­
sider happens to each individual photon when it reaches the polari­
scope ? How do the photons in the state 0 change into photons in
the states a and          ?
   This question cannot be answered without the help of an entirely
new concept which is quite foreign to classical ideas. We shall there­
fore first consider another question of a different type, namely, what
will be the result of any particular experiment which one may perform
to try to determine what happens to an individual photon when it
reaches the polariscope. It is only questions of this type that are
really important, and quantum mechanics always gives a definite
answer to them. Any answer that may be given to our first question,
i.e. any description of the whole course of a photon during the
experiment, would be simply a device to help us to remember the
results of the experiments. We ought not to be surprised if no such
 description based on classical ideas is possible.
   The most direct experiment of this kind would be to use an incident
 beam consisting of only a single photon and then to measure the
 energy in each of the two components. The result predicted by
4           T H E P R I N C I P L E OF S U P E R P O S I T I O N      §2
quantum mechanics is that sometimes one would find the whole of
the energy in one component and the other times one would find the
whole in the other component. One would never find part of the
energy in one and part in the other. Experiment can never reveal
a fraction of a photon. If one did the experiment a large number of
times, one would find in a fraction cos2a of the total number of times
that the whole of the energy is in the a-component and in a fraction
sin2a that the whole of the energy is in the (a-(-JiT)-component. One
may thus say that a photon has a probability cos2a of appearing in
the a-component and a probability sin2a of appearing in the (a+ £ 7r)-
component. These values for the probabilities lead to the correct
classical distribution of energy between the two components when
the number of photons in the incident beam is large.
   Thus the individuality of the photon is preserved in all cases, but
only at the expense of determinacy. The result of an experiment is
not determined, as it would be according to the classical theory, by
the conditions under the control of the experimenter. The most that
can be predicted is the probability of occurrence of each of the pos­
sible results. This lack of determinacy, which runs through the whole
of quantum mechanics and is in sharp contradiction to the classical
theory, may at first sight appear to be unsatisfactory, as implying
a departure from the law of causality. It should be remarked, though,
that if one makes any experimental arrangement to observe the energy
of one of the components (e.g. by reflection by a movable mirror and
measurement of the recoil momentum communicated to the mirror),
it will always be impossible subsequently to recombine the two com­
ponents to produce interference effects. The observation must in­
evitably produce, as we shall see from the general laws of quantum
mechanics, a change in phase of uncertain and unpredictable amount.
One may therefore, as has been pointed out by Bohr,* ascribe the
lack of determinacy in the result to the uncertainty in the disturbance
which the observation necessarily makes, although one cannot inquire
closely into how it comes about. The apparent failure of causality
is from this point of view due to a theoretically necessary clumsiness
in the means of observation.
   We must now consider the answer to our first question and give
a description of the photon throughout the course of the experiment.
A description consisting of a continuous picture in the classical sense
             * See the article by N. Bohr in .Nature, p. 580, 1928.
§2    S U P E R P O S I T I O N OF S T A T E S OF P O L A R I Z A T I O N   5
is not possible. The description which quantum mechanics allows us
to give is merely a manner of speaking which is of value in helping
us to deduce and to remember the results of experiments and which
never leads to wrong conclusions. One should not try to give too
much meaning to it.
   It is necessary to suppose a peculiar relationship to exist between
the different states of polarization, which is such that when, for
instance, a photon is in the state 0, it'm ay be considered as being
partly in the state a and partly in the state         Similarly it could
be considered as partly in state /J and partly in state jS-\-lrr, where
   is any other angle of polarization, or as partly in the state of left-
circular polarization and partly that of right-circular polarization.
More generally, one could consider it partly in each of two states
plane polarized in two directions that are not at right angles, though
this is seldom convenient, or one could consider it partly in each of
 more than two states. There are thus many ways of describing the
 photon, which are all always permissible and equally good theoreti­
 cally, although; of course, the one that says the photon is entirely in
 state 0 is simpler than those that say it is ‘distributed ’ over two or
 more states. When we say that the photon is distributed over two
 or more given states the description is, of course, only qualitative,
 but in the mathematical theory it is made exact by the introduction
of numbers to specify the distribution, which determine the iveights
 with which the different states occur in it.
    One cannot picture in detail a photon being partly in each of two
 states; still less can one see how this can be equivalent to its being
 partly in each of two other different states or wholly in a single state.
 We must, however, get used to the new relationships between the
 states which are implied by this manner of speaking and must build
 up a consistent mathematical theory governing them.
    In our polarizing experiment, if we choose to consider the incident
 photon as being partly in state a and partly in state                the
 action of the polariscope is then quite simple. It separates the two
 components a and a+^77 into twro distinct beams, so that after the
 photon has passed through we must say that it is partly in one beam
 with the polarization a and partly in the other with the polarization
 ct+l77. There is now no way of saying the photon is wholly in one
 state, without a generalization of the meaning of a state, which will
 be made later. The simplest description is the one just given, in
6            T H E P R I N C I P L E OF S U P E R P O S I T I O N   §2
which the photon is distributed over two states. Other possible
descriptions would require the photon to be distributed over three
or more states; e.g. one could say it is partly in the first beam with
the polarization a, partly in the second beam with the polarization
/? (arbitrary), and partly in the second beam with the polarization
P+h-rr. Such descriptions would not, however, be of value unless the
beams were subsequently passed through other polarizing instru­
ments.
    Let us consider now what happens when we determine the energy
in one of the components. The result of such a determination must
be either the whole photon or nothing at all. Thus the photon must
change suddenly from being partly in one beam and partly in the
other to being entirely in one of the beams. This sudden change may
be counted as due to the disturbance of the photon which the observa­
tion necessarily makes. It is impossible to predict in which of the
two beams the photon will be found. Only the probability of either
result can be calculated from the previous distribution of the photon
 over the two beams.
    This way of describing the photon during the course of the
experiment leads to one important conclusion, namely, the above-
 mentioned circumstance that when once the energy in one of the
 components has been determined, it will be impossible subsequently
 to bring about interference between the two components. When the
 photon is partly in one beam and partly in the other, if the two beams
 are superposed interference can take place, as the mathematical
 theory will show. This possibility disappears when the photon is
 forced entirely into one of the beams by the energy observation. The
 other beam then no longer enters into the description of the photon,
 so that if any experiment is subsequently performed on the same
 photon it will count as being entirely in the one beam in the ordinary
 way.
    We have obtained a description of the photon throughout the
 experiment, which rests on a new rather vague idea of a photon
 being partly in one state and partly in another. The reader may,
 perhaps, feel that we have not really solved the difficulty of the con­
 flict between the waves and the corpuscles, but have merely talked
 about it in a certain way and, by using some of the concepts of waves
 and some of corpuscles, have arrived at a formal account of the
 phenomena, which does not really tell us anything that we did not
§2           B E H A V I O U R OF A S I N G L E P H O T O N           7
know before. The difficulty of the conflict between the waves and
corpuscles is, however, actually solved as soon as one can give an
unambiguous answer to any experimental question. The only object
of theoretical physics is to calculate results that can be compared with
experiment, and it is quite unnecessary that any satisfying description
of the whole course of the phenomena should be given.
   With regard to the objection that the present description does
not seem to take us any farther than we could, perhaps, have gone
with very hazy notions of the relations between photons and
electromagnetic waves, such as, for instance, those one had before
the discovery of quantum mechanics, it should be remarked that the
conclusion obtained above, that when once the energy of one of the
beams has been measured subsequent interference between the beams
would be impossible, could not have been drawn from very hazy
notions, and also that the present discussion is really too qualitative
for the advantages of the new theory to show up clearly. In § 5 the
discussion on the nature of light will be renewed on a slightly more
quantitative basis, which will bring out definitely the difference
between the present theory and the previous hazy notions. For many
elementary optical experiments, moreover, the hazy notions would
suffice to give answers to questions concerning the results of observa­
tions and in such cases quantum mechanics would not give any
further information. The object of quantum mechanics is to extend
the domain of questions that can be answered and not to give more
detailed answers than can be experimentally verified.

§ 3. Superposition and Indeterm inacy
The new ideas that we have introduced in our description of the
photon must be extended and applied to any atomic system, i.e. to
any set of electrons and atomic nuclei interacting with each other
and perhaps also with photons. We must first generalize the meaning
of a ‘state ’ so that it can apply to any atomic system. Corresponding
to the case of the photon, which we say is in a given state of polariza­
tion when it has been passed through suitable polarizing apparatus,
we say that any atomic system is in a given state when it has been
prepared in a given way, which may be repeated arbitrarily at will.
The method of preparation may then be taken as the specification of
the state. The state of a system in the general case includes any
information that may be known about its position in space from the
8            T H E P R I N C I P L E OF S U P E R P O S I T I O N     §3
way in which it was prepared, as well as any information about its
internal condition.
   We must now imagine the states of any system to be related in
such a way that whenever the system is definitely in one state, we
can equally well consider it as being partly in each of two or more
other states. The original state must be regarded as the result of
a kind of superposition of the two or more new states, in a way that
cannot be conceived on classical ideas. Any state may be considered
as the result of a superposition of two or more other states, and indeed
in an infinite number of ways. Conversely any two or more states
may be superposed to give a new state, even also when they refer
to different positions of the system in space. Thus in our previous
example of the polarization experiment, when the photon is partly
in the one beam with the polarization a and partly in the other with
the polarization          we may still count it as being entirely in a
certain single state. In fact it still satisfies the definition of having
been prepared in a definite way which may be repeated at will.
   When a state is formed by the superposition of two other states,
it will have properties that are in a certain way intermediate between
those of the two original states and that approach more or less closely
to those of either of them according to the greater or less ‘weight’
attached to this state in the superposition process. The new state is
completely defined by the two original states when their relative
weights in the superposition process are known, together with a cer­
tain phase difference, the exact meaning of weights and phases being
provided in the general case by the mathematical theory of the next
chapter. In the case of the' polarization of a photon their meaning
is that provided by classical optics, e.g. when two perpendicularly
plane polarized states are superposed with equal weights, the new
state may be circularly polarized in either direction, or linearly
polarized at an angle \ tt, or else elliptically polarized, according to
the phase difference. This, of course, is true only provided the two
states that are superposed refer to the same beam of light, i.e. all
that is known about the position and momentum of a photon in
either of these states must be the same for each.
   It is convenient at this stage to modify slightly the meaning of the
word ‘state ’ and to make it more precise. We must regard the state
of a system as referring to its condition throughout an indefinite
period of time and not to its condition at a particular time, which
§3                   STATES IN SPACE-TIME                               9
would make the state a function of the time. Thus a state refers to
a region of 4-dimensional space-time and not to a region of 3-dimen­
sional space. A system, when once prepared in a given state, remains
in that state so long as it remains undisturbed. This does not, of
course, imply that it is not undergoing changes which could he
revealed by experiment. In general it will be following out a definite
course of changes, predictable by the quantum theory, belonging tt>
that state. It is sometimes purely a matter of convenience whether
we are to regard a system as being disturbed by a certain outside
influence, so that its state gets changed, or whether we are to regard
the outside influence as forming part of and coming in the definition
of the system, so that with the inclusion of the effects of this influence
it is still merely running through its course in one particular state.
An illustration of this is our previous example of a photon being
passed through a polariscope and becoming partly in each of. two
beams. Either we may consider the polariscope as disturbing the
photon, so that after it has passed through it is in a different state;
or else we may consider the polariscope as forming part of the ' field ’
in which the photon is moving, so that it is in the same state when
it is in the incident beam as later when it is partly in each of the
two component beams, and it is just following out its course in that
state. The general laws of quantum mechanics apply equally well
for either of these meanings of the state. There are, however, two
cases when we are in general obliged to consider the disturbance as
causing a change in state of the system, namely, when the disturbance
is an observation and when it consists in preparing the system so as
to be in a given state.
   With the new space-time meaning of a state we need a corre­
sponding space-time meaning of an observation. This requires that
the specification of an observation shall include a definite time at
which the observation is to be made, or at which the apparatus used
in making the observation is to be set in motion, relatively to the
time when the system was prepared. It should be noticed that it has
a meaning to consider an observation being made on a system in a
given state before this state is prepared. If the system is prepared
at time t0, so that after time t0 it is in a given state, we can imagine
what it would have to be like before time t0 in order that, if left
undisturbed, it may become in the given state after time tQ. Thus
we can imagine the given state being produced backwards in time
  3595                              r
10           T H E P R I N C I P L E OF S U P E R P O S I T I O N     §3
and can give a meaning to an observation being made before time t0
on the system in this state.
   The introduction of indeterminacy into the results of observations,
which we had to make in our discussion of the photon, must now be
extended to the general case. When an observation is made on any
atomic system that has been prepared in a given way and is thus in
a given state, the result will not in general be determinate, i.e. if the
experiment is repeated several times under identical conditions
several different results may be obtained. If the experiment is
repeated a large number of times it will be found that each particular
result will be obtained a definite fraction of the total number of
times, so that one can say there is a definite probability of its being
obtained any time the experiment is performed. This probability the
theory enables one to calculate. In special cases this probability may
be unity and the result of the experiment is then quite determinate.
   The indeterminacy in the results of observations is a necessary con­
sequence of the superposition relationships that quantum mechanics
requires to exist between the states. Suppose that we have two states
A and B such that there exists an observation which, when made on
the system in state A, is certain to lead to one particular result, and
when made on the system in state B, is certain not to lead to this
result. Two such states we call orthogonal. Suppose now that this
observation is made on the system in a state formed by superposition
of A and B. It is impossible for the result still to be determinate
(except in the special case when the weight of A or B in the super­
position process is zero). There must be a finite probability p that
the result, that was certain for state A , will now be obtained and
a finite probability 1—p that it will not be obtained. By continuously
varying the relative weights in the superposition process we can get
a continuous range of states, extending from pure A to pure B, for
which the probability of the result, that was certain for state A,
being obtained varies continuously from unity to zero.
   It was mentioned above that an observation is not specified unless
the time when it is made is given. In special cases it may so happen
that the result of the observation, or the probability of any particular
result being obtained, is independent of this time. If the state of the
system is such that this is so for every observation that could be
made on the system, then the state is said to be a stationary state and
we should picture it as one in which the conditions are not varying.
§3   COMPARISON W I T H CLASSICAL S U P E R P O S I T I O N            11
   The possibility in quantum mechanics of superposing states to get
new states is connected with the fact that in the mathematical theorj
the equations that define a state are linear in the unknowns. It is
not unnatural that one should try to establish analogies with systems
in classical mechanics (such as vibrating strings or membranes),
which are governed by linear equations and for which, consequently,
a superposition principle holds. Such analogies have led to the name
‘Wave Mechanics’ being sometimes given to quantum mechanics.
It must be emphasized, however, that the superposition that occurs in
quantum mechanics is of an essentially different nature from that occurr­
ing in the classical theory. The analogies are therefore very mis­
leading. Their inadequacy may be seen from the following special
case. Suppose one compares the states of an atomic system with the
states of vibration of a membrane. If one superposes any state of the
vibrating membrane with itself, the result is a new state of double
the amplitude. On the other hand, if one superposes an atomic state
with itself according to quantum mechanics, the resulting state will
be precisely the same as the original one. There is nothing in the
atomic case that is analogous to the absolute value of the amplitude,
as distinct from the relative amplitudes of different points, of the
vibrating membrane.

§ 4. Compatibility of Observations
In general a system is disturbed when an observation is made on it,
so that after the observation it is no longer in the same state as
before. Only when the initial state and the observation are such that
there is a probability unity, i.e. a certainty, for one particular result
is it possible that the observation may produce no change of state.
The necessity for this conclusion may be seen from the following
argument.
   Suppose that there is a probability p for a given result being
obtained from the observation. Consider one occasion on which
this result was actually found and suppose the observation was
repeated immediately afterwards on the system in the state in which
it was left by the first observation. There must have been a proba­
bility unity for the given result being obtained a second time, since
we may assume the system could not have changed in the infinitely
short time between the two observations. Thus while the first state
is such that there is a probability p for a given result from a certain
12           T H E P R I N C I P L E OF S U P E R P O S I T I O N    §4
observation, the second state (i.e. the one in which the system was
left by the first observation) is such that there is a probability unity
for this same result from a practically equivalent observation. Hence
the second state must differ from the first when p differs from unity,
since the probability of a result is quite definite for each state. It
must be understood that the second state here considered is the one
that arose on that particular occasion referred to above when the
first observation was found to give the particular result desired.
There will be a different second state corresponding to each different
result for this observation. They must all be different from the initial
state when p differs from unity.
   Hence when once an observation of a system in a given state has
been made, one cannot in general make a second observation and
suppose it to apply to the same state. The first observation spoils
the state of the system, which must then be prepared again before
one can make the second. The two observations may, however, be
such that, although the first one alters the state of the system, yet
it does so in such a way as not to make any difference to the proba­
bility of any given result being obtained with the second. By the
probability of a given result being obtained with the second is here
meant its probability at the beginning of the experiment, before one
knows what the result of the first observation is, and not its proba­
bility after a particular result has been obtained with the first
observation. Two observations for which this is so when they are
made (or at least when the first is made) with the minimum of dis­
turbance allowed by theory, which can be attained in practice only
under the most favourable conditions, are called compatible. Three
or more observations are called compatible when any two are com­
patible. Two or more observations may be compatible only with
respect to one particular state as initial state before any of the
observations, or they may be compatible with respect to all initial
states. In future when it is said that two or more observations are
compatible, the second alternative is to be understood unless the
contrary is stated.
   The condition for the compatibility of two observations is, according
to the laws of quantum mechanics, a symmetrical condition between them.
If one of two compatible observations, cq say, is made at the time
ty and the other, a2 say, at the time t2 which is later than tv then,
according to the definition given above, the probability of a given
§4                COMPATIBLE OBSERVATIONS                                13
result being obtained for a2must be the same whether this observa­
tion is made on the system in the initial state or in the state ensuing
after observation cq. The symmetry condition now requires that the
probability of a given result being obtained for a! must be the same
whether this observation cq is made on the system in the initial state
or in the state ensuing after observation a2, it being necessary to
suppose this latter state, which is prepared at time t2, to be produced
backwards in time, in the way mentioned in the preceding section, in
order that the observation cq at time q may be made on it. By the
probability of a result for the state ensuing after a certain observa­
tion, is meant in each case the average probability for each state that
can ensue after this observation, each of these states being weighted
in the averaging process with the probability that it does ensue after
this observation.
   It has been pointed out that the state of a system after any
observation has been made on it is such that this observation, if
made on the system in this final state, would for a certainty give one
particular result. Suppose now that a number of compatible observa­
tions cq, ct2, . . . are made on the system. Then the final state must
be such that, if any of the observations a.r is made on the system in
this final state, there will be a certainty for one particular result,
since there was a certainty for one particular result as soon as the
observation ar was made in the preparation of the final state, and
this will not be affected by the subsequent observations ar+1, ar+2, . . . ,
owing to the compatibility condition. The existence of states for
which the result of any of the observations is a certainty forms one
of the main properties of compatible observations. The order of the
observations need not, of course, be their order in time, since we are
allowed to consider an observation being made on a state before it
is prepared.
   The case of greatest interest of the compatibility of two observa­
tions is when they both refer to the same instant of time. The com­
patibility condition is now that if either is made a very short time
before the other, the probability of any given result being obtained
with the second shall be the same as if the first had not been made.
   I t is often convenient to count two or more compatible observa­
tions, particularly when they are simultaneous, as a single observa­
tion, the result of such an observation being expressible by two or
more numbers. We shall frequently have to consider the greatest
14           T H E P R I N C I P L E OF S U P E R P O S I T I O N      §4
possible number of independent compatible simultaneous observa­
tions being made on a system and shall, for brevity, call such a set
of observations a maximum observation. When a maximum observa­
tion is made on a system, its subsequent state is completely determined
by the result of the observation and is independent of its previous state.
This may be considered as an axiom, or as a more precise definition
of a state.
   The state of a system after a maximum observation has been made
on it is such that there exists a maximum observation (namely, an
immediate repetition of the maximum observation already made)
which, when made on the system in this state, will for a certainty
lead to one particular result (namely, the previous result over again).
Any state can be specified only as the state ensuing after a given
maximum observation has been made for which a given result was
obtained, or in some equivalent way, We can therefore draw the
conclusion that for any state there must exist one maximum observa­
tion which will for a certainty lead to one particular result, and
conversely, if we consider any possible result of a maximum observa­
tion, there must exist a state of the system for which this result for
the observation will be obtained with certainty.

§ 5. Further D iscussion on Photons
When quantum mechanics is applied to a system composed of simply
a freely moving corpuscle, the equations that define a state of the
system are, as we shall find from the mathematical theory, the
ordinary equations for wave motion. It is this circumstance that
gives to the corpuscle many of the properties of waves and allows us
to consider a corpuscle in a given state as associated with, or controlled
by, a given wave. In order to show more definitely the nature of the
relations between the waves and the corpuscle, a typical example will be
given of the conflict between the wave and the corpuscular theories
of light and of the solution which quantum mechanics provides.
   Consider a beam of light to be split into two components of equal
intensity, which are made to interfere. According to the old corpus­
cular theory we would say that each of the two components contains
an equal number of photons and we should then require that a photon
in one component could interfere with one in the other. Under certain
conditions they would have to annihilate one another, and under
others to produce four photons. This contradicts the idea of photons
§5            S E L F - I N T E R F E R E N C E OF A P H O T O N        15
 being discrete particles and is, besides, in disagreement with the con­
 servation of energy, which should hold for each process in detail and
not be merely statistically true.
   The answer that quantum mechanics gives to the difficulty is that
one should consider each photon to go partly into each of the two
components, in the way allowed by the idea of the superposition of
states. Each photon then interferes only with itself. Interference
between two different photons can never occur. The solution of
Maxwell’s equations that forms the wave picture of the phenomenon
represents one of the photons and not the whole assembly of photons.
The relative intensities that this solution gives for the light at dif­
ferent points determine the relative probabilities of that photon being
found at these points when an experiment is made to find its position.
Only the relative intensities at different points are of importance;
the absolute intensity has no interpretation. One must not try to estab­
lish any connexion between the absolute intensity of the waves and
the total number of particles, which is in sharp distinction to the
older ideas of the relations between waves and particles.
   The quantum-mechanical views do not, of course, get over the
difficulty of enabling us to picture something having properties be­
tween those of waves and corpuscles, but they serve to remind us,
by their way of saying a photon is partly in one component and
partly in the other, of the close connexion between the components
and so prevent us from intuitively drawing wrong conclusions, as we
do on the older views when we picture each component as having its
own photons. For instance, we are reminded, by the requirement
that the total probability of a photon being anywhere must be and
must remain unity, that in whatever way the two component beams
interfere, if they neutralize each other in one place they must rein­
force each other in another so that conservation of energy is pre­
served. We thus get into no difficulty with the detailed conservation
of energy.

§ 6. Definition of Superposition
A definition of the superposition of states will now be given. We say
that a state A may be formed by a superposition of states B and G when,
if any observation is made on the system in state A leading to any result,
there is a finite probability for the same result being obtained when the
same observation is made on the system in one (at least) of the two states
16           T H E P R I N C I P L E OF S U P E R P O S I T I O N     §6
B and C. The Principle of Superposition says that any two states B
and C may be superposed in accordance with this definition to form
a state A and indeed an infinite number of different states A may
be formed by superposing B and G in different ways. This principle
forms the foundation of quantum mechanics. It is completely
opposed to classical ideas, according to which the result of any
observation is certain and for any two states there exists an observa­
tion that will certainly lead to two different results.
   From our definition of superposition some elementary theorems
follow immediately. For example, the states B and G themselves are
particular cases of states formed by superposition of B and G. Again,
if we superpose two states A and B obtaining a state P, which is then
superposed on another state C, the resulting state Q will have the
property that, if any observation is made on the system in this state
leading to any result, there will be a finite probability of this same
result being obtained when the observation is made on the system
in one of the two states P and C, and hence there must be a finite
probability of this result being obtained when the observation is
made on the system in one of the three states A, B, and G. Thus
the property possessed by the state Q is symmetrical in the three
states A, B, and C, so that when superpositions are made successively
their order is unimportant. This, of course, is necessary for the word
‘superposition’ to be suitable for describing the relations between
the states.
   Another example of a deduction from the definition of superposi­
tion is the following: If an observation of the system in a state A is
certain to lead to one particular result and if this observation for
another state B is certain to lead to the same result, then the observa­
tion is also certain to lead to this result for any state obtained by
superposition of A and B. This is because it cannot lead to any
other result, as the probability of this other result for both the states
A and B is zero.
   One could proceed to build up the theory of quantum mechanics
on the basis of these ideas of superposition with the introduction of
the minimum number of new assumptions necessary. Although this
would be the logical line of development, it does not appear to be
the most convenient one, as the laws of quantum mechanics are so
closely interconnected that it would not be easy, and would in any
case be somewhat artificial, to separate out the barest minimum of
                   THE SYMBOLIC METHOD                            17
assumptions from which the rest could be deduced. The method that
will be here followed will therefore be first to give all the simple
general laws in the form in which they are most easily expressed and
remembered, and then to work out their consequences. This will
mean that we shall continually be deducing results that are obviously
necessary for the physical meaning of the theory to be tenable, or
that follow from the foregoing ideas of superposition. Such deduc­
tions will then merely show the reasonableness and self-consistency
of our fundamental assumptions.




  3595                           D
