E in ste in ’s C ritique of
Q uantum Theory:
T h e Roots and
Significance o f E P R

The matrix mechanics path to quantum theory was initiated by
 Heisenberg in the summer of 1925. Dirac received a prepublication
copy of Heisenberg’s paper and by November he had worked out
his own beautiful generalization of the ideas. Independently, and
almost at the same time, Schrödinger was developing the wave
mechanics route, marked out in his “first communication" at the
end of January 1926.1
   In the early months of 1926 Einstein corrresponded with both
 Heisenberg and Schrödinger about their work on quantum phe­
nomena. As spring began he summed up his own impressions of
the quantum world in letters to Ehrenfest and Lorentz. Heisenberg
came to Berlin that spring to talk with Einstein and to the collo-
quium there, and later, in July, Schrödinger came as well. Thus
Before the new ideas were"a year old, Einstein had acquired hrst-
hand knowledge of them from the originators themselves. Einstein,
wKoseTown \vork on quantum problems played an important role
in both lines of development, reacted to the new theory with an
uncharacteristic ambivalence.
    In a letter to Ehrenfest (February 12, 1926), Einstein criticized
the matrix mechanics, focusing on the fact that it is not relativis-
tically invariant and wondering whether the commutation relations
^opposition and linear momentum actually hold in all cases. Yet a
 few weeks later (March 7, 1926) he wrote to Hedi Born, “The

     © 1981 by M em phis State U niversity Press.
     Unless a published source is cited, references to the Einstein c o rresp o n d en ce
a n d p ap ers a re to m aterial on m icrofilm in the Einstein Archives, housed in the
R are Book Room o f the Firestone L ibrary at P rinceton University. T h e c o rre sp o n ­
den ce is indexed alphabetically for the c o rresp o n d en ts cited. T h e unpublished
m anuscripts are on reel n u m b e r two, IA 2 -IA 7 . 1 am grateful to David M alam ent
a n d M ichael Ferguson fo r help with the G erm an, a n d to Micky Forbes for assistance
with its English. I am responsible, however, for the translations as given. I w ant to
acknow ledge the coop eratio n o f the trustees o f the Estate o f A lbert E instein with
re g ard to the use o f these m aterials, a n d to th an k them for th e ir perm ission to
re p ro d u c e portions here. Part o f the research fo r this study was su p p o rte d by
N ational Science Foundation G ra n t # SOC 76-82113.
     1. See respectively H eisenberg (1925), Dirac (1925), a n d S ch rö d in g er (1926).
                                                                                               27

  Heisenberg-Born concepts leave us all breathless, and have made
 a deep impression on all theoretically oriented people. Instead of
 dull resignation, there is now a singular tension in us sluggish
  people” (Born 1971, p. 88). Within the week, however, Einstein
 wrote to Lorentz (March 13, 1926) that despite a great deal of
 effort in studying the Heisenberg-Born theory his instincts still
  resisted their way of conceiving things. He went on, in this letter,
'torecömmend Schrödinger’s work as a promising development of                     s/
 de Broglie’s ideas. Responding to an earlier request from Lorentz
  that he address the ßfth Solvay Conference (to be held in Brussels
 in October 1927), Einstein claimed to have nothing new to say and
  recommended that Schrödinger be invited in his stead. Einstein’s
 endorsement of wave mechanics, however, was short lived. In April                /
  Re expressed enthuslasrn foF"Schrodinger’s work to Ehrenfest, but
  by January (1927) he remarked to him, “My heart does not warm
  toward Schrödingerei—it is uncausal and altogether too primitive.”
  (“Mein Herz wird nicht warm bei der Schrödingerei—sie ist un
  kausal and überhaupt zu primitiv.”)
     I do not think this remark represents some special predilection
  for causality, rather it is probably Einstein’s way of acknowledging
  to Ehrenfest that wave mechanics is no better, in terms of causality,
  than is matrix mechanics. In any case, Einstein wrote a critique of I t *
  wave mechanics early in 1927. (It may be that this critique, which
  was never published, was made in preparation for the October
  Solvay Conference. For Einstein had finally yielded to Lorentz’s
                                                                               tfzrr
  strong personal request and agreed to give a talk on quantum
  statistics—although, in fact, the talk was never given.) In these notes Fi&TOtfZ
  he criticizes wave mechanics on three grounds: he thinks that be­
  cause of superposition it will be difficult to recover the classical          ©
  Hamilton:Jacobi equations even as an approximation; he is worried
  that the treatment of many-electron systems in configuration space—
  involves correlations between the electrons that violate the principle
  of action-by-contact; and he thinks that one will have to renounce
  the treatment of individual systems and will find that the theory
  offers at best a descriptive completeness only in the sense of statistics.2 —V 3 j
     If we put this critique of Schrödinger’s wave mechanics together
  with the reservations expressed to Ehrenfest over Heisenberg’s

     2. In note 26 o f c h ap ter 6 I point o u t th at w hat I call h e re a critique o f wave
m echanics is actually an u n p u b lish ed a ttem p t at a h id d en variables in te rp reta tio n
u h e Bestimmt m an u scrip t re fe rre d to in that note), to g e th e r with E instein’s own
critique o f th a t attem pt. Betw een the project a tte m p ted in the m anuscript a n d his
critique o f it th e th ree points m entioned in m y text d o em erge. My thanks to Paul
Form an fo r catching my m istakes h ere.                                                   *'    ’
                                                                 CHAPTER THREE


        matrix mechanics, we find that by the spring of 1927 Einstein had
        already arrived at the following lines of criticism of the newly
        emerging quantum theory: (1) the equations of the theory are not
        relativistically invariant; (2) it does not yield the classical behavior
        of macroscopic objects to a~goo3~lippi^^                       ) it leadsto
         orrelations among spatially separated objects that appear to violate
        action-byTcontact principles; j4)lt is an essentially statistical theory
        that seems incapable even of describing tfiFT5ehavTor of individual
        systems; and (5) the scope of the commutation relations may not
        in fact be so broad as the theory supposes.
            Einstein’s disagreement with the quantum theory is well known,
        and it seems to be widely believed that this disagreement is a re­
        action to the uncertainty formulas of the theory and largely directed
foihc   at the refutation of them. This is the image, for example, that
        emerges from Bohr’s (1949) retelling of his “debates” with Einstein.
        It is also the dominant theme of Jammer’s detailed story of the
        Bohr-Einstein dispute up to 1930 (Jammer 1974, pp. 120, 132,
        136). It is therefore important to note that Einstein could only have
        known of the uncertainty formulas in April 1927, for that is when
        he received a prepublication copy of Heisenberg’s (1927) funda­
        mental paper. Thus the five lines of criticism assembled above con­
        stitute Einstein’s reaction to the quantum theqpy prior even to the
        formulation ofthe uncertainty formulas. Only item (5) on that list
        lsdirectly relevant to those formulas, and that item is more by way
        of a question than an objection. It appears, then, that Einstein’s
        initial disagreements with the quantum theory did not have to do
        with the uncertainty relations but were broader in scope than those
        relations, and perhaps also more central. Moreover, I believe that
        these initial disagreements were the ones that lasted, as the sub­
        sequent story will show.
            Einstein attended the fifth Solvay Conference in October 1927,
        although he did not give the address on quantum statistics that he
        had promised Lorentz. He did, however, make a few remarks in
        discussion on the last day, notes of which he enclosed in a letter to
        EorentTon November 21, 1927. His remarks were not addressed
        to the uncertainty relations, but rather to the question of a statistical
        versus a complete individual interpretation of the theory. He ar-
        guecTtKat i f the state function were interpreted as expressing prob­
        abilities for finding properties of an individual system, then the
        phenomenon of the collapse of the wave packet would represent
        a peculiar action-at-a distance. The collapse prevents a particle,
        whose wave function ifTontmuously distributed over some region
        of space, from producing an effect at two places in the region at
        once. It thus represents a peculiar nonlocalized mechanism which,
                                                                                          29
Einstein suggests, violates relativity. Moreover, he thought that the
representation of many-particle systems in configuration space raises
two problems: how to obtain the Einstein-Bose statistics, and how
to formulate the idea of forces acting only over small spatial dis­
tances. These are problems, however, not oJjEe_theory itself but
of the interpretation according to which the theory gives a complete-
statistical description of individual systems. The alternative is to
interpret the state function as providing information only about              EL                        ,
the distribution of an ensemble of systems and not about features
of the individual systems themselves.
   If Bohr’s (1949) account of the unrecorded discussions at that J7~lS A/VT
meeting is reliable, then these remarks of Einstein’s led to an in­
formal discussion over the possibilities for more complete descrip­
tions of individual systems. In this context, according to Bohr, Ein­
stein raised the issue as to whether it might be possible in the case
                                                                      7H A )-
of a double slit experiment to determine both where the particle       t f - f T.
lands on the detectingscreen and through which slit it has passed
ffTtfie ensuing discussion Bohr was able to show, apparently, that
the possibilities for controlling the transfer of momentum to the
diaphragm as the particle passes through are constrained by the
uncertainty formulas in such a way as to preclude the required
determinations. In effect, Bohr argued that one measurement (at
the slits) disturbs the subsequent behavior (i.e., where the particle
lands)!
    There is no record of Einstein’s response to these discussions.
 But Bohr does say that at their conclusion Einstein asked “whether
 we could really believe that the providential authorities took re­
 course to dice-playing [ob der liebe Gott würfelt]” (Bohr 1949,
 p. 218). Within a fortnight Einstein wrote, in a letter to Sommer­
 feld, “On ‘Quantum Mechanics’ I think that, with respect to pon-
 derable matter, it contains roughly as much truth as the theory of
 light without quanta. It may be a correct theory of statistical laws,
 but an inadequate conception of individual elementary processes.”3                                 V
 It appears, then, that Einstein left the conference convinced that
 the only viable interpretation for the quantum theory was the sta­
t istical one he had suggested, and not convinced that it was im­
 possible to build conceptions of “individual elementary processes”
 into a better theory.           J ^ tb ic a J                 --
     Except for the problem of macroscopic approximation, one can
 see in Einstein’s discussions tbroughouFtEis time expressions of the
 same concerns that he had accumulated by the spring of 1927. In                                    ^       '

    3.    T h is is letter 53 o f N ovem ber 9, 1927, in H e rm a n n (1968). I have used the
translation by R. a n d R. Stuew er in a p re p rin t translation o f H e rm a n n ’s collection.
 *)U                                                                           CHAPTER TH REE

  the period between the fifth Solvay Conference and the sixth one
  (October 1930), I can find nothing in Einstein’s published work nor
  in his correspondence (both published and unpublished) that rep­
  resents any shift or alteration in these concerns. In correspondence
  with Schrödinger, however, he does indicate an important conclu­
  sion about the quantum theory that he had not acknowledged pre­
  viously. In the letter of May 31, 1928, Einstein notes his agreement
  with Schrödinger’s conclusion that the limitations on the applica­
  bility of the classical concepts that are embedded in the uncertainty
  formulas indicate the need to replace those concepts by new ones.
  Einstein wrote, “Your claim that the concepts p, q [momentum, po­
  sition] will have to be given up, if they can, only claim such ‘shaky’
  meaning seems to be fully justified” (Przibam 1967, p. 31). Einstein
  readily assimilated this conclusion to his concern over the complete­
  ness of the theory so that he would later write (in 1936) that quantum
  theory “is an incomplete representation of real things, although it
  is the only one which can be built out of the fundamental concepts
  of force and material points (quantum corrections to classical me­
  chanics)” (Einstein 1954, pp. 315-16).
      During the sixth Solvay Conference, Einstein once again made
  his only contribution by way of the discussion. He continued, here,
  the informal discussion of the possibility for the description of
' individual systems, this time explicitly directed to test the limitation
   imposed by the energy-time uncertainty formula. Einstein pro­
   posed a simple thought experiment involving the time at which a
   photon escapes from a box and which seemed to get around this
   limitation. Bohr, after a sleepless night, was able to use Einstein’s
   own gravitational redshift formula to show that the determination
   SHh? time of the energy change was in fact limited by Heisenberg’s
   relation. Once again Bohr showed howr the measurement of one
   parameter (here weighing the box-plus-clock) directly interfered
   with the determination of another (here the clockrate). According
   to Bohr (1949, p. 226), Einstein contributed effectively in helping
   to work out Bohr’s argument against Einstein’s own speculation.
      That spirit accords well with Einstein’s scientific character, and
   with the fact that nowhere after 1930 do we find Einstein ques­
   tioning the general validity of the uncertainty formulas.4 Indeed
   the following year he published an article, jointly with Tolman and

     4.      Ja m m e r (1974), p. 136, in te rp re ts this as E instein’s tu rn in g fro m a search fo r
  the in tern al inconsistency o f the q u a n tu m theory to a dem o n stratio n o f its incom ­
  pleteness. B ut this is w rong on b oth counts for, as we have seen, the issue o f com ­
  pleteness was E instein’s concern from the beginning, w hereas now here d o I find
  him try in g to show the inconsistency o f the theory.
                                                                      31

Podolsky (1931), in which he argued that certain apparent possi­
bilities for determining the history of a particle with an accuracy
greater than that allowed by the uncertainty formulas would, in
fact, permit violations of those forumlas. Since these possibilities
had been allowed by both Bohr and Heisenberg (and simply dis­
missed with the positivist disclaimer that they would have no pre­
dictive value), we find that here Einstein is more orthodox about
the uncertainty formulas than are the orthodox themselves.
   If Einstein came away from the discussions at the Solvay con­
ferences convinced of the general validity of the uncertainty re­
lations, he must also have seen that the key to Bohr’s interpretation
                                                                                 Mu*
of the theory lay in the doctrine of disturbance. For the idea that
Bohr had twice used to undermine Einstein’s attempts to get at a              to M ^
detailed description of individual systems was the doctrine that                     At
certain simultaneous determinations were not possible because any
one of them would inevitably disturb the physical situation so as to
preclude the others. It was probably clear to Einstein after the 1930
conference that to defend his own statistical interpretation he must         M
somehow neutralize the doctrine of disturbance to be able to dem­                -flk/
onstrate tHePexistence of real physical attributes that are left un­
attended by the theory, except insofar as they have statistical Z.
significance.                                                              /         , ;
    Once he was settled with regard to the uncertainty formulas, Ein-
stein’s five original objections to tHeTKebfy were reduced to four.
 Of these, two concerned external constraints imposed by other the­
 ories: how to reconcile the quantum theory with the requirements PjJ                  C
 of relativity and how to achieve a satisfactory classical approximation C£)           ]
 from the quantum theory. From his own brilliant work on relativity,
 Einstein understood that such external constraints are guideposts                     ;
 for the construction of new physical concepts. He knew, therefore,
 that to develop the new concepts to replace the classical ones it would
 be necessary to attend to such constraints. He believed, moreover,
 that working from the relativistic framework was a likely starting
 point (see chapter 2 for a discussion of Einstein’s ideas in this area).
 But if one were interested in interpreting the new theory, which al­
 ready relied_soJie^lxc^dTe_classical concepts themselves, it may
 well have seemed reasonable to bracket off the anomalies engen­
 dered by these external constraints, at least for a while. If Einstein
 thought in these ways, then he would have two central problems left.
 One concerned the question of distant correlations and action-by-
 contact in the theory, and the other was the central issue of statistics <^T)
 and the description of individual systems. Notice that these very same
 concerns were the ones expressed by Einstein in the 1927 Solvay
32                                                                 CHAPTER THREE


Conference. He was to make one more attempt to combine them so
as to neutralize Bohr’s doctrine of disturbance and to support his
own statistical interpretation.
   On March 25, 1935 the editors of Physical Review received a short
manuscript coauthored by Albert Einstein, Boris Poldolsky, and
Nathan Rosen. The paper was published in the May 15, 1935, issue
with the awkward title “Can Quantum Mechanical Description of
Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?” Most often referred to
by slogans incorporating the acronym “EPR,” this short (four-page)
article is the source of a voluminous published commentary and is
the touchstone for several attempts to interpret (or to reinterpret)
the formalism of quantum theory.5

   The argument of the paper is concerned with two assertions:
(INC) The quantum mechanical description of a system given by the state
  function is incomplete (as they say, not “every element of physical
   reality has a counterpart in the theory”).
(NSV) Observables represented by noncommuting operators cannot have
  simultaneous reality (i.e., cannot have simultaneously sharp values).

   The argument develops in two parts. The first part demonstrates
the validity of the disjunction6
     (INC) v (NSV).
The second part shows the validity of the conditional
     ~(INC) -> ~(NSV).
The authors then conclude from this that
     (INC)
must hold.
   We can represent the logical structure of the argument as fol­
lows: From PvQ and ~P -> ~Q, infer P. And one can show the
validity of the argument by reasoning that if —P then, by the second
premise, one can get ~Q; and then, by the first premise, one can
get P. So it follows from the premises that if ~P, then P. Since clearly
if P, then P, the conclusion P follows by a simple constructive di­
lemma. Of course this is not the only way to get the conclusion
from the premises, but it is perhaps the most straightforward way.
(The authors do not give the reasoning, they just draw the conclu­
sion.) The point I want to emphasize is that even from the point
    5. See H o o k er (1972) a n d the ex te n d ed discussion in Ja m m e r (1974).
    6. For com pactness, below I use sta n d ard logical symbols: “PvQ” fo r “P o r Q,”
“~ P ” fo r “it is not th e case th a t P” a n d “P -» Q ” fo r “if P, th en Q .”
                                                                       33

of view of elementary logic, the argument of the paper appears
quite complex. The subarguments are even more so.
   To establish the disjunction, (INC) v (NSV), the authors show
that ~(NSV) -» (INC). Thus they suppose that a pair of noncom­
muting observables of a system have simultaneous values and they
note that no state of the system is simultaneously an eigenstate for
both observables. Hence they conclude that the description given
by the state function for such a system would be incomplete.
   To establish the conditional, ~(INC) -» ~(NSV), the authors as­
sume the antecedent (i.e., that the theory is complete) and try to es­
tablish tlmexistence of simultaneous values for position and linear
momentum JinTTieTame direction) in a certain interesting system.
This is a system consisting of two particles that interact so as to pre­
serve total linear momentum (in a certai^chrection) and then fly
apaFTmT^positeTlm               so as to preserve their relative positions
(in the same direction). The authors argue from the interaction for­
malism of the theory that, at least theoretically, there are such cor­
related two-particle systems. They then introduce the following cri­
terion of reality: “If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can
predict with certainty (that is, with probability equal to unity) the
value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of physical
reality corresponding to this physical quantity” (EPR 1935, p. 777).
In the case of the hypothetical correlated system, we can predict,
from a measurement of the position of one system, the position of
the other, and similarly with regard to linear momentum. If the sys­
tems are allowed to separate far enough spatially, there can be no
question of the measurement of one system disturbing the other.
 Hence the authors invoke the criterion of reality to conclude that
for such a system at least one particle must have simultaneously def­
inite position and momentum. Since this is the desired conclusion
in this part of the argument, the inference is achieved.
    I shall reserve comments on the general argument for awhile,
but there are several features of this second stage that I should
 mention. One is to note that the assumption of completeness is
 never actually used here, the authors simply show (or try to)"that
 a certain system has simultaneous position and momentum. Thus
 they establish the conditional
   ~(INC) - ~(NSV)
simply by deriving the consequent, ~(NSV). But if they had just
stated this as their objective in this second part, then the conclusion
(INC) would follow immediately from the disjunction
   (INC) v (NSV)
                                                                            CHAPTER TH REE


   of part one. So once again the form of argument seems strangely
   complex. Moreover, the actual text is not as clear as I have made
   out. For the authors digress (or so it seems) to point out that by
   choosing to measure either position or momentum on one particle
   of the pair, one can alter the postmeasurement state function for
   the other particle ät will.7 Änd they seem to think that this runs
   counter to the assumed completeness. Finally it is by no means clear
   how, even with the stated criterion of reality, the fact that one can
   assign either a definite position or a definite momentum to the
   unmeasured particle establishes that the particle has both properties
   at once. Surely, the argument in this second part is both tangled
   and flawed.
      Despite these difficulties of style and logic, I think one can see
   here just that combination of the ideas of correlated system, action-
—^by-contact, and descriptive incompleteness that Einstein required
   to provide the background for his statistical interpretation. More­
   over, the criterion of reality is clearly aimed at Bohr’s doctrine of
(^-disturbance. It did not miss its target for, as Rosenfeld recalls, “This
1 onslaught came down on us as a bolt from the blue. Its effect on
   Bohr was remarkable” (Rozental 1967, p. 128). And Rosenfeld goes
   on to tell how he worked with Bohr “day after day, week after
   week” to formulate a response. The response was announced on
   June 29, 1935, in a letter to the editor of Nature and spelled out in
   a longer paper (six pages to EPR’s four) published in Physical Review
   (Bohr 1935). The announcement focused on EPR’s criterion of
   reality which, in a typical phrase, Bohr said “contains an essential
   ambiguity.” It was then precisely the question of disturbance to
   which Bohr responded. For he argued that the phrase “without in
   any way disturbing a system” was the ambiguous culprit. There
   was, he admitted, no question (“of course”) of a physical (“me­
   chanical”) disturbance of one system brought about by measuring
   its correlated twin, “but even at this stage there is essentially the
   question of an influence on the very conditions which define the possible
   types of predictions regarding the future behavior of the system.”
       I want to point out two significant features of Bohr’s response.
   The first is that what Bohr himself underlines (the italics are his)
   is virtually textbook neopositivism. For Bohr simply identifies the
   attribution of properties with the possible types of predictions of
    future behavior. (I think this point needs emphasizing, for many
   commentators seem inclined to suppose that BohEsjjendencv to

       7.   T h e significance o f this “d igression” is discussed in c h a p te r 4, section 2, and
   in connection with “bijective com pleteness” in c h a p te r 5.
                                                                                       35
 obscure language is a token of philosophical depth, whereas I find
 that, as here, where it really matters Bohr invariably lapses into
 positivist slogans and dogmas.) The second feature, and one which
~heTther~Bohr~nor his commentators have acknowledged, is that
 Bohr’s response to EPR marks a definite break from his previously -2
 stated view. For in earlier writings and in his response to Einstein
 at the Solvay conferences, Bohr had always argued that the dis-
 turbance created by a measurement of a particular variable caused
 a real change in the physical situation which altered the precon­
 ditions for applying complementary variables. But here Bohr
 switched from this doctrine of actual physical disturbance to what
                                                                        fiC.
 one might call a doctrine of semantic disturbance. In a way that
 Bohr does not account for on physical grounds, the arrangement
 to measure, say, the position of one particle in a pair simply pre­
 cludes meaningful talk of the linear momentum of the unmeasured
 land admittedly undisturbed) other particle. I think it is fair to     <2I
 conclude that the EPR paper did succeed in neutralizing Bohr’s
 doctrine of disturbance. It forced Bohr to retreat to a merely se­
 mantic disturbance and thereby it removed an otherwise plausible
 and intuitive physical basis for Bohr’s ideas.
      If Bohr’s response to EPR is the most famous, it was nevertheless
  not the first. An equally important response was written a few days                           •(
  earlier, on June 19, 1935, and it was by Einstein himself. On that 7©
  day Einstein responded to a June 7 letter from Schrödinger. In
  that letter Schrödinger had reminded Einstein of their discussions
  in Berlin (presumably in the summer of 1926) about “the dogmatic
  quantum theory,” and responded to the calculations of EPR.8
      In the June 19 letter Einstein wrote about EPR as follows: “For
  reasons of language this [paper] was written by Podolsky after much
  discussion. Still, it did not come out as well as I had originally
   wanted; rather the essential thing was, so to speak, smothered by
   the formalism [gelehrsamkeit].”9
       I think we should take in the message of these few words: Ein­
   stein did not write the paper, Podolsky did, and somehow the cen­
   tral point was obscured. No doubt Podolsky (of Russian origin)
   would have found it natural to leave the definite article out of the
   title. Moreover the logically opaque structure of the piece is un-
   characteristic of Einstein’s thought and writing. There are no ear-
    iTer drafts of this article among Einstein’s papers and no corre-
      8. See c h ap ter 5 for fu rth e r details o f this letter a n d o f E instein’s reply.
      9. “Diese ist aus S p rac h g rü n d e n von Podolsky geschrieben nach vielen Diskus­
  sionen. Es ist ab er doch nicht so gut h erausgekom m en, was ich eigentlich wollte;
  so n d ern die H auptsache ist sozusagen d u rc h G elehrsam keit v erschüttet.”
                                                 (T7
                                                                          CHAPTER TH REE


 spondence or other evidence that I have been able to find which
 would settle the question as to whether Einstein saw a draft of the
 paper before it was published. Podolsky left Princeton for Califor­
 nia at about the time of submission and it could well be that, au­
 thorized by Einstein, he actually composed it on his own.
     In any case, Einstein goes on in the June 19 letter to sketch the
 essential features which were obscured. He first tries to convey the
 sense of the assertion of incompleteness by means of the following
 illustration. Consider a ball located in one of two closed boxes. An
 incomplete description of this “reality” might be, for example, “The
 probability is one-half that the ball is in the first box.” A complete
 description would be, for example, “The ball is in the first box.”
 Thus an incomplete description is a probabilistic assertion, with
 probability less than unity, made in circumstances in which there is some
further truth that could be told. This seems like an elementary and
 intuitive idea for incompleteness, but how are we to know whether
 there is some further truth to be told? That is, of course, the
 problem of measurement disturbance: does the measured result,
 so to speak, arise with the measurement or, rather, does the mea­
 surement simply reflect what is already there?
     Einstein addresses this issue in the letter by continuing with the
 illustration as follows. He acknowledges that one cannot sort things
 out without assuming something more, and he then proposes to
 assume a principle of separation (Trennungsprinzip): “the contents
 of~the second box are independent of whatTiappens to the first
 box.”10
     If one now assumes an obvious conservation law, that balls are
 neither created nor destroyed, then I can find out by looking in
 the first box whether or not the ball is in the second box. (If I find
 it in the first box, it is not in the second box. If I do not find it in
 the first box, it is in the second box.) If my theory only allows, in
 these circumstances, probabilistic assertions (with probability less
 than unity), then my"~heory is incomplete. Thus, given the con­
 servation law, the principle of separation would imply the incom­
 pleteness of my theory.
     Einstein continues in this letter to give a technical reformulation
 of the EPR argument. It is a little confusing because it introduces10

     10.        Einstein puts it delightfully like this: T h e separation principle is n eed e d in
o rd e r to get past the T alm udists. For “the T alm udic p h ilosopher sniffs at ‘reality’
as at a frig h ten in g c rea tu re o f the naive m in d .” (“D er Talm udistische Philosoph . . .
pfeift a u f die ‘W irklichkeit’ als a u f einen Popanz d e r Naivität . . .”) A lthough no
re fe re n ce is m ade, I w ould guess th a t B ohr should be co u n ted h e re as a Talm udist.
T h e obvious ones a re the positivists.
                                                                          37

a further refinement of the idea of completeness (this time in terms
of state functions correlated to real states of affairs). But I think
there is enough material contained, as it were, in Einstein’s boxes
to give at least one formulation of some of the essenträlsToFEPR
that were obscured by Podolsky’s exposition.
    Consider the system of two particles correlated via the conser­
vation law for total linear momentum. Separation is the claim that
whether a physical property holds for one of the particles does not
depend on measurements (or other interactions) made on the other
particle when the pair is widely separated in space. Completeness
is the claim that if a certain physical property in fact holds for one
particle at a given time, then the state function for the combined
system at that time should yield probability one for Ending that
the property does hold (i.e., the subsystem consisting of the particle
should have a state function which is an eigenstate for the property
in question).
    One can now copy Einstein’s box argument as follows. Suppose
the two particles (A and B) are far apart and I measure, say, particle
A for linear momentum (in a certain direction). Using the conser­
vation law I can infer the linear momentum of particle B from the
result of this measurement on A. Thus after the A measurement,,
the B particle has a certain linear momentum. By separation, this
real property of B must have held already at the time when I began
my measurement on A (or just before, in the case of an instanta­
neous measurement). For otherwise I would have created the mo-
mentum at B by measuring A, in violation of separation. But at
the initial moment of the A measurement, the state of the composite
system does not yield probability one for finding any momentum
value for B, for that state is a nontrivial superposition of products
of “momentum eigenstates” tor the A and B subsystems. Hence
the description provided by the state function given by quantum
theory is incomplete. Here, as in the illustration, the argument
establishes the incompatibility of separation and completeness^
    It is this incompatibility that I take to be the central conclusion,
which got obscured in EPR. Many years later, in Schilpp (1949,
p. 682) Einstein put it succinctly in these words:
the paradox forces us to relinquish one of the following two assertions:
  1) the description by means o f the ^-function is complete
1 2) the real states of spatially separated objects are independent o f each

other. "s

  It is important to notice that the conclusion Einstein draws from
EPR is not a categorical claim for the incompleteness of quantum
                                                             CHAPTER THREE

  theory. It is rather that the theory poses a dilemma between com-
  pleteness and separation; both cannot be true. It is also important
  to notice that the argument I have drawn from Einstein’s illustration
 does not depend in any way on simultaneous measurements or
 even attributions of position and momentum. The argument de­
  pends on the satisfaction of a single conservation law and the in­
  ferences drawn from that concerning the measurement of a single
 variable. This feature of the situation, I believe, is completely buried
  in the orieinal paper and, because of that, Einstein’s ideas con­
 cerning completeness and separation have become needlessly en-
•tangled with discussions of the uncertainty formulas and hidden
  variables. In his letter to Schrödinger of June 19, 1935, Einstein
  says that if the argument he gives applies to pairs of incompatible
 observables “ist mir wurst,” which I would translate loosely as “I
 couldn’t care less.” The argument nowhere depends on that, nor
 do the basic ideas. I think that this feature shows that Einstein has
  successfully managed to use the correlations to get around Bohr’s
  doctrine of disturbance. For even in the semantic version of that
  doctrine, measuring the momentum on A does not preclude as­
  signing a somewhat earlier momentum to $, which is all the argument
  requires.
     Einstein wanted to use the dilemma posed by EPR to show that
  if we maintain the ideas of action-by-contact embodied in the sep­
  aration principle, then we must view quantum theory as providing
  no more than a statistical account of a realm of objects whose
  properties outstrip the descriptive apparatus of the theory. As we
  have seen, he felt that the concepts needed to describe these prop­
  erties adequately would be other than the dynamical concepts of
  classical physics. Thus, although Einstein took the incompleteness
  to be a sign that something better was required, he never showed
  any interest in the hidden variables program for filling out the
  theory from within. Rather, he hoped that some unification of
  quantum theory and relativity would, so to speak, provide a com-
  pletion from without. This path would address the externafcon-
  straints of relativity and of classical dynamics together, if it could
  be successfully followed. Of course, Einstein did not succeed. And
  now recent arguments by Bell and others suggest that separation
, alone may be incompatible with the quantum theory, and perhaps
  even with certain experiments." Should that be correct, then the
  dilemma of EPR could be resolved by abandoning separation. I do
  not believe that the Bell arguments are in fact strong enough to1

    11. See ch ap ters 4 a n d 9 for discussions o f Bell.
                                                                                       39

force the issue this way, but even if they are, the question of com- ^
pleteness would remain. For it is possible that 6o77Tseparation and       _
completeness turn out to be false.                                    *—* ,
   Einstein’s reservations about the fundamental character of quan­
tum theory began with reflections about completeness, and these'
reflections were the home base to which Einstein’s thinking about
the theory always returned. It seems appropriate, therefore, to close
by citing the earliest reference to the completeness issue that I have
been able to find. It occurs in a letter of February 18, 1926, which
says, “it seems likely to me that quantum mechanics can never make
direct statements about the individual system, but rather it always
gives only average values.”12
   This comes from a letter written to Einstein fry Fleisenberg. Thus,
one might say that the original idea and focus on incompleteness
came from him.
    12.      “D enn es scheint m ir an sich w ahrscheinlich, dass d. Q uan ten m ech an ik nie
directe Aussagen ü b e r d. Einzelprozess m achen kann, so n d e rn im m er n u r Mittel-
         . gibt.”




                                                                                      ■Dt.l*>
                                                                                         l:* ö f
