                  ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
                   IN QUANTUM ENGINEERING




Entanglement and the measurement problem

Art Hobson1
1
Physics Professor Emeritus, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701,
USA. Email: ahobson@uark.edu

Abstract
The entangled "measurement state" (MS), predicted by von Neumann to arise
during quantum measurement, seems to display paradoxical properties such as
multiple macroscopic outcomes. But analysis of interferometry experiments
using entangled photon pairs shows that entangled states differ surprisingly from
simple superposition states. Based on standard quantum theory, this paper shows
that (i) the MS does not represent multiple detector readings but instead represents
nonparadoxical multiple statistical correlations between system states and
detector readings, (ii) exactly one outcome actually occurs, and (iii) when one
outcome occurs, the other possible outcomes simultaneously collapse nonlocally.
Point (iii) resolves an issue first raised in 1927 by Einstein who demonstrated that
quantum theory requires instantaneous state collapse. This conundrum's
resolution requires nonlocal correlations, which from today's perspective implies
the MS must be an entangled state. Thus, contrary to previous presumed proofs
of the measurement problem's insolubility, we find the MS to be the collapsed
state and just what we expect upon measurement.

KEYWORDS
measurement problem, problem of indefinite outcomes, entanglement,
nonlocality, collapse of the quantum state
Art Hobson            Entanglement and the measurement problem                          2


1     |      INTRODUCTION

       Physicists agree that Schrodinger's equation describes the evolution of non-
relativistic quantum states between measurements, but there is no agreement on
how states change during measurements. In fact, an apparent problem arises when
one applies standard quantum theory (minus the collapse postulate) to
measurements. John von Neumann analyzed the problem1 and we follow his
argument here.        "Measurement" is the experimental determination and
macroscopic recording of the value of a physical observable associated with a
quantum system. von Neumann showed that, unless the system happens to be in
an eigenstate of the measured observable, measurement leads to a "measurement
state" (MS) whose mathematical representation is an entangled state that seems
to predict the detector to be in a macroscopic superposition of exhibiting all of the
possible outcomes, a paradox known as the "problem of outcomes."
       This paper shows, based on standard quantum theory without a collapse
postulate, that this is a pseudo-problem and that, far from predicting superposed
outcomes, von Neumann's MS predicts an instantaneous collapse to a single
eigenstate.2 Specifically, we demonstrate, with no assumptions other than
standard quantum physics (minus the collapse postulate): (i) The MS has been
misinterpreted and does not in fact predict paradoxical multiple macroscopic
outcomes; it instead correctly predicts non-paradoxical multiple statistical
correlations between system and detector outcomes. (ii) Exactly one outcome
actually occurs. (iii) The entanglement entails that, when one outcome occurs,
the other outcomes simultaneously and nonlocally remain "dark" (i.e. do not
occur). This resolves an objection to quantum physics first raised by Einstein in
1927.
       That is, we show von Neumann's enigmatic MS to be in fact the collapsed
state expected upon measurement. The collapse is derived (i.e. demonstrated)
with no assumptions beyond the other standard principles of quantum physics.
       We show the problem of outcomes arises from a mistaken understanding
of entangled superpositions, not only in measurements but also in purely
microscopic processes. The MS is obviously a superposition of subsystem
product states. But the MS is poorly understood because no previous work has
analyzed its complete phase dependence. Do the states of individual subsystems
vary with phase, as they do in simple superpositions? If not, then what does vary
with phase, i.e. precisely which entities occupy indefinite states when two or more
subsystems are entangled? Such questions show that we do not fully understand
the MS's phase dependence, i.e. we don't fully understand the MS.
       We investigate these questions by studying earlier Bell-test quantum-optics
experiments that measure momentum-entangled two-photon states. These
experiments study a purely microscopic entangled superposition (mathematically
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                         3


identical with the MS) across all phases. The results show that entangled
superpositions differ sharply from simple superpositions, i.e. the implication of
the "plus" sign differs surprisingly. The MS does not represent multiple detector
readings, but instead represents multiple statistical correlations between system
states and detector readings. These correlations are not paradoxical: a
macroscopic detector that simultaneously exhibited two states would be
paradoxical, but a detector that simultaneously participates in two correlations is
not paradoxical. Furthermore, the MS directly implies that exactly one of these
correlations is realized as the measurement outcome. This resolves the so-called
"Schrodinger's cat paradox," which in turn resolves the quantum measurement
problem.3
       The measurement problem has a long and rich history3,4 that we will not try
to comprehensively cover here. The present analysis shares certain features with
the modal interpretations of quantum physics.5-8 Like the present paper, modal
interpretations are based on standard quantum mechanics but without the
projection postulate (von Neumann's "Process 1");1 they are realistic in the sense
that they presume quantum systems possess real physical properties and they
provide an objective (independent of humans) description of a single physical
reality; they presume the dynamical state tells us the possible properties of the
system and their corresponding probabilities; and they presume the dynamics (for
non-relativistic systems) is governed by the unitary Schrodinger evolution and by
the entanglement process presented in Section 2. However the present analysis
differs importantly from the modal interpretations' conclusion that "the dynamical
state never collapses during its evolution."5 On the contrary, this paper deduces
from quantum theory and from experimental evidence that an instantaneous
nonlocal collapse takes place, resulting in one outcome occurring while the other
outcomes simultaneously do not occur. Thus, while the present paper does not
postulate collapse, it derives an instantaneous collapse as a consequence of
entanglement.
       Other formulations also avoid postulating collapse. Hugh Everett's many-
worlds interpretation assumes "that there are many worlds which exist in parallel"
and that a different branch is realized in each different world.9,10 David Bohm's
hidden variables theory11 assumes that a field (represented by the wave function)
and particles are both present, with the field guiding the particles. Mario Bunge's
realistic formulation12 assumes a representative system/detector interaction and
derives the Schrodinger evolution of the composite system, allowing one to
deduce each observable's value from the detector reading. Gottfried and Yan13,14
argue that, for all practical purposes, the off-diagonal terms of the exact density
operator arising from the MS can be ignored, and that this solves the measurement
problem. A recent information-based analysis15 regards the MS as the result of
quantum measurement (as does this paper) and introduces, in addition to the
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                         4


measured quantum system and its measurement apparatus, a "programming
system" that interacts with the quantum system and apparatus to encode the basis
information for the system and apparatus, thus avoiding any classical concepts
within an information-complete quantum formalism.
       At least six papers--Lev Landau,16 Gerhart Luders,17 Josef Jauch,18 Roland
Omnes,19 Stefan Rinner and Ernst Werner,20 and S. Perez-Berrliaffa, G. Romero
and H. Vucetich21--express the effect of measurement as a trace on the composite-
system density operator representing the MS. This trace operation, which predicts
definite outcomes at the subsystems, seems to yield just what we want, namely
that measurement transforms the subsystem states into mixtures over the possible
eigenstates. However, several objections are commonly raised against this
proposal.22 The present paper, in contrast, argues that the MS directly represents
the collapsed state of the composite system, that the collapse is a consequence of
entanglement, and that the entanglement is required in order to ensure a
simultaneous (hence instantaneous) collapse over the separated branches.
       Section 2 presents von Neumann's derivation of the MS, poses the
measurement problem, reviews eight presumed measurement problem
insolubility proofs, and explains why their conclusion cannot be correct.
       Section 3 presents a crucial clue. In 1927, Einstein noted that quantum
theory implies that measurements entail instantaneous collapse and suggested this
would violate Special Relativity. However, today (unlike 1927) we know that
instantaneous nonlocal changes of correlations violating Bell's inequalities really
occur,23-25 that they do not violate special relativity,26 and that they occur when
disparate systems are entangled.27, 28 Thus from today's perspective, Einstein's
argument implies that nonlocal correlations are required during measurements,
entailing that entanglement is also required.
       Is von Neumann's MS in fact precisely what we want? The answer can
only come from fully understanding the MS, particularly its full phase
dependence which has not, to this author's knowledge, been previously discussed
in connection with the measurement problem. To this end, Section 4 reviews two
1990 quantum optics experiments exploring an entangled two-photon
microscopic state that is mathematically identical to the MS.
       The correct understanding of the microscopic version of the MS is then
worked out in Section 5. We find that both entangled sub-systems are in definite
(i.e. non-superposed) states, but that the degree of correlation between these
states is in an indefinite state. This key new finding is summarized in Table 1.
       Section 6 applies this new insight to the MS. We find the MS is not a
macroscopic superposition of different detector states. It instead represents
different correlations between detector states and system states. This is not
paradoxical. Furthermore, quantum theory directly implies that precisely one
outcome is realized. This resolves the Schrodinger's cat paradox.
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                          5


       Section 7 concludes the analysis by studying a particularly simple
measurement example that also typifies the essentials of quantum measurements.
       Section 8 summarizes the results and considers why it has taken so long to
straighten out this simple misunderstanding of von Neumann's MS.

2     |      ENTANGLEMENT AND MEASUREMENT

      The superposition postulate entails that, if |A1> and |A2> are Hilbert space
vectors ("kets") representing possible states of a quantum system A, then all
normalized linear superpositions of |A1> and |A2> also represent possible states
of A. For example,

      |YA> = |A1> + |A2>                                                        (1)
                 √2

(|A1> and |A2> orthonormal) represents a possible state of A. The superposition
postulate is prerequisite to the Hilbert-space representation of quantum states, and
the basis for conceptualizing quantum states as physically real waves in a quantum
field that fills the universe.26,29-31 |YA> represents a situation in which A is
represented neither by |A1> nor by |A2> but incorporates aspects of both,
including "overlap" effects such as interference. As Dirac32 put it, A goes "partly
into each of the two components" and "then interferes only with itself."
       If quantum system A interacts with another quantum system B, it frequently
happens that the situation of A and B are then represented by an entangled
superposition such as

      |YAB > = |A1>|B1> + |A2>|B2> ,                                            (2)
                       √2

where |Ai> and |Bi> (i=1,2) are orthonormal kets representing the "subsystems"
A and B, respectively. Although the physical interpretation of simple
superpositions such as |YA> is clear, the physical interpretation of entangled
superpositions such as |YAB > is not comparably clear. |YAB > is a superposition
of two products |Ai>|Bi> (i=1,2). |A1>|B1> is commonly interpreted to
represent a state of the composite system AB in which A has the properties
associated with |A1> and B has the properties associated with |B1>, and similarly
for |A2>|B2>. But if this is the case, then the physical interpretation of the state
|YAB > would seem to be that AB simultaneously exhibits properties associated
with |A1> and |B1> AND properties associated with |A2> and |B2>, where
"AND" represents the superposition. In the case of Schrodinger's iconic cat,33 this
would imply that the nucleus is both decayed and undecayed and, more
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                         6


disturbingly, the cat is both alive and dead. This paper will demonstrate that both
quantum experiment and quantum theory show that this is actually not the case.
Instead, the state |YAB > entails merely that |A1> and |B1> are coherently (in a
phase-dependent manner) correlated with each other AND |A2> and |B2> are
coherently correlated with each other (see Sections 4 and 5). This is not
paradoxical.
        Quantum measurements are important examples of entanglement. As first
discussed by John von Neumann,1,22 a "measurement" is the determination of the
value of an observable associated with a quantum system A. If A happens to be
represented by an eigenvector of the measured observable, then a good
measurement will detect the associated eigenvalue. But what if A is represented
by a superposition of eigenvectors of the measured observable? It will suffice for
this paper's purpose to assume that A's Hilbert space has only two dimensions,
and that A is represented by the superposition Equation (1). The kets |Ai> (i=1,2)
define the eigenvectors of the measured observable. We assume the existence of
a detector B designed to distinguish between the |Ai>.
        For example, |A1> and |A2> could represent the paths of an electron
passing through the slits of a double-slit apparatus, and B could be an electron
detector for the "which-slit" observable whose eigenvectors are the |Ai>. To
make the which-slit measurement, B must distinguish between the states
represented by |A1> and |A2>, so B must contain a specific quantum detection
component having quantum states represented by kets |Bi> such that, if A is in
the state represented by |Ai>, then detection yields the state represented by |Bi>
(i = 1, 2).. Assuming a minimally-disturbing measurement that leaves eigenstates
unaltered, and letting |Bready> represent the state of B's quantum component prior
to measurement, the process

      |Ai>|Bready> ==> |Ai>|Bi> (i=1,2)                                        (3)

describes a measurement of the which-slit observable when A's state is
represented by an eigenstate. When A is in the state represented by |YA> and B
measures the which-slit observable, simple linearity of the time evolution implies

      (|A1> + |A2>) |Bready> ==> |A1>|B1> + |A2>|B2> = |YAB >                  (4)
          √2                             √2

Thus von Neumann's straightforward argument shows the measurement creates
the entangled superposition |YAB > of Equation (2), where "B" now refers to the
quantum detection component of the detector.
       But von Neumann's measurement postulate1 implies that, when the which-
slit observable is measured, A collapses into one of its eigenstates while B
Art Hobson            Entanglement and the measurement problem                        7


collapses into the corresponding detector state.3,32 It is by no means clear that
|YAB > (Equation (4)) represents such a measurement outcome. As Myrvdal3 puts
it, "The problem of what to make of this is called the 'measurement problem'."
This paper will show that |YAB > does in fact represent the collapsed state and the
single definite outcome expected from von Neumann's measurement postulate.
        We have used the same notation, |YAB >, for the arbitrary entangled state
represented by Equation (2) (where A and B are arbitrary quantum systems) and
for the specific case of the entangled state that develops when a detector measures
a quantum system, represented by Equation (4) (where B is now a detector). We
will refer to this state in the context of Equation (4) as the "measurement state"
(MS). We will also, however, need to refer to the arbitrary entangled state
Equation (2), especially in Sections 4 and 5 where we analyze an experiment
involving two microscopically entangled photons.
        Thus the question of how to interpret entangled states looms large in the
foundations of quantum physics. As noted above, the interpretation of general
entangled states such as the one represented by Equation (2) is already murky as
compared with the interpretation of simple superposition states such as the one
represented by Equation (1). The problem of interpreting the MS is especially
important, because macroscopically distinct states now lie on each side of the
"plus" sign on the right-hand side of Equation (4). As already discussed, the
superposition |YA> can be interpreted to represent a situation in which A
incorporates properties represented by both |A1> and |A2>. And a product state
such as |A1>|B1> represents a state of the composite system AB in which A is
represented by |A1> and B is represented by |B1>. Thus |YAB > appears to
describe a detector that simultaneously "points" to two macroscopically different
outcomes |B1> and |B2>! The detector seems to display no definite outcome, a
conundrum known as the "problem of outcomes".3,22,33-47
        Such a superposition state would be paradoxical. Schrodinger, who
imagined a cat attached to the detector in such a way that |B1> included a live cat
and |B2> included a dead cat, described |YAB> as representing a “living and dead
cat ...smeared out in equal parts.”33 As one quantum foundations expert writes,

   The crucial difficulty is now that it is not at all obvious how one is to regard
   the dynamical evolution described by [Equation (4)] as representing
   measurement in the usual sense. This is so because [Equation (4)] is ...not
   sufficient to directly conclude that the measurement has actually been
   completed.22

In fact, while measurement should lead to a specific eigenstate of the measured
observable, Equation (4) appears to entail that "the system has been sucked into a
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                          8


vortex of entanglement and no longer has its own quantum state. On top of that,
the entangled state fails to indicate any particular measurement outcome."48
       As noted, it seems paradoxical that quantum measurements lead to a state
represented by the MS. Measurement should lead to a situation in which A is
represented by one of its eigenvectors |Ai> and B is represented by the
corresponding |Bi>. Since quantum uncertainty typically implies unpredictable
measurement outcomes, it is reasonable to conclude that measurement should lead
to a state represented by an ignorance-interpretable mixture22 of the products
|A1>|B1> and |A2>|B2>. Assuming the initial state is represented by |YA>, such
a post-measurement mixture would be represented by the density operator

      rmixed = (|A1>|B1> <B1|<A1| + |A2>|B2> <B2|<A2|) / 2                      (5)

This mixture can be interpreted as "the system is represented by a single
component |Ai>|Bi>, but we cannot know whether i=1 or 2 until we look at the
outcome."
        Beginning with von Neumann's analysis, at least eight "measurement
problem insolubility proofs"1,49-55 have assumed that, in order to obtain definite
outcomes, the measurement process should transform the composite system AB
into a mixture analogous to Equation (5). The initial state of A is assumed to be
pure and to be represented by a superposition such as Equation (1). The analysis
then investigates whether a suitable composite-system post-measurement mixture
can be reached via a unitary process. To achieve this, the detector must be
represented by a mixture initially, because unitary processes cannot turn a pure
state into a mixture. Since B is macroscopic, such an initial mixture seems
appropriate. Thus von Neuman and seven succeeding analysts asked: Is there an
initial mixed-state density operator rready of B and a unitary process U acting on
AB such that U transforms the initial composite density operator
|YA><YA|⊗rready into the desired composite mixture? The eight insolubility
proofs showed, with varying assumptions, the answer is "no," presumably
demonstrating the measurement problem to be insoluble.
        Section 3 will show, however, that the premise of these insolubility proofs,
namely that Equation (5) represents the appropriate post-measurement state, was
doomed from the start, precisely because it is not entangled and thus cannot have
the properties required if quantum theory is to describe the measurement process.
To put this another way, there are reasons why the post-measurement state must
be an entangled state, which implies that it cannot be a mixture such as Equation
(5). Sections 4-7 then show that the MS does have the desired properties.
Art Hobson              Entanglement and the measurement problem                               9


3      |      A CRUCIAL CLUE FROM EINSTEIN

      At the 1927 Solvay Conference, five years prior to von Neumann's
analysis1 of quantum measurement, Einstein asked the audience to consider an
experiment in which electrons pass through a tiny hole in an opaque screen and
then impact a large hemispherical detection screen centered at the hole (Fig. 1).




Figure 1. Einstein's thought experiment. Each electron diffracts widely, reaching the entire
screen simultaneously, yet only one point shows an impact. How do the other points
instantaneously remain dark? Does this violate Special Relativity?

       According to the Schrodinger equation, each electron's state diffracts
widely, spreading and reaching the entire screen simultaneously. Yet each
electron registers at only a single point. How, Einstein asked, do the other points
instantaneously remain "dark," i.e. not show an impact? As Einstein put it in his
notes, this "entirely peculiar mechanism of action-at-a-distance, which prevents
the wave continuously distributed in space from producing an effect in two places
on the screen," presents a fundamental problem. It appears to imply instant
signaling, violating special relativity.56-58
       Einstein's argument shows that, under a realistic and objective (independent
of humans) interpretation of quantum physics, the Schrodinger equation is at odds
with experimental facts unless the electron's state collapses instantaneously and
nonlocally upon measurement.26,29 Thus, realistic quantum physics implies
instantaneously-established nonlocal correlations are essential to the
measurement process. Indeed, Fuwa et al.59 experimentally verified the nonlocal
character of the measurement transition. Since nonlocality is essential to
measurement, the presumed post-measurement mixed state was doomed from the
start precisely because it does not exhibit the required nonlocality. But entangled
superpositions do exhibit the required nonlocality.27,28 So from our modern point
of view, Einstein's argument shows that entanglement, far from being an
unwelcome paradox, is required in measurements. This is a crucial clue and good
news for quantum foundations, because von Neumann's predicted MS is just such
an entangled superposition!
Art Hobson            Entanglement and the measurement problem                       10


      Gottfried and Yan's argument13,14 should be mentioned. Their resolution of
the measurement problem "diagonalizes the density operator." They form the
exact density operator r = |YAB> <YAB|, which can be written

      |YAB> <YAB| = rdiagonal + roff-diagonal                                 (6)

where rdiagonal = rmixed (Equation (5)) and

      roff-diagonal = (|A1>|B1> <B2|<A2| + |A2>|B2> <B1|<A1|) / 2.            (7)

Recall that the exact expectation value of any observable F is

      <F> = Tr (r F) = Σj Σk rjk Fkj                                          (8)

where rjk and Fkj are matrix elements of r and F. Gottfried and Yan argue that
off-diagonal terms in Equation (8) can be ignored because they involve matrix
elements such as <B1|<A1|F|A2>|B2> that are non-zero only for a "fantastic"
observable F because |B1> and |B2> represent the states of widely separated
detectors. In Gottfried and Yan's opinion, matrix elements for such fantastic
observables can, for all practical purposes, be neglected so that we can replace
r by rmixed. But we have seen that this premise is doomed because rmixed lacks the
required nonlocal properties, so Gottfried and Yan's proposal fails.

4   |  EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES                        OF     STATES       HAVING
ENTANGLED SPATIAL PATHS

       Sections 2 and 3 presented the measurement problem and some previous
research on the problem. Sections 4-7 will present a suggested resolution. This
Section reviews interferometry experiments and theory that investigate the
microscopic entangled superposition |YAB> Equation (2) over its full 0-to-π range
of phases, for a system of two momentum-entangled (i.e. path-entangled)
photons. The results provide a key insight into solving the measurement puzzle.
       As preparation, we first study the simple superposition Equation (1).
Consider the interferometer experiment of Figure 2. On each experimental trial,
a photon enters a 50-50 beam splitter BS1 which transforms the photon's state into
the superposition Equation (1) where |A1> and |A2> respectively represent paths
1 and 2. A series of single-photon trials probes this state using mirrors M that
bring the two branches together, phase shifters f1 and f2 that lengthen the two
paths by phases f1 and f2 , and a second beam splitter BS2 that mixes the branches
together. Measurement occurs at photon detectors B1 and B2.
Art Hobson              Entanglement and the measurement problem                         11




Figure 2. Mach-Zehnder interferometer experiment. A photon traverses a beam splitter,
travels on two phase-shifted paths to another beam splitter, and is detected.

      Figure 3 shows the results. Varying f1 through 180 degrees causes the
photon's state to shift from 100% probability of detection at B1, through
diminishing probabilities at B1 and increasing probabilities at B2, finally reaching
100% probability of detection at B2. The photon exhibits similar interference
upon varying f2 . Note that A's state depends only on the phase difference f2 - f1.




Figure 3. Single photon interference, pointing to Dirac's conclusion that "each photon
...interferes only with itself," i.e. each photon follows both paths.

      Since single-trial results vary regardless of which phase shifter varies, it is
hard to avoid the conclusion that each photon follows both paths. In fact, let us
assume the contrary, namely that each photon follows only one path. Suppose the
phase shifters are set to ensure 100% probability of detection at B1. Under our
assumption, this setting guarantees that every photon following path 1, and every
photon following path 2, is detected at B1. Suppose path 2 is now blocked without
changing the phase settings, so that (still under our one-path assumption) every
detected photon must now follow path 1 and be detected at B1. But the
experiment shows that, to the contrary, 50% of the detected photons now go to
B2. Conclusion: each photon follows both paths. For a full discussion, see.26,29
Art Hobson              Entanglement and the measurement problem                                 12


As Paul Dirac put it, "The new theory, which connects the wave function with
probabilities for one photon, gets over the difficulty by making each photon go
partly into each of the two components. Each photon then interferes only with
itself."32 This illustrates why the "plus" sign in a superposition such as Equation
(1) is interpreted by the word "and."
        We turn now to the entangled state Equation (2). Many Bell inequality tests
beginning with Clauser's60 and Aspect's61 used polarization-entangled photon
pairs to study the full phase dependence of this state. More useful for this paper
are interferometer experiments by Rarity and Tapster62 and Ou, Zou, Wang and
Mandel63-65 conducted nearly simultaneously in 1990. Both of these "RTO
experiments" (for Rarity, Tapster, and Ou et al.) used momentum-entangled
photon pairs to conduct Bell inequality tests of the entangled superposition
Equation (2).
        Figure 4 shows the layout. The source creates entangled pairs of photons
A (moving leftward) and B (moving rightward) by laser down-conversion in a
non-linear crystal. The down-converted photons are prepared in the entirely
microscopic state represented by |YAB> (Equation (2)) by selecting four single-
photon beams, each a plane wave having a distinct momentum (i.e. wave vector),
from the output of the crystal. Figure 4 resembles two back-to-back Mach-
Zehnder interferometer experiments (Figure 2) with BS1 located effectively
inside the source.




Figure 4. The RTO experiments. In each trial, each of two entangled photons travels two
phase-shifted paths (one solid, the other dashed) to beam splitters and coincidence detectors.
Think of one biphoton spreading from the source along both the solid and the dashed paths.

       For simplicity and clarity, Figure 4 differs from the layout shown in RTO's
reports. In Figure 4, paired photons are directed oppositely. This arrangement
would result if the entanglement were prepared by the cascade decay of an atom
as in Reference.66 In RTO's experiments, however, down-converted photon pairs
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                          13


are emitted into two angular cones, resulting in photons that are not oppositely
directed. Figure 4's simpler geometry is pedagogically useful and has no effect
on our arguments.
        Although Figure 4 represents each photon as a wave packet spreading along
two paths directed leftward or rightward, the composite system AB should be
regarded as a single object, a "biphoton." In each trial, a biphoton spreads outward
from the source along two superposed branches. One branch, represented by the
first term |A1>|B1> in Equation (2), spreads along the solid path and the other
branch, |A2>|B2>, spreads along the dashed path. As the biphoton AB moves
outward along the solid path, A encounters a mirror M, then a beam splitter BS
where it transmits and reflects to detectors A1 and A2; photon B encounters a
mirror M, a phase shifter fB, and a beam splitter BS where it transmits/reflects to
detectors B1/B2. The other half of the entanglement, namely the dashed path, has
a similar description. The experiments record outcomes at four photon detectors
equipped with coincidence timers.
        Horne, Shimony and Zeilinger66,67 predict RTO's results theoretically and
we follow their optical-path analysis here. They begin by calculating the two-
point nonlocal quantum field amplitudes Y(Ai, Bj) at the four coincidence
detectors (Ai, Bj), and from these results they predict single-photon results. For
example, Y(A1, B2) has two contributions, one from phase shifts in the beam
following the solid path (the first term in |YAB>) and the other from the dashed
path (the second term). From Equation (2), assuming distinct plane waves
exp(ik•x) for each single-photon beam,

      Y(A1,B2) = {exp(ifw)exp[i(fx+fB)] + exp[i(fy +fA)] exp(ifz)}/2√2          (9)

where fw, fx, fy, fz are fixed phase-shifts resulting from mirrors and beam
splitters, and the additional factor of 1/2 comes from the superpositions created at
the two beam splitters. Using the Born rule, Equation (9) implies the coincidence
probability

      P(A1, B2) = |Y(A1,B2)|2 = [1+cos(fB-fA + fv)]/4                          (10)

where fv is a fixed phase arising from fw, fx, fy, fz. Similarly,

      P(A1, B1) = [1+cos(fB-fA + fu)]/4,                                       (11)

where fu is another fixed phase. Remarkably, the sinusoidal terms predict
coherent (phase-dependent) nonlocal interference between A and B, regardless of
their separation. There are similar expressions for P(A2, B1) and P(A2, B2).
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                         14


      Single-photon predictions then follow.         For example, from simple
probability theory

      P(A1) = P(A1, B1) + P(A1, B2)
            = [1+cos(fB-fA + fu)]/4 + [1+cos(fB-fA + fv)]/4.                  (12)

Horne et al. then show the two fixed phase factors fu and fv differ by π:

      fv = fu + π (mod 2π).                                                   (13)

Thus the sinusoidal terms in Equation (12) interfere destructively, and P(A1) =
1/2 regardless of phase. Equations (12) and (13) show this remarkable result to
arise from destructive interference of two phase-dependent nonlocal contributions
from the distant other photon B! The result at all four single-photon detectors is
the same:

      P(A1) = P(A2) = P(B1) = P(B2) = 1/2.                                    (14)

Unlike the non-entangled single-photon superposition |YA>, where the
superposed photon is coherent (phase-dependent) as shown by Figure 3, each
entangled photon is "decohered"22 and cannot interfere with itself. Instead the
two photons interfere with each other despite being separated by an arbitrary
distance. More accurately, each biphoton interferes with itself. Thus no single-
photon interference fringes are associated with the state represented by |YAB>.
       Special relativity entails that this must be the case: Since single-photon
phase dependence could be used to establish an instantaneous communication
channel between A and B, entanglement must deprive individual photons of their
phase. The result is nonlocal coherence of the biphoton, and decoherence of
individual photons. Decoherence is required by special relativity.
       Equation (14) can also be derived by tracing the pure state density operator
|YAB><YAB| over one subsystem to obtain the density operator for the other
subsystem.22 This yields two density operators that appear to be mixtures but are
not really "ignorance mixtures" as the word "mixture" is usually understood
because the biphoton is in fact not in a mixed state but rather in a pure state
represented by |YAB>. The optical path analysis, above, derives Equation (14)
while avoiding these controversial22 subtleties.
       A few definitions can put these predictions into more comprehensible form:
If one photon is detected in state 1 and the other in state 2, the two outcomes are
said to be "different." Otherwise, the outcomes are the "same." Then from
Equations (10) and (11), and similar expressions for P(A2, B1) and P(A2, B2),
Art Hobson               Entanglement and the measurement problem                                15


       P(same) = P(A1,B1) + P(A2,B2) = 1/2[1 + cos(fB - fA)]                              (15)

       P(different) = P(A1,B2) + P(A2,B1) = 1/2[1 - cos(fB - fA)].                        (16)

Their difference, graphed in Figure 5, is called the "degree of correlation":

       C = P(same) - P(different) = cos(fB-fA).                                           (17)

Section 5 explores its physical significance.




Figure 5. Results of the RTO experiment, demonstrating nonlocality (violation of Bell's
inequality). The two photons interfere with each other across an arbitrary distance, i.e. each
biphoton interferes with itself.

5 |    INTERPRETATION OF ENTANGLED MICROSCOPIC STATES

       The original purpose of RTO's experiments was to demonstrate violations
of Bell's inequality by comparing theoretical predictions, Figure 5, with
experimental measurements. The experimental results agreed with Figure 5 and
violated Bell's inequality by 10 standard deviations, confirming the nonlocal
nature of |YAB>.
       What does Figure 5 mean conceptually? At zero phase difference, where
the two phase shifters are set to equal phases, P(same) = 1 and C = P(same) -
P(different) = +1. Thus both stations always agree, despite the presence of beam
splitters that randomize each photon prior to detection (see Figure 4). It is as
though coins were flipped at each station and they always came out either both
heads or both tails! Zero is the "measurement" phase angle where B's state is
perfectly (and instantaneously23-25) correlated with A's state. The nonlocality is
intuitively obvious: Each photon acts like a detector of the state of the other
photon regardless of separation! Simply based on this conclusion, we can make
Art Hobson            Entanglement and the measurement problem                          16


an important observation about the entangled MS Equation (4): Nonlocality is a
central feature of quantum measurements.
       For small non-zero phase differences, there is a small probability
P(different) that results at the two stations will differ, i.e. observation of B no
longer provides reliable information about A. With increasing phase difference,
this unreliability increases until, at π/2, the two detector pairs are entirely
uncorrelated, and C=0. As the phase further increases from π/2 to π, P(different)
increases while P(same) decreases, making C more and more negative. Finally,
C = -1 at phase difference π, implying perfect anti-correlation. Thus C is aptly
called the "degree of correlation."
       This description gives us a clear sense of the physical meaning of the fully
entangled state Equation (2), indicating precisely which entities are superposed.
The biphoton's phase controls the degree to which the fixed phase-independent
50-50 states of its two spatially separated subsystems are statistically correlated.
Compare this with the phase of the simple superposition |YA> (Equation (1)),
which controls the degree to which the single system A is represented by one or
the other state. The entities before and after the plus signs in Equations (1) and
(2) are conceptually quite different: Equation (1) sums two states while Equation
(2) sums two correlations between states.
       This distinction is crucial. A state is a situation (or configuration or path)
of a single quantum object, but a correlation is a statistical relationship between
two (or more) quantum objects. A superposition is the simultaneous existence of
two or more states of a single quantum object. An entanglement is the
simultaneous existence of two or more relationships (specifically, correlations)
between the states of two or more quantum objects. Creating an entanglement is
quite a different matter from creating a superposition.
       To elaborate, Table 1 compares the superposition represented by |YA>
(columns 1-2) with the entanglement represented by |YAB> (columns 3-5) at five
different phases. Column 2 demonstrates interference between the states
represented by |A1> and |A2>, implying the photon is in a superposition of
following both paths and that the state of A varies with phase. The phase
dependence in column 2 shows that A interferes with itself.
       In contrast, column 4 shows that, when the subsystems are represented by
the pure state |YAB>, neither photon has a phase. Thus neither photon can
interfere with itself, so neither photon can be represented by a superposition state.
They are decohered. Both photons are represented by fixed, phase-independent,
50-50 states at all phase angles, just as though they were in ignorance mixtures
(which they are not). But phase dependence has not vanished, it has only been
transferred to the composite system. As column 5 reveals, the degree of
correlation between the fixed states of A and B now varies with phase.
Art Hobson             Entanglement and the measurement problem                            17



Simple superposition of 1 photon.          Entangled superposition of 2 photons
f2-f1     State of photon            fB-fA State of each photon Correlation between photons
0         100% 1, 0% 2                 0       50-50 1 or 2            100% corr, 0% anticorr
π/4       71% 1, 29% 2                 π/4     50-50 1 or 2            71% corr, 29% anticorr
π/2       50% 1, 50%2                  π/2     50-50 1 or 2            50% corr, 50% anticorr
3π/4      29% 1, 71% 2                 3π/4 50-50 1 or 2               29% corr, 71% anticorr
π         0% 1, 100% 2                 π       50-50 1 or 2            0% corr, 100% anticorr
Table 1. Comparison between a simple superposition (Fig, 2) and an entangled superposition
(Fig. 4). In Fig. 2, single-photon states vary with phase. In Fig. 4, only the correlation
between single-photon states varies with phase while single-photon states have no phase.
Thus each biphoton is coherent but its subsystems are incoherent. That is, entanglement
decoheres each photon while transferring coherence to the biphoton.

       A photon represented by |YA> is in a coherent (phase-dependent)
superposition of being in two states (i.e. of following two paths). |YAB>, on the
other hand, represents the coherent superposition of two correlations between
fixed states. Instead of two coherent states existing simultaneously, two coherent
relationship between states exist simultaneously. Neither subsystem is "smeared"
(as Schrodinger apparently believed); instead, only the relationship between
subsystems is smeared. Briefly, |YA> is a superposition of states and |YAB> is a
superposition of correlations.
       Thus |YAB> is qualitatively different from |YA>. |YA> exhibits properties
of |A1> AND |A2>, where "AND" indicates the superposition. If you amplify A
to macroscopic dimensions, you will get a macroscopic superposition. |YAB>
exhibits properties of correlations between |A1> and |B1> AND correlations
between |A2> and |B2>. If you amplify A and B to macroscopic dimensions, you
will not get a macroscopic superposition, you will simply get correlations between
macroscopic objects. The entanglement process transfers the coherence (phase
dependence) of each photon to correlations between the two photons, leaving
individual photons in mixtures that are incoherent but that are not ignorance
mixtures. |YAB> is a "superposition of correlations between properties," in
contrast to |YA> which is a "superposition of properties."
       There is a better way to think about all this: Regard AB as a single object,
a biphoton. Then Equation (2) describes a superposition of this object. In the
RTO experiment (Figure 4), the two superposed states are represented by the solid
line and the dashed line. In this context, it makes no sense to speak of the
superposition of a single subsystem, but it does make sense to speak of the
superposition of the biphoton. It is the biphoton that goes through the phases
graphed in Figure 5 and indicated in Table 1 column 5. Both branches (solid and
dashed) of the biphoton exist simultaneously.
Art Hobson             Entanglement and the measurement problem                             18


6      |      INTERPRETATION OF THE MEASUREMENT STATE

        Section 4 analyzed the microscopic state represented by Equation (2)
mathematically, and Section 5 interpreted this state physically. We now apply
these insights to the entangled MS of a quantum system A and its detector B as
derived in Equation (4).
        In order for B to be a reliable detector, its states must be perfectly correlated
with A's states--it must exhibit |Bi> when and only when A is represented by |Ai>
(i = 1, 2). Thus Figure 5 implies the MS must be established at zero non-local
phase: fB-fA=0. At this phase, two nonlocal perfect statistical correlations
between a phase-independent 50-50 state of A and the corresponding phase-
independent 50-50 state of B exist simultaneously. As shown in Section 5,
contrary to Schrodinger's description,33 neither subsystem state can be "smeared
out" (superposed) because neither subsystem has a phase. Instead, correlations
between fixed states of A and B are smeared as shown in Table 1, while the
detector indicates a single definite outcome.
        Applying Table 1 to Schrodinger's example,33 the cat is predicted to be alive
in 50% of trials, dead in the other 50%, and never in both states simultaneously.
Phase alterations would not smear the cat, they would smear only the correlations
between the cat and the nucleus leading not to a smeared cat but only to imperfect
detection. There is no paradoxical macroscopic superposition.
        But if neither A nor B is superposed, what is superposed? What does the
MS's "plus" sign really mean? The answer, from Table 1 at zero phase: |A1> is
perfectly correlated with |B1> AND |A2> is perfectly correlated with |B2>, where
"AND" represents the superposition. This simply says both correlations exist
simultaneously: |A1> if and only if |B1> AND |A2> if and only if |B2>. Again,
there is no paradoxical macroscopic superposition. It's only the correlations
(relationships) between states, not the states themselves, that are superposed.
        Entanglement transforms a superposition of 2 states into a superposition of
two correlations between states. This makes quantum measurements possible
because subsystem states can then be amplified to macroscopic dimensions
without requiring the creation of a macroscopic superposition. Neither subsystem
is in a macroscopic superposition.
        Since neither subsystem is superposed, only a single outcome occurs--a
conclusion that also follows from Equation (14). This single definite outcome
occurs instantly upon entanglement, as facilitated by the nonlocal properties of
the entangled MS.23-25 Thus we have derived the collapse as an inevitable
consequence of entanglement, and have no need to postulate such a process. The
MS is the collapsed state. Our conclusion follows merely from standard
principles of quantum theory with no other assumptions.
Art Hobson              Entanglement and the measurement problem                             19


      So von Neumann's enigmatic measurement state, Equation (4), is just what
we want. This entangled pure state provides the desired correlations, a single
outcome, and the nonlocality required by Einstein's argument. Note that the
collapse is established at the microscopic level, prior to macroscopic
amplification. The next Section provides an example of the sequence of events.

7      |      EXAMPLE

        The following simple example typifies quantum measurements and
illustrates the preceding insights in terms of a specific measurement process.
        Consider the set-up in Figure 6. A single photon traverses a beam splitter,
creating the superposition represented by Equation (1) whose branches
correspond to separate paths toward widely separated photon detectors.
Analogously to Figure 1, we assume the two detectors are equidistant from the
beam splitter. Each detector contains a photo-sensitive plate that, upon absorbing
a photon, releases an electron.
        Von Neumann's argument implies that, as the two branches of the
superposition approach the detectors, at some point the branches overlap the
detectors sufficiently that the entanglement process represented by Equation (4)
occurs, where |Bready> denotes the microscopic state of the detectors prior to
entanglement while |B1> and |B2> denote their states following entanglement
but prior to amplification and macroscopic recording.




Figure 6. A simple measurement that mirrors Einstein's example (Fig. 1): A photon passes
through a beam splitter and is measured by photon detectors. Due to entanglement between
the two superposed photon branches and the detectors, one electron in one detector absorbs
the photon's energy while the other detector simultaneously remains "dark."

       At the instant of interaction, the state jumps from a superposition of two
paths of A (Equation (1)) to a superposition of two correlations between A and B
(right-hand side of the process in Equation (4)). This entangled state is not
paradoxical. The right-hand side of Equation (4) entails precisely the proper
correlations: |A1> if and only if |B1>, AND |A2> if and only if |B2>. The
excitation is transferred to only one detector while the other detector remains
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                          20


unexcited. More correctly, either the solid branch or the dashed branch of the
superposed biphoton (Figure 4) is randomly selected. In fact, Fuwa et al.59 show
experimentally and theoretically that the set-up shown in Figure 6 leads to
entanglement and that the predicted nonlocal collapse occurs; the nonlocality of
the collapse is verified quantitatively by the experimental violation of an EPR-
steering inequality.
       Thus the collapse, a non-linear and irreversible process, occurs at the
microscopic level. Once one photoelectron is released, the process is
thermodynamically irreversible because the electron is released into a vast
number--a continuum--of free electron states and cannot feasibly be reversed.
This electron triggers an avalanche of other electrons leading to a macroscopic
mark at one detector.
       Other measurement set-ups follow the same general principles. For
example, in the measurement described by Einstein (Section 3), each small region
of the detection screen acts as a single detector, and the diffracted electron's
quantum state entangles with all these many regions. Thus the argument above,
involving only two detectors, must be extended to N detectors.

8     |      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

       Using only the standard principles of quantum physics, but minus the
collapse postulate, we have shown that quantum state collapse occurs as a
consequence of the entanglement that occurs upon measurement as described in
1932 by von Neumann (Equation (4)). The entangled "measurement state" of a
quantum system and its detector is the collapsed state: It incorporates the required
perfect correlations between the system and its detector, it predicts precisely one
definite outcome, and it incorporates the nonlocal properties--the instantaneous
collapse across all branches of the superposition--that Einstein showed to be
required in quantum measurements.
       The measurement state Equation (4) does not describe a detector in a
paradoxical superposition of displaying multiple outcomes, as had been supposed
by Schrodinger and others. Instead, quantum theory concludes that this state
entails just what we expect following a measurement: The states represented by
|A1> and |B1> are perfectly correlated, AND the states represented by |A2> and
|B2> are perfectly correlated, where "AND" represents the plus sign in the
mathematical representation of the state. Entanglement entails merely the
simultaneous occurrence of two correlations between subsystems, not the
simultaneous occurrence of two individual states of either subsystem. There can
be no paradoxical superposition of different detector states or of different system
states, because the entanglement has shorn both the detector and the quantum
Art Hobson           Entanglement and the measurement problem                          21


system of their quantum phases. The phase has been transferred from the
individual subsystems to the degree of correlation between subsystems.
       To put all of this more directly, the single quantum object AB (the biphoton)
collapses from a superposition to one of its members.
       The measurement state's entanglement and its nonlocal properties, far from
being paradoxical, are required in order to guarantee that the collapse occurs
simultaneously across all branches of the superposition. Eight previous
insolubility proofs failed because they did not incorporate this required
nonlocality. Nonlocality is a central feature of quantum measurement.
       There is no need for a special collapse postulate because the entangled state
is the collapsed state. Collapse occurs instantly upon entanglement.
       This analysis should not be regarded as one more interpretation of quantum
physics. It is instead a correction of the previous misunderstanding of von
Neumann's entangled measurement state. It is not surprising that this
misunderstanding has persisted for nearly 90 years. After all, entanglement and
nonlocality are deeply involved in the measurement problem's proper resolution
but they only began to be understood in 1964,69 leading to a long period of gradual
acceptance with confirmation only in 2015.23-25 The delay in understanding
measurement stemmed from this delay in understanding nonlocality.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank University of Arkansas colleague Suren Singh for many consultations, and
for showing me that a biphoton really is a single thing. I thank University of
Arkansas colleagues Julio Gea-Banacloche, Michael Lieber, Peter Milonni, and
Barry Ward. I thank Nathan Argaman, Kenneth Augustyn, Rodney Brooks,
Mario A. Bunge, Zeng-Bing Chen, Klaus Colanero, Allan Din, Moses Fayngold,
Ron Garret, Kurt Gottfried, David Green, Robert Griffiths, Lucien Hardy, Ulrich
Harms, Norbert Ibold, Ken Krechmer, Andrew Laidlaw, Franck Laloe, Gui-Lu
Long, James Malley, Tim Maudlin, N. David Mermin, Peter Morgan, Michael
Nauenberg, Oliver Passon, Jakub Ratajczak, Ravi Rau, Stefan Rinner, Gustavo E.
Romero, Jacob van Dijk, and Herve’ Zwirn.

REFERENCES
1.  von Neumann J. Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik.
    Springer 1932, translated as Mathematical Foundations of Quantum
    Mechanics. Princeton University Press; 1955.
2.  This paper refines and extends a preliminary paper: Hobson A. Review
    and suggested resolution of the problem of Schrodinger's cat.
    Contemporary Phys. 2018;59:16-30.
3.  Myrvold W. Philosophical issues in quantum theory. In Zalta E (ed).
    Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 2018 (Fall).
Art Hobson          Entanglement and the measurement problem                       22


4.    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Measurement_in_quantum_mechanics.
5.    Lombardi O, Dieks D. Modal interpretations of quantum mechanics. In
      Zalta E. ( ed). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosoph. 2017.
6.    Clifton R. The properties of modal interpretations of quantum mechanics.
      British J of Philosophy of Science. 1996;47:371-398.
7.    Dieks D. Modal interpretations of quantum mechanics, measurements, and
      macroscopic behavior. Phys Rev A. 1994;49:2290-2300.
8.    Dieks D. Quantum mechanics without the projection postulate and its
      realistic interpretation. Found Phys. 1989;19:1397-1423.
9.    Everett H. The relative state formulation of quantum mechanics. Rev Mod
      Phys. 1957;23:454-462.
10.   Vaidman L. Many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. In Salta E
      (ed). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 2014.
11.   Bohm D. Suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of
      "hidden" variables. I & II. Phys Rev. 1952;85;166-193.
12.   Bunge M. Foundations of Physics. Springer-Verlag. 1967:274-287.
13.   Gottfried K. Does quantum mechanics carry the seeds of its own
      destruction? Phys World. 1991;1:34-40.
14.   Gottfried K, Yan T. Quantum mechanics. Springer; 2004:572-574.
15.   Chen Z, Quantum Engineering, in press.
16.   Landau L. Das daempfungsproblem in der wellenmechanik. Z Physik.
      1927;45:430-441.
17.   Luders G. Concerning the state-change due to the measurement process
      2006;15:663-670 (German original Ann. Phys. (Leipzig). 1951;8: 322.)
18.   Jauch J. The problem of measurement in quantum mechanics. Helv. Phys.
      Acta. 1964;37:293-316.
19.   Omnes R. Consistent interpretations of quantum mechanics. Revs Mod
      Phys. 1992;64:339-382.
20.   Rinner S, Werner E. On the role of entanglement in Schrodinger's cat
      paradox Central European J Phys. 2008;6:178-183.
21.   Perez-Bergliaffa S, Romero G., Vucetich H. Axiomatic foundations of
      quantum mechanics revisited: the case for systems. Internat J Theor Phys.
      1996;35:1805-1819.
22.   Schlosshauer M. Decoherence and the quantum-to-classical transition,
      Springer; 2007.
23.   Giustina M, et al. Significant-loophole-free test of Bell's theorem with
      entangled photons. Phys Rev Lett. 2015;115:250401.
24.   Hensen B, et al. Loophole-free Bell inequality violation using electron
      spins separated by 1.3 kilometres. Nature. 2015;526:682-686.
25.   Shalm L, et al. Strong loophole-free test of local realism. Phys Rev Lett.
      2015:115:250402.
Art Hobson          Entanglement and the measurement problem                      23


26.   Hobson A. Realist analysis of six controversial quantum issues. Matthews
      M (ed). Mario Bunge: A Centenary Festschrift. Springer; 2019:329-348.
27.   Gisin N. Bell's inequality holds for all non-product states. Phys Lett.
      1991;154:201-202.
28.   Liang Y, Masanes L, Rosset D. All entangled states display some hidden
      nonlocality. Phys. Rev. A;2012;86:052115.
29.   Hobson A. There are no particles, there are only fields. Am J Phys.
      2013;81:211-223.
30.   Long G. Realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics and encounter-
      delayed-choice experiment. Science China: Phys, Mech & Astron.
      2018;61:03031.
31.   Long G. Collapse-in and collapse-out in partial measurement in quantum
      mechanics and its wise interpretation. Science China: Phys, Mech &
      Astron. 2021;64:280321.
32.   Dirac P. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Clarendon Press; 1947.
33.   Schrodinger E. The present situation in quantum mechanics: a translation.
      Proc Am Phil Soc. 1937;124:323-338.
34.   van Kampen N. Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements.
      Physica A. 1988;153:97-113.
35.   Bell J. Against measurement. Phys World 1990;3:33-40.
36.   Ney A. Introduction. In Ney A, Albert D. The Wave Function. Oxford
      University Press; 2013:1-51.
37.    Allori V. Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical
      theories. In Ney A, Albert D., ibid. 58-75.
38.   Wallace D. A Prolegomenon to the ontology of the Everett interpretation.
      In Ney A, Albert D. ibid. 203-222.
39.   Sherrer R. Quantum Mechanics: An Introduction. Pearson; 2006.
40.   Ballentine L. Quantum Mechanics: A Modern Development. World
      Scientific; 1998.
41.   Griffiths D. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge Press; 2018.
42.   Greiner W. Quantenmechanik. I, Einfuehrung. Springer;1994.
43.   Rae A. Quantum Mechanics. Institute of Physics; 2002.
44.   Ghirardi G, Rimini A, Weber T. Unified dynamics for microscopic and
      macroscopic systems. Phys. Rev. D. 1986;34:470-491.
45.   Maudlin T. Three measurement problems. Topoi. 1995;14:7-15.
46.   Leggett A. Quantum measurement problem. Science. 2005;307:871-872.
47.   Leggett A. Schrodinger's cat and her laboratory cousins. Contemporary
      Phys. 2009;50:243-258.
48.   Schlosshauer M. Elegance and Enigma. Springer; 2011:141-142.
49.   Wigner E. The problem of measurement. Am. J. Phys. 1963;31:6-15.
Art Hobson          Entanglement and the measurement problem                        24


50.   d'Espagnat B. Two remarks on the theory of measurement. Suppl al Nuovo
      Cimento. 196;4:828-838.
51.   Fine A. Insolubility of the quantum measurement problem. Phys Rev D.
      1970;2:2783-2787.
52.   Shimony A. Approximate measurement in quantum mechanics II. Phys.
      Rev. D. 1974;9:2321-2323.
53.   Brown H. The insolubility proof of the quantum measurement problem.
      Founds of Phys. 1986;16:857-870.
54.   Busch P, Shimony A. Insolubility of the quantum measurement problem
      for unsharp observables. Studies in Hist and Phil of Mod Phys.
      1996;27:397-404.
55.   Bacciagaluppi G. Insolubility theorems and EPR argument. Eur J for Phil
      of Sci. 2013;3:87-100.
56.   Gilder L. The Age of Entanglement. Alfred A. Knopf; 2008:110-112, 374.
57.   Bacciagaluppi G, Valentini A. Quantum Theory at the Crossroad.
      Cambridge University Press; 2009:440-442.
58.   Kumar M. Quantum: Einstein, Bohr, and the Great Debate About the
      Nature of Reality. W. W. Norton; 2008:263-266.
59.   Fuwa M, Takeda S, Zwierz M, Wiseman H, Furusawa A. Experimental
      proof of nonlocal wavefunction collapse for a single particle using
      homodyne measurements. Nature Communications. 2015;6:6665.
60.   Clauser J, Freedman S. Experimental test of local hidden-variable theories.
      Phy. Rev Lett. 1972;26:938-941.
61.   Aspect A, Dalibard J, Roger G. Experimental test of Bell's inequality
      involving time-varying analyzers. Phys Rev Lett. 1982;49:1804-1807.
62.   Rarity J, Tapster P. Experimental violation of bell's inequality based on
      phase and momentum. Phys Rev Lett. 1990;64:2495-2498.
63.    Ou Z, Zou X, Wang L, Mandel L. Observation of nonlocal interference in
      separated photon channels. Phys Rev Lett. 199; 65:321-325.
64.   Hobson A. Tales of the Quantum. Oxford University Press; 2017.
65.   Hobson A. Physics: Concepts & Connections. Pearson Education;
      2010:303-307.
66.   Franson J, Bell D. Inequality for position and time. Phys Rev Lett.
      1989;62:2205-2208.
67.   Horne M, Shimony A, Zeilinger A. Introduction to two-particle
      interferometry. In Sixty-Two Years of Uncertainty. Plenum Press;
      1990:113-119.
68.   Horne M, Shimony A, Zeilinger A. Two-Particle Interferometry. Phys.
      Rev Lett. 1989;62:2209-2212.
69.   Bell J. On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics. 1964;1:195-
      200.
