                                                                                       127




                                                                                              Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
                      EPIPHENOMENAL QUALIA
                                 B Y FBANK JACKSON

    It is undeniable that the physical, chemical and biological sciences have
provided a great deal of information about the world we live in and about
ourselves. I will use the label 'physical information' for this kind of informa-
tion, and also for information that automatically comes along with it. For
example, if a medical scientist tells me enough about the processes that go
on in my nervous system, and about how they relate to happenings in the
world around me, to what has happened in the past and is likely to happen
in the future, to what happens to other similar and dissimilar organisms,
and the like, he or she tells me — if I am clever enough to fit it together
appropriately — about what is often called the functional role of those states
in me (and in organisms in general in similar cases). This information, and
its kin, I also label 'physical'.
    I do not mean these sketchy remarks to constitute a definition of 'physical
information', and of the correlative notions of physical property, process,
and so on, but to indicate what I have in mind here. It is well known that
there are problems with giving a precise definition of these notions, and so
of the thesis of Physicalism that all (correct) information is physical informa-
tion. 1 But — unlike some — I take the question of definition to cut across
the central problems I want to discuss in this paper.
    I am what is sometimes known as a "qualia freak". I think that there
are certain features of the bodily sensations especially, but also of certain
perceptual experiences, which no amount of purely physical information
includes. Tell me everything physical there is to tell about what is going
on in a living brain, the kind of states, their functional role, their relation
to what goes on at other times and in other brains, and so on and so forth,
and be I as clever as can be in fitting it all together, you won't have told me
about the hurtfulness of pains, the itchiness of itches, pangs of jealousy, or
about the characteristic experience of tasting a lemon, smelling a rose,
hearing a loud noise or seeing the sky.
    There are many qualia freaks, and some of them say that their rejection
of Physicalism is an unargued intuition.2 I think that they are being unfair
to themselves. They have the following argument. Nothing you could tell
of a physical sort captures the smell of a rose, for instance. Therefore,
Physicalism is false. By our lights this is a perfectly good argument. It is
   1
     See, e.g., D. H . Mellor, "Materialism and Phenomenal Qualities", Aristotelian Society
Supp. Vol. 47 (1973), 107-19; and J . W. Cornman, Materialism and Sensations (New
Haven and London, 1971).
   'Particularly in discussion, but see, e.g., Keith Campbell, Metaphysics (Belmont,
1976), p . 67.
128                               FRANK JACKSON




                                                                                           Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
obviously not to the point to question its validity, and the premise is
intuitively obviously true both to them and to me.
    I must, however, admit that it is weak from a polemical point of view.
There are, unfortunately for us, many who do not find the premise intuitively
obvious. The task then is to present an argument whose premises are obvious
to all, or at least to as many as possible. This I try to do in §1 with what I
will call "the Knowledge argument". In §11 I contrast the Knowledge argu-
ment with the Modal argument and in §111 with the "What is it like to be"
argument. In §IV I tackle the question of the causal role of qualia. The
major factor in stopping people from admitting qualia is the belief that they
would have to be given a causal role with respect to the physical world and
especially the brain;3 and it is hard to do this without sounding like someone
who believes in fairies. I seek in §IV to turn this objection by arguing that
the view that qualia are epiphenomenal is a perfectly possible one.

I. THE KNOWLEDGE ARGUMENT FOR QTJALIA
    People vary considerably in their ability to discriminate coloxxrs. Sup-
pose that in an experiment to catalogue this variation Fred is discovered.
Fred has better colour vision than anyone else on record; he makes every
discrimination that anyone has ever made, and moreover he makes one that
we cannot even begin to make. Show him a batch of ripe tomatoes and he
sorts them into two roughly equal groups and does so with complete con-
sistency. That is, if you blindfold him, shuffle the tomatoes up, and then
remove the blindfold and ask him to sort them out again, he sorts them
into exactly the same two groups.
    We ask Fred how he does it. He explains that all ripe tomatoes do not
look the same colour to him, and in fact that this is true of a great many
objects that we classify together as red. He sees two colours where we see
one, and he has in consequence developed for his own use two words 'red!'
and 'red2' to mark the difference. Perhaps he tells us that he has often
tried to teach the difference between redx and reds to his friends but has
got nowhere and has concluded that the rest of the world is redj-redg colour-
blind — or perhaps he has had partial success with his children, it doesn't
matter. In any case he explains to us that it would be quite wrong to think
that because 'red' appears in both 'red/ and 'reoy that the two colours are
shades of the one colour. He only uses the common term 'red' to fit more
easily into our restricted usage. To him red x and redj are as different from
each other and all the other colours as yellow is from blue. And his dis-
criminatory behaviour bears this out: he sorts red x from redg tomatoes with
the greatest of ease in a wide variety of viewing circumstances. Moreover,
an investigation of the physiological basis of Fred's exceptional ability re-
veals that Fred's optical system is able to separate out two groups of wave-
    8
      See, e.g., D. C. Dennett, "Current Issues in t h e Philosophy of Mind",   American
Philosophical Quarterly, 15 (1978), 249-61.
                              EFIPHENOMENAL       QUALIA                             129




                                                                                            Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
lengths in the red spectrum as sharply as we are able to sort out yellow from
blue.4
    I think that we should admit that Fred can see, really see, at least
one more colour than we can; redx is a different colour from red2. We are to
Fred as a totally red-green colour-blind person is to us. H. G. Wells' story
"The Country of the Blind" is about a sighted person in a totally blind
community. 8 This person never manages to convince them that he can see,
that he has an extra sense. They ridicule this sense as quite inconceivable,
and treat his capacity to avoid falling into ditches, to win fights and so on
as precisely that capacity and nothing more. We would be making their
mistake if we refused to allow that Fred can see one more colour than we can.
    What kind of experience does Fred have when he sees redx and red2?
What is the new colour or colours like? We would dearly like to know but
do not; and it seems that no amount of physical information about Fred's
brain and optical system tells us. We find out perhaps that Fred's cones
respond differentially to certain light waves in the red section of the spectrum
that make no difference to ours (or perhaps he has an extra cone) and that
this leads in Fred to a wider range of those brain states responsible for
visual discriminatory behaviour. But none of this tells us what we really
want to know about his colour experience. There is something about it we
don't know. But we know, we may suppose, everything about Fred's body,
his behaviour and dispositions to behaviour and about his internal physi-
ology, and everything about his history and relation to others that can be
given in physical accounts of persons. We have all the physical information.
Therefore, knowing all this is not knowing everything about Fred. It follows
that Physicalism leaves something out.
    To reinforce this conclusion, imagine that as a result of our investigations
into the internal workings of Fred we find out how to make everyone's
physiology like Fred's in the relevant respects; or perhaps Fred donates his
body to science and on his death we are able to transplant his optical system
into someone else — again the fine detail doesn't matter. The important
point is that such a happening would create enormous interest. People
would say, "At last we will know what it is like to see the extra colour, at
last we will know how Fred has differed from us in the way he has struggled
to tell us about for so long". Then it cannot be that we knew all along all
about Fred. But ex hypothesi we did know all along everything about Fred
that features in the physicalist scheme; hence the physicalist scheme leaves
something out.
    Put it this way. After the operation, we will know more about Fred and
especially about his colour experiences. But beforehand we had all the
physical information we could desire about his body and brain, and indeed
   *Put this, and similar simplifications below, in terms of Land's theory if you prefer.
See, e.g., Edwin H . Land, "Experiments in Color Vision", Scientific American, 200 (5
May 1959), 84-99.
   6
     H . G. Wells, The Country of the Blind and Other Stories (London, n.d.).
130                            FRANK JACKSON




                                                                                  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
everything that has ever featured in physicalist accounts of mind and
 consciousness. Hence there is more to know than all that. Hence Physicalism
is incomplete.
    Fred and the new colour(s) are of course essentially rhetorical devices.
The same point can be made with normal people and familiar colours. Mary
is a brilliant scientist who is, for whatever reason, forced to investigate the
world from a black and white room via a black and white television monitor.
She specialises in the neurophysiology of vision and acquires, let us suppose,
all the physical information there is to obtain about what goes on when we
see ripe tomatoes, or the sky, and use terms like 'red', 'blue', and so on. She
discovers, for example, just which wave-length combinations from the sky
stimulate the retina, and exactly how this produces via the central nervous
system the contraction of the vocal chords and expulsion of air from the
lungs that results in the uttering of the sentence 'The sky is blue'. (It can
hardly be denied that it is in principle possible to obtain all this physical
information from black and white television, otherwise the Open University
would of necessity need to use colour television.)
    What will happen when Mary is released from her black and white room
or is given a colour television monitor? Will she learn anything or not? It
seems just obvious that she will learn something about the world and our
visual experience of it. But then it is inescapable that her previous know-
ledge was incomplete. But she had all the physical information. Ergo there
is more to have than that, and Physicalism is false.
    Clearly the same style of Knowledge argument could be deployed for
taste, hearing, the bodily sensations and generally speaking for the various
mental states which are said to have (as it is variously put) raw feels, phen-
omenal features or qualia. The conclusion in each case is that the qualia
are left out of the physicalist story. And the polemical strength of the
Knowledge argument is that it is so hard to deny the central claim that one
can have all the physical information without having all the information
there is to have.

II. THE MODAL ARGUMENT
    By the Modal Argument I mean an argument of the following style.6
Sceptics about other minds are not making a mistake in deductive logic,
whatever else may be wrong with their position. No amount of physical
information about another logically entails that he or she is conscious or
feels anything at all. Consequently there is a possible world with organisms
exactly like us in every physical respect (and remember that includes func-
tional states, physical history, et al.) but which differ from us profoundly
in that they have no conscious mental life at all. But then what is it that
we have and they lack? Not anything physical ex hypothesi. In all physical
   •See, e.g., Keith Campbell, Body and Mind (New York, 1970); and Robert Kirk,
"Sentience and Behaviour", Mind, 83 (1974), 43-60.
                              EPIPHENOMENAL QUALIA                                   131




                                                                                             Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
regards we and they are exactly alike. Consequently there is more to us
than the purely physical. Thus Physicalism is false.7
    It is sometimes objected that the Modal argument misconceives Physical-
ism on the ground that that doctrine is advanced as a contingent truth. 8
But to say this is only to say that physicalists restrict their claim to some
possible worlds, including especially ours; and the Modal argument is only
directed against this lesser claim. If we in our world, let alone beings in any
others, have features additional to those of our physical replicas in other
possible worlds, then we have non-physical features or qualia.
    The trouble rather with the Modal argument is that it rests on a disput-
able modal intuition. Disputable because it is disputed. Some sincerely
deny that there can be physical replicas of us in other possible worlds which
nevertheless lack consciousness. Moreover, at least one person who once
had the intuition now has doubts. 9
    Head-counting may seem a poor approach to a discussion of the Modal
argument. But frequently we can do no better when modal intuitions are
in question, and remember our initial goal was to find the argument with
the greatest polemical utility.
    Of course, qua protagonists of the Knowledge argument we may well
accept the modal intuition in question; but this will be a consequence of our
already having an argument to the conclusion that qualia are left out of the
physicalist story, not our ground for that conclusion. Moreover, the matter
is complicated by the possibility that the connection between matters
physical and qualia is like that sometimes held to obtain between aesthetic
qualities and natural ones. Two possible worlds which agree in all "natural"
respects (including the experiences of sentient creatures) must agree in all
aesthetic qualities also, but it is plausibly held that the aesthetic qualities
cannot be reduced to the natural.

III.   T H E "WHAT IS IT LIKE TO B E " ARGUMENT
   In "What is it like to be a bat?" Thomas Nagel argues that no amount
of physical information can tell us what it is like to be a bat, and indeed
that we, human beings, cannot imagine what it is like to be a bat. 10 His
    ' I have presented the argument in an inter-world rather t h a n the more usual intra-
world fashion to avoid inessential complications t o do with supervenience, causal
anomalies and the like.
    'See, e.g., W. G. Lycan, "A New Lilliputian Argument Against Machine Functional-
ism", Philosophical Studies, 35 (1979), 279-87, p . 280; and Don Locke, "Zombies, Schizo-
phrenics and Purely Physical Objects", Mind, 85 (1976), 97-9.
    •See K. Kirk, " F r o m Physical Explicability to Full-Blooded Materialism", The
Philosophical Quarterly, 29 (1979), 229-37. See also the arguments against the modal
intuition in, e.g., Sydney Shoemaker, "Functionalism and Qualia", Philosophical Studies,
27 (1975), 291-315.
    10
       The Philosophical Review, 83 (1974), 435-50. Two things need t o be said about
this article. One is that, despite my dissociations to come, I am much indebted to it.
The other is t h a t the emphasis changes through t h e article, and b y the end Nagel is
objecting not so much to Physicalism as to all extant theories of mind for ignoring
points of view, including those t h a t admit (irreducible) qualia.
132                                 FRANK JACKSON




                                                                                               Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
reason is that what this is like can only be understood from a bat's point of
view, which is not our point of view and is not something capturable in
physical terms which are essentially terms understandable equally from
many points of view.
    It is important to distinguish this argument from the Knowledge argu-
ment. When I complained that all the physical knowledge about Fred was
not enough to tell us what his special colour experience was like, I was not
complaining that we weren't finding out what it is like to be Fred. I was
complaining that there is something about his experience, a property of it,
of which we were left ignorant. And if and when we come to know what
this property is we still will not know what it is like to be Fred, but we will
know more about him. No amount of knowledge about Fred, be it physical
or not, amounts to knowledge "from the inside" concerning Fred. We are
not Fred. There is thus a whole set of items of knowledge expressed by
forms of words like 'that it is / myself who is . . .' which Fred has and we
simply cannot have because we are not him.11
    When Fred sees the colour he alone can see, one thing he knows is the
way his experience of it differs from his experience of seeing red and so on,
another is that he himself is seeing it. Physicalist and qualia freaks alike
should acknowledge that no amount of information of whatever kind that
others have about Fred amounts to knowledge of the second. My complaint
though concerned the first and was that the special quality of his experience
is certainly a fact about it, and one which Physicalism leaves out because
no amount of physical information told us what it is.
    Nagel speaks as if the problem he is raising is one of extrapolating from
knowledge of one experience to another, of imagining what an unfamiliar
experience would be like on the basis of familiar ones. In terms of Hume's
example, from knowledge of some shades of blue we can work out what it
would be like to see other shades of blue. Nagel argues that the trouble
with bats et al. is that they are too unlike us. I t is hard to see an objection
to Physicalism here. Physicalism makes no special claims about the imagin-
ative or extrapolative powers of human beings, and it is hard to see why it
need do so.12
    Anyway, our Knowledge argument makes no assumptions on this point.
If Physicalism were true, enough physical information about Fred would
obviate any need to extrapolate or to perform special feats of imagination
or understanding in order to know all about his special colour experience.
The information would already be in our possession. But it clearly isn't. That
was the nub of the argument.

   "Knowledge de se in the terms of David Lewis, "Attitudes De Dieto and De Se",
The Philosophical Review, 88 (1979), 513-43.
   " S e e Laurence Nemirow's comments on " W h a t is it . . . " in his review of T. Nagel,
Mortal Questions, in The Philosophical Review, 89 (1980), 473-7. I am indebted here in
particular to a discussion with David Lewis.
                              EPIPHENOMENAL QTJALIA                                  133




                                                                                            Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
IV.   THE BOGEY OF EPIPHENOMENALISM
    Is there any really good reason for refusing to countenance the idea that
qualia are causally impotent with respect to the physical world? I will argue
for the answer no, but in doing this I will say nothing about two views
associated with the classical epiphenomenalist position. The first is that
mental states are inefficacious with respect to the physical world. All I will
be concerned to defend is that it is possible to hold that certain properties
of certain mental states, namely those I've called qualia, are such that then-
possession or absence makes no difference to the physical world. The second
is that the mental is totally causally inefficacious. For all I will say it may
be that you have to hold that the instantiation of qualia makes a difference
to other mental states though not to anything physical. Indeed general
considerations to do with how you could come to be aware of the instantiation
of qualia suggest such a position.13
    Three reasons are standardly given for holding that a quale like the
hurtfulness of a pain must be causally efficacious in the physical world, and
so, for instance, that its instantiation must sometimes make a difference to
what happens in the brain. None, I will argue, has any real force. (I am much
indebted to Alec Hyslop and John Lucas for convincing me of this.)
    (i) It is supposed to be just obvious that the hurtfulness of pain is partly
responsible for the subject seeking to avoid pain, saying 'It hurts' and so
on. But, to reverse Hume, anything can fail to cause anything. No matter
how often B follows A, and no matter how initially obvious the causality
of the connection seems, the hypothesis that A causes B can be overturned
by an over-arching theory which shows the two as distinct effects of a com-
mon underlying causal process.
    To the untutored the image on the screen of Lee Marvin's fist moving
from left to right immediately followed by the image of John Wayne's head
moving in the same general direction looks as causal as anything.14 And of
course throughout countless Westerns images similar to the first are followed
by images similar to the second. All this counts for precisely nothing when
we know the over-arching theory concerning how the relevant images are
both effects of an underlying causal process involving the projector and the
film. The epiphenomenalist can say exactly the same about the connection
between, for example, hurtfulness and behaviour. It is simply a consequence
of the fact that certain happenings in the brain cause both.
    (ii) The second objection relates to Darwin's Theory of Evolution.
According to natural selection the traits that evolve over time are those
conducive to physical survival. We may assume that qualia evolved over
time — we have them, the earliest forms of life do not — and so we should

   "See my review of K. Campbell, Body and Mind, in Australasian Journal of Philo-
sophy, 50 (1972), 77-80.
   14
     Cf. J e a n Piaget, "The Child's Conception of Physical Causality", reprinted in The
Essential Piaget (London, 1977).
134                           FRANK JACKSON




                                                                                Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
expect qualia to be conducive to survival. The objection is that they could
hardly help us to survive if they do nothing to the physical world.
    The appeal of this argument is undeniable, but there is a good reply to
it. Polar bears have particularly thick, warm coats. The Theory of Evolution
explains this (we suppose) by pointing out that having a thick, warm coat
is conducive to survival in the Arctic. But having a thick coat goes along
with having a heavy coat, and having a heavy coat is not conducive to
survival. It slows the animal down.
    Does this mean that we have refuted Darwin because we have found an
evolved trait — having a heavy coat — which is not conducive to survival?
Clearly not. Having a heavy coat is an unavoidable concomitant of having
a warm coat (in the context, modern insulation was not available), and the
advantages for survival of having a warm coat outweighed the disadvantages
of having a heavy one. The point is that all we can extract from Darwin's
theory is that we should expect any evolved characteristic to be either
conducive to survival or a by-product of one that is so conducive. The
epiphenomenalist holds that qualia fall into the latter category. They are a
by-product of certain brain processes that are highly conducive to survival.
    (iii) The third objection is based on a point about how we come to know
about other minds. We know about other minds by knowing about other
behaviour, at least in part. The nature of the inference is a matter of some
controversy, but it is not a matter of controversy that it proceeds from
behaviour. That is why we think that stones do not feel and dogs do feel.
But, runs the objection, how can a person's behaviour provide any reason
for believing he has qualia like mine, or indeed any qualia at all, unless
this behaviour can be regarded as the outcome of the qualia. Man Friday's
footprint was evidence of Man Friday because footprints are causal outcomes
of feet attached to people. And an epiphenomenalist cannot regard behav-
iour, or indeed anything physical, as an outcome of qualia.
    But consider my reading in The Times that Spurs won. This provides
excellent evidence that The Telegraph has also reported that Spurs won,
despite the fact that (I trust) The Telegraph does not get the results from
The Times. They each send their own reporters to the game. The Telegraph's
report is in no sense an outcome of The Times', but the latter provides good
evidence for the former nevertheless.
    The reasoning involved can be reconstructed thus. I read in The Times
that Spurs won. This gives me reason to think that Spurs won because I
know that Spurs' winning is the most likely candidate to be what caused
the report in The Times. But I also know that Spurs' winning would have
had many effects, including almost certainly a report in The Telegraph.
    I am arguing from one effect back to its cause and out again to another
effect. The fact that neither effect causes the other is irrelevant. Now the
epiphenomenalist allows that qualia are effects of what goes on in the brain.
Qualia cause nothing physical but are caused by something physical. Hence
                           EPIPHENOMENAL QUALIA                             135




                                                                                   Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
the epiphenomenalist can argue from the behaviour of others to the qualia
of others by arguing from the behaviour of others back to its causes in the
brains of others and out again to their qualia.
    You may well feel for one reason or another that this is a more dubious
chain of reasoning than its model in the case of newspaper reports. You
are right. The problem of other minds is a major philosophical problem, the
problem of other newspaper reports is not. But there is no special problem
of Epiphenomenalism as opposed to, say, Interactionism here.
    There is a very understandable response to the three replies I have just
made. "All right, there is no knockdown refutation of the existence of epi-
phenomenal qualia. But the fact remains that they are an excrescence.
They do nothing, they explain nothing, they serve merely to soothe the
intuitions of dualists, and it is left a total mystery how they fit into the
world view of science. In short we do not and cannot understand the how
and why of them."
    This is perfectly true; but is no objection to qualia, for it rests on an
overly optimistic view of the human animal, and its powers. We are the
products of Evolution. We understand and sense what we need to under-
stand and sense in order to survive. Epiphenomenal qualia are totally
irrelevant to survival. At no stage of our evolution did natural selection
favour those who could make sense of how they are caused and the laws
governing them, or in fact why they exist at all. And that is why we can't.
    It is not sufficiently appreciated that Physicalism is an extremely opti-
mistic view of our powers. If it is true, we have, in very broad outline
admittedly, a grasp of our place in the scheme of things. Certain matters
of sheer complexity defeat us — there are an awful lot of neurons — but in
principle we have it all. But consider the antecedent probability that every-
thing in the Universe be of a kind that is relevant in some way or other to
the survival of homo sapiens. It is very low surely. But then one must admit
that it is very likely that there is a part of the whole scheme of things, maybe
a big part, which no amount of evolution will ever bring us near to knowledge
about or understanding. For the simple reason that such knowledge and
understanding is irrelevant to survival.
    Physicalists typically emphasise that we are a part of nature on their
view, which is fair enough. But if we are a part of nature, we are as nature
has left us after however many years of evolution it is, and each step in
that evolutionary progression has been a matter of chance constrained just
by the need to preserve or increase survival value. The wonder is that we
understand as much as we do, and there is no wonder that there should be
matters which fall quite outside our comprehension. Perhaps exactly how
epiphenomenal qualia fit into the scheme of things is one such.
    This may seem an unduly pessimistic view of our capacity to articulate
a truly comprehensive picture of our world and our place in it. But suppose
we discovered living on the bottom of the deepest oceans a sort of sea slug
136                              TOANK    JACKSON




                                                                                        Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/pq/article/32/127/127/1612468 by Harvard College Library, Cabot Science Library user on 06 October 2020
which manifested intelligence. Perhaps survival in the conditions required
rational powers. Despite their intelligence, these sea slugs have only a very
restricted conception of the world by comparison with ours, the explanation
for this being the nature of their immediate environment. Nevertheless they
have developed sciences which work surprisingly well in these restricted
terms. They also have philosophers, called slugists. Some call themselves
tough-minded slugists, others confess to being soft-minded slugists.
    The tough-minded slugists hold that the restricted terms (or ones pretty
like them which may be introduced as their sciences progress) suffice in
principle to describe everything without remainder. These tough-minded
slugists admit in moments of weakness to a feeling that their theory leaves
something out. They resist this feeling and their opponents, the soft-minded
slugists, by pointing out — absolutely correctly — that no slugist has ever
succeeded in spelling out how this mysterious residue fits into the highly
successful view that their sciences have and are developing of how their
world works.
    Our sea slugs don't exist, but they might. And there might also exist
super beings which stand to us as we stand to the sea slugs. We cannot
adopt the perspective of these super beings, because we are not them, but
the possibility of such a perspective is, I think, an antidote to excessive
optimism.15

Monash University




    " I a m indebted t o Robert Pargetter for a number of comments and, despite his
dissent, to §IV of Paul E . Meehl, "The Compleat Autooerebrosoopist" in Mind, Matter,
and Method, ed. Paul Feyerabend and Grover Maxwell (Minneapolis, 1966).
