                                          Existentialism ( 2 8 7 ^
made, not in question, out of reach; he dare not look at it
for fear of being forced to contest it and seek another form
of it. The Jew is only a pretext: elsewhere it will be the
Negro, the yellow race; the Jew's existence simply allows
the antisemite to nip his anxieties in the bud by persuading
himself that his place has always been cut out in the world,
that it was waiting for him and that by virtue of tradition
he has the right to occupy it. Antisemitism, in a word, is fear
of man's fate. The antisemite is the man who wants to be
pitiless stone, furious torrent, devastating lightning: in
short, everything but a man.

4. Existentialism is a Humanism     (H%)
   My purpose here is to offer a defence of existentialism
against several reproaches that have been laid against it.
   First, it has been reproached as an invitation to people
to dwell in quietism of despair. For if every way to a solution
is barred, one would have to regard any action in this world
as entirely ineffective, and one would arrive finally at a
contemplative philosophy. Moreover, since contemplation is
a luxury, this would be only another bourgeois philosophy.
This is, especially, the reproach made by the Communists.
   From another quarter we are reporached for having under-
lined all that is ignominious in the human situation, for
depicting what is mean, sordid or base to the neglect of cer-
tain things that possess charm and beauty and belong to the
brighter side of human nature: for example, according to
the Catholic critic, Mile. Mercier, we forget how an infant
smiles. Both from this side and from the other we are also
reproached for leaving out of account the solidarity of man-
kind and considering rnan in isolation. And this, say the
Communists, is because we base our doctrine upon pure
subjectivity—upon the Cartesian "I think": which is the
moment in which solitary man attains to himself; a position
from which it is impossible to regain solidarity with other
men who exist outside of the self. The ego cannot reach them
through the cogito.
   From the Christian side, we are reproached as people who
deny the reality and seriousness of human affairs. For since
we ignore the commandments of God and all values pre-
scribed as eternal, nothing remains but what is strictly volun-
288   SARTRE

tary. Everyone can do what he likes, and will be incapable.
from such a point of view, of condemning either the point of
view or the action of anyone else.
   It is to these various reproaches that I shall endeavor to
reply today; that is why I have entitled this brief exposition
"Existentialism is a Humanism." Many may be surprised at
the mention of humanism in this connection, but we shall try
to see in what sense we understand it. In any case, we can
begin by saying that existentialism, in our sense of the word,
is a doctrine that does render human life possible; a doctrine,
also, which affirms that every truth and every action imply
both an environment and a human subjectivity. The essen-
tial charge laid against us is, of course, that of over-emphasis
upon the evil side of human life. I have lately been told of a
lady who, whenever she lets slip a vulgar expression in a
moment of nervousness, excuses herself by exclaiming, "I
believe I am becoming an existentialist." So it appears that
ugliness is being identified with existentialism. That is why
some people say we are "naturalistic," and if we are, it is
strange to see how much we scandalize and horrify them, for
no one seems to be much frightened or humiliated nowadays
by what is properly called naturalism. Those who can quite
well keep down a novel by Zola such as La Terre are sick-
ened as soon as they read an existentialist novel. Those who
appeal to the wisdom of the people—which is a sad wisdom
—find ours sadder still. And yet, what could be more dis-
illusioned than such sayings as "Charity begins at home" or
"Promote a rogue and he'll sue you for damage, knock him
down and he'll do you homage"? 12 We all know how many
common sayings can be quoted to this effect, and they all
mean much the same—that you must not oppose the powers-
that-be; that you must not fight against superior force;
must not meddle in matters that are above your station. Or
that any action not in accordance with some tradition is
mere romanticism; or that any undertaking which has not
the support of proven experience is foredoomed to frustra-
tion; and that since experience has shown men to be in-
variably inclined to evil, there must be firm rules to restrain
them, otherwise we shall have anarchy. It is, however, the
people who are forever mouthing these dismal proverbs
and, whenever they are told of some more or less repul-
sive action, say "How like human nature!"—it is these very
people, always harping upon realism, who complain that exis-
                                           Existentialism   289
tentialism is too gloomy a view of things. Indeed their ex-
cessive protests make me suspect that what is annoying
them is not so much our pessimism, but, much more likely,
our optimism. For at bottom, what is alarming in the doc-
trine that I am about to try to explain to you is—is it not?—
that it confronts man with a possibility of choice. To verify
this, let us review the whole question upon the strictly phil-
osophic level. What, then, is this that we call existentialism?
   Most of those who are making use of this word would be
highly confused if required to explain its meaning. For since
it has become fashionable, people cheerfully declare that this
musician or that painter is "existentialist." A columnist in
Clartes signs himself "The Existentialist," and, indeed, the
word is now so loosely applied to so many things that it no
longer means anything at all. It would appear that, for the
lack of any novel doctrine such as that of surrealism, all those
who are eager to join in the latest scandal or movement now
seize upon this philosophy in which, however, they can find
nothing to their purpose. For in truth this is of all teachings
the least scandalous and the most austere: it is intended
strictly for technicians and philosophers. All the same, it can
easily be defined.
   The question is only complicated because there are two
kinds of existentialists. There are, on the one hand, the
Christians, amongst whom I shall name Jaspers and Gabriel
Marcel, both professed Catholics; and on the other the
existential atheists, amongst whom we must place Heidegger
as well as the French existentialists and myself. What they
have in common is simply the fact that they believe that
existence comes before essence—or. if you will, that we must
begin from the subjective. What exactly do we mean by that?
   If one considers an article of manufacture—as, for ex-
ample, a book or a paper-knife—one sees that it has been
made by an artisan who had a conception of it; and he has
paid attention, equally, to the conception of a paper-knife
and to the pre-existent technique of production which is a
part of that conception and is, at bottom, a formula. Thus
the paper-knife is at the same time an article producible in
a certain manner and one which, on the other hand, serves a
definite purpose, for one cannot suppose that a man would
produce a paper-knife without knowing what it was for.
Let us say, then, of the paper-knife that its essence—that
is to say the sum of the formulae and the qualities which
290   SARTRE

made its production and its definition possible—precedes its
existence. The presence of such-and-such a paper-knife or
book is thus determined before my eyes. Here, then, we are
viewing the world from a technical standpoint, and we can
say that production precedes existence.
    When we think of God as the creator, we are thinking of
him, most of the time, as a supernal artisan. Whatever doc-
trine we may be considering, whether it be a doctrine like
that of Descartes, or of Leibnitz himself, we always imply
that the will follows, more or less, from the understanding or
at least accompanies it, so that when G o d creates he knows
precisely what he is creating. Thus, the conception of man
in the mind of God is comparable to that of the paper-knife
in the mind of the artisan: God makes man according to a
procedure and a conception, exactly as the artisan manu-
factures a paper-knife, following a definition and a formula.
Thus each individual man is the realization of a certain con-
ception which dwells in the divine understanding. In the
philosophic atheism of the eighteenth century, the notion of
God is suppressed, but not, for all that, the idea that essence
is prior to existence; something of that idea we still find
everywhere, in Diderot, in Voltaire and even in Kant.
Man possesses a human nature; that "human nature,"
which is the conception of human being, is found in every
man; which means that each man is a particular example of
a universal conception, the conception of Man. In Kant, this
universality goes so far that the wild man of the woods, man
in the state of nature and the bourgeois are all contained in
the same definition and have the same fundamental qualities.
Here again, the essence of man precedes that historic exist-
ence which we confront in experience.
    Atheistic existentialism, of which I am a representative,
declares with greater consistency that if God does not exist
there is at least one being whose existence comes before its
 essence, a being which exists before it can be defined by
 any conception of it. That being is man or, as Heidegger
 has it, the human reality. What do we mean by saying that
 existence precedes essence? We mean that man first of all
 exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world—and de-
 fines himself afterwards. If man as the existentialist sees
 him is not definable, it is because to begin with he is noth-
 ing. He will not be anything until later, and then he will be
 what he makes of himself. Thus, there is no human nature,
                                            Existentialism 291
 because there is no God to have a conception of it. Man
 simply is. Not that he is simply what he conceives himself
 to be, but he is what he wills, and as he conceives himself
 after already existing—as he wills to be after that leap to-
 wards existence. Man is nothing else but that which he
 makes of himself. That is the first principle of existentialism.
 And this is what people call its "subjectivity," using the
 word as a reproach against us. But what do we mean to say
 by this, but that man is of a greater dignity than a stone or a
 table? For we mean to say that man primarily exists—that
 man is, before all else, something which propels itself towards
 a future and is aware that it is doing so. Man is, indeed, a
 project which possesses a subjective life, instead of being a
 kind of moss, or a fungus or a cauliflower. Before that pro-
 jection of the self nothing exists; not even in the heaven of
 intelligence: man will only attain existence when he is what
 he purposes to be. Not, however, "what he may wish to be.
 For what we usually understand by wishing or willing is a
 conscious decision taken—much more often than not—after
 we have made ourselves what we are. I may wish to join
  a party, to write a book or to marry—but in such a case what
 is usually called my will is probably a manifestation of a
  prior and more spontaneous decision. If, however, it is true
  that existence is prior to essence, man is responsible for what
  he is. Thus, the first effect of "xi^tentinlism is JjraM* p"ts
  every man in possession of hjmself as he is, and places rhe
'entire responsibility for his existence sauarelv upon his own
  shoulders. And, when we say that man is responsible for him-
  selfTwe do not mean that he is responsible only for his own
  individuality, but that he is responsible for all men. The
  word "subjectivism" is to be understood in two senses, and
  our adversaries play upon only one of them. Subjectivism
  means, on the one hand, the freedom of the individual sub-
  ject and, on the other, that man cannot pass beyond human
  subjectivity. It is the latter which is the deeper meaning of
  existentialism. When we say that man chooses himself, we
  do mean that every one of us must choose himself; but by
  that we also mean that in choosing for himself he chooses
  for all men. For in effect, of all the actions a man may take in
  order to create himself as he wills to be, there is not one
  which is not creative, at the same time, of an image of man
  such as he believes he ought to be. To choose between this or
  that is at the same time to affirm the value of that which is
            y l    4-e/- »vi_ " ?     £,e<od •£» r o-Xf
   292   SARTRE                                               )   ft"
    chosen; for we are unable ever to choose the worse. What
S- we choose is always the better; and nothing can be better
    for us unless it is better for all. If, moreoever, existence
    precedes essence and we will to exist at the same time as we
    fashion our image, that image is valid for all and for the
    entire epoch in which we find ourselves. Our responsibility
    is thus much greater than we had supposed, for it concerns
    mankind as a whole. If I am a worker, for instance, I may
    choose to join a Christian rather than a Communist trade
    union. And if, by that membership, I choose to signify that
    resignation is, after all, the attitude-that best becomes a
    man, that man's kingdom is not upon this earth, I do not
    commit myself alone to that view. Resignation is my will for
    everyone, and my action is, in consequence, a commitment
    on behalf of all mankind. Or if, to take a more personal case,
    I decide to marry and to have children, even though this
    decision proceeds simply from my situation, from my pas-
    sion or my desire, I am thereby committing not only myself,
    but humanity as a whole, to the practice of monogamy. I am
    thus responsible for myself and for all men, and I am creat-
    ing a certain image of man as I would have him to be. In
     fashioning myself I fashion man.
        This may enable us to understand what is meant by such
    terms—perhaps a little grandiloquent—as anguish, aban-
     donment and despair. As you will soon see, it is very simple.
     First, what do we mean by anguish? The existentialist
    .frankly states that man is in anguish. His meaning is as
     follows—When a man commits himself to anything, fully
 /• realizing that he is not only choosing what he will be, but is
     thereby at the same time a legislator deciding for the whole
n of mankind—in such a moment a man cannot escape from
     the sense of complete and profund responsibility. There are
     many, indeed, who show no such anxiety. But we affirm
     that they are merely disguising their anguish or are in flight
     from it. Certainly, many people think that in what they are
     doing they commit no one but themselves to anything: and
     if you ask them, "What would happen if everyone did so?"
     they shrug their shoulders and reply, "Everyone does not do
     so." But in truth, one ought always to ask oneself what
     would happen if everyone did as one is doing; nor can one
     escape from that disturbing thought except by a kind of
     self-deception. The man who lies in self-excuse, by saying
     "Everyone will not do it" must be ill at ease in his con-

                             • y s - IS   / ,L* ASM sift*f&
                                            Existentialism   293
science, for the act of lying implies the universal value
which it denies. By its very disguise his anguish reveals it-
self. This is the anguish that Kierkegaard called "the an-
guish of Abraham." You know the story: An angel com-
manded Abraham to sacrifice his son: and obedience was
obligatory, if it really was an angel who had appeared and
said, "Thou, Abraham, shalt sacrifice thy son." But anyone
in such a case would wonder, first, whether it was indeed
an angel and secondly, whether I am really Abraham. Where
are the proofs? A certain mad woman who suffered from
hallucinations said that people were telephoning to her, and
giving her orders. The doctor asked, "But who is it that
speaks to you?" She replied: "He says it is God." And what,
indeed, could prove to her that it was God? If an angel
appears to me, what is the proof that it is an angel; or, if I
hear voices, who can prove that they proceed from heaven
and not from hell, or from my own subconsciousness or
some pathological condition? Who can prove that they are
really addressed to me?
   Who, then, can prove that I am the proper person to im-
pose, by my own choice, my conception of man upon man-
kind? I shall never find any proof whatever; there will be
no sign to convince me of it. If a voice speaks to me, it is still
I myself who must decide whether the voice is or is not
that of an angel. If I regard a certain course of action as
good, it is only I who choose to say that it is good and not
bad. There is nothing to show that I am Abraham: neverthe-
less I also am obliged at every instant to perform actions
which are examples. Everything happens to every man as
though the whole human race had its eyes fixed upon what
he is doing and regulated its conduct accordingly. So every
man ought to say, "Am I really a man who has the right to
act in such a manner that humanity regulates itself by what
I do." If a man does not say that, he is dissembling his
anguish. Clearly, the anguish with which we are concerned
here is not one that could lead to quietism or inaction. It is
anguish pure and simple, of the kind well known to all
those who have borne responsibilities. When, for instance, a
military leader takes upon himself the responsibility for an
attack and sends a number of men to their death, he chooses
to do it and at bottom he alone chooses. No doubt he acts
under a higher command, but its orders, which are more
general, require interpretation by him and upon that in-
