                         Logical Empiricism *
                             HERBERT       FEIGL



                     POSITIVISM, NOT NEGATIVISM
   Probably the most decisive division among philosophical attitudes is the
one between the worldly and the other-worldly types of thought. Profound
differences in personality and temperament express themselves in the ever
changing forms these two kinds of outlook assume. Very likely there is here
an irreconcilable divergence. It goes deeper than disagreement in doctrine;
at bottom it is a difference in basic aim and interest. Countless frustrated
discussions and controversies since antiquity testify that logical argument
and empirical evidence are unable to resolve the conflict. In the last analysis
this is so because the very issue of the jurisdictive power of the appeal to
logic and experience (and with it the question of just what empirical evi-
dence can establish) is at stake.
   It seems likely that this situation in philosophy will continue as long as
human nature in its relations to its cultural environment remains what it
has been for the last three or four thousand years. The tough-minded and
the tender-minded, as William James described them so brilliantly, are
perennial types, perennially antagonistic. There will always be those who
find this world of ours, as cruel and deplorable as it may be in some respects,
an exciting, fascinating place to live in, to explore, to adjust to, and to im-
prove. And there will always be those who look upon the universe of ex-
perience and nature as an unimportant or secondary thing in comparison
with something more fundamental and more significant. This tendency
of thought may express itself theologically or metaphysically. It may lead
to a faith in extra-mundane existence, or it may in various attenuated fash-
ions assert merely the supremacy of some rational or intuitive principles.
   Empiricism, Skepticism, Naturalism, Positivism, and Pragmatism 1 are
typical thought movements of the worldly, tough-minded variety. Respect
for the facts of experience, open-mindedness, an experimental trial-and-
error attitude, and the capacity for working within the frame of an incom-
plete, unfinished world view distinguish them from the more impatient,
imaginative, and often aprioristic thinkers in the tender-minded camp.
Among the latter are speculative metaphysicians, intuitionists, rationalists,
  * Reprinted with omissions from Twentieth Century Philosophy, D. D. Runes, ed.,
Philosophical Library, New York, 1943, by kind permission of the editor and the
publishers.
  1
    Disregarding some of James' own tender-minded deviations.
                                        3
       4                               INTRODUCTION
       and absolute idealists. An amusing anecdote concerning two celebrated con-
       temporary philosophers has become widely known. One considers the other
       muddle-headed and the other thinks the one simple-minded. This fairly
       epitomizes the history of philosophy, that grandiose "tragicomedy of wis-
       dom." 2 Plato and Protagoras, St. Thomas and William of Ockham, Spinoza
       and Hobbes, Leibniz and Locke, Kant and Hume, Hegel and Comte, Royce
       and James, Whitehead and Russell are in many regards, though of course
       not in every feature, outstanding examples of that basic difference.
          Inasmuch as this divergence of attitudes establishes a continuum of posi-
       tions between extremes, there is also among the tough-minded thinkers a
       gradation of shades from a nominalistic, pan-scientific radicalism to a more
       liberal, flexible form of empiricism. Typical among the radicals is the
       use of the phrase "nothing but." W e are familiar with this expression from
       earlier doctrines, such as materialism: "Organisms are nothing but ma-
       chines." "Mind is nothing but matter." "The history of ideas is only
       an epiphenomenon of the economic processes." W e also know it from
       phenomenalism: "Matter is nothing but clusters of sensations." Or from
       nominalism: "Universals are mere words." Or from ethical skepticism and
       relativist):: "Good and evil are no more than projections of our likes and
       dislikes."
          One of the great merits of logical empiricism lies in the fact that it is
       conscious of the danger of these reductive fallacies. It may not always
       have been able to avoid them. A young and aggressive movement in its zeal
       to purge thought of confusions and superfluous entities naturally bran-
       dishes more destructive weapons than it requires for its genuinely construc-
       tive endeavor. But that is a socio-psychological accident which in time will
       become less important. The future of empiricism will depend on its ability
       to avoid both the reductive fallacies of a narrowminded positivism—stig-
       matized as negativism—as well as the seductive fallacies of metaphysics.
       Full maturity of thought will be attained when neither aggressive destruc-
       tion nor fantastic construction, both equally infantile, characterize the
       philosophic intellect. The alternative left between a philosophy of the
 yT    "Nothing But" and a philosophy of the "Something More" is a philosophy
Jjpv   of the "What is What." Thus an attitude of reconstruction is emerging:
       an attitude which recognizes that analysis is vastly different from destruc-
       tion or reduction to absurdity, an attitude that is favorable to the integration
       of our knowledge, as long as that integration is carried on in the truly sci-
       entific spirit of caution and open-mindedness. The reconstructive attitude
       demands that we describe the world in a way that does not impoverish it
       by artificial reductions, and it thus requires that we make important dis-
       tinctions wherever there is an objective need for them. But, on the other
       hand, the empiricist will with equal decision reject wishful thinking of
        2
          In a shrewd and entertaining book, Die Tragikomoedie der Weisheit, R. Wahle
       many years ago rewrote the history of philosophy from a positivistic point of view.
                          LOGICAL EMPIRICISM                                5
 all sorts, the reading into experience of features which are incapable of
test and the multiplication of entities beyond necessity.
    It would be puerile optimism to hope that out of such revision and re-
form should grow a generally accepted philosophy to end all philosophies.
But what may seem questionable as an historical prediction may yet be
justifiable as a working attitude in a living enterprise. The spirit of en-
lightenment, the spirit of Galileo, of Hume, and of the French Encyclope-
dists is fully alive again in the contemporary encyclopedists of a unified
science. These modern logical empiricists hope to have freed themselves
from the naivete and dogmatism of the various nineteenth-century material-
ists and monists. They are conscious of their philosophy's role as a turning
point in the history of critical thought. Nevertheless, they do not claim
originality, for they are aware that the empirical and analytic trend in
philosophy is no less persistent than the speculative and intuitive approach,
though it is admittedly less spectacular and popular. The tradition they now
represent has centered its chief inquiries around the two humble questions,
"What do you mean?" and "How do you know?" The systematic pursuit
of meaning by the Socratic method and the searching scrutiny of the
foundations of knowledge are thus again declared the genuine task of
philosophy, a task which differs from the quest for truth as carried on by
science and yet is most intimately related to it.
    Neither the construction of a world view nor a vision of a way of liv-
ing is the primary aim. If through the progress of knowledge and through
social, political, and educational reform one or the other objective is pur-
sued, philosophy in its critical and clarifying capacity may aid or guide
such developments. But it cannot, by mere reflective analysis, prescribe
or produce them. Quackish and dilettantish projects in both directions
have always been abundant and cheap in the market of ideas. The main
contribution that philosophical reconstruction can make in this regard lies
in the direction of an education toward maturer ways of thinking, think-
ing which possesses the virtues characteristic of science: clarity and con-
sistency, testability and adequacy, precision and objectivity. Immature
attitudes are associated with attempts to explain experience in ways which
lack the distinguishing marks of science. Certain of these pre-scientific
modes of explanation, like the magical, the animistic, and the mythological,
are nearly defunct; others, like the theological and the metaphysical,
still prevail.
   Throughout its history philosophy has been the particular stronghold
of verbal magic. By purely verbal means it has tried to explain things
which only science could explain or which cannot be explained at all.
In the process it creates its own perplexities, and at its worst it attempts
the "solution" of these pseudo-problems—problems arising only out of
linguistic confusion—by means of pseudo-techniques—more verbal magic.
Analysis teaches us that all this is altogether unnecessary. Thus, if a little
»«   6                                 INTRODUCTION
     levity be permitted, we may define philosophy as the disease of which it
     should be the cure.

               THE ANALYSIS OF LANGUAGE AND THE MEANINGS
                                    OF "MEANING"
        The systematic pursuit of the problem of meaning by means of a logical
     analysis of language distinguishes Logical Empiricism from the earlier,
     more psychologically oriented types of Empiricism, Positivism, and Prag-
     matism. The imperative need for a logic of language was impressed upon
     scientists and logicians most poignantly in the last few decades. Just as the
     seminal ideas of some nineteenth-century philosophies originated in a
     scientific achievement (Darwin's theory of evolution) so twentieth-
     century Logical Empiricism was conceived under the influence primarily
     of three significant developments in recent mathematics and empirical
     science. These are the studies in the foundations of mathematics (led by
     Russell, Hilbert, and Brouwer), the revision of basic concepts in physics
     (advanced especially by Einstein, Planck, Bohr, and Heisenberg) and the
     reform of psychology by the behaviorists (Pavlov, Watson, et al.).
     Though very different in context and subject-matter, these three de-
     velopments focussed attention on the necessity for an inquiry into the
     limits and structure of meaningful discourse. Russell, through his dis-
     covery of logical and mathematical paradoxes, could show that tradi-
     tional logic had to be revised and that certain laws, like his rule of types,
     had to be incorporated in logic in order to avoid inconsistencies in the
     very foundations of mathematics. Einstein, in his analysis of the electro-
     dynamics of moving bodies, was led to a most revolutionary critique of
     such basic concepts as simultaneity, length, duration, and mass. Thus he
     showed that the traditional phraseology of "absolute space" and "absolute
     time" was in certain important respects devoid of the factual meaning it
     was supposed to possess. Analogous revisions of basic concepts, touching
     also on the principle of causality, resulted from the elaboration of the
     theory of quanta. Finally, by developing objective procedures for the
     study of mental life, the behaviorists made us aware of the fact that all
     of the scientific content of psychology can be formulated in the physical
     language 3 and that the assumption of a "something more," a surplus of
     factual meaning attached to mentalistic terminology, is an illusion. (Earlier
     reductive naivetes were gradually eliminated here, as elsewhere.)
        Whatever the future of mathematics, physics, and psychology may
     decide about the theoretical content of these recent ideas, we have, in
     any case, been awakened once for all to the need for logical analysis, and
     we have been witnesses to the fruitfulness of its results.
         3
        1 , e., the language whose undefined, primitive terms are spatiotemporal coordinates
     (referring to observable or measurable locations and dates) and thing-predicates (re-
     ferring to observable properties of things).
                           LOGICAL EMPIRICISM                                7
   Three disciplines are being developed to carry out this task of clarify-
ing language and meaning. Pragmatics investigates the functions of lan-
guage in its full biological, psychological, and sociological setting. Here
language in its relation to behavior is the primary object of study. By two
successive steps of abstraction the disciplines of semantics and syntax are
arrived at. Semantics analyzes the meaning of terms and expressions. Its
studies center about the relation of designation and the concept of truth.
While pragmatics is interested predominantly in the expression and ap-
peal function of language, semantics explores the symbolic or representative
aspect of language. Syntax, finally, ignores even the meaning-relation and
studies exclusively the connections of linguistic signs with each other. It
systematizes the purely formal, structural rules for the formation of sen-
tences and the transformation rules of logical derivation.
   Granting that language as used in common life serves in a fusion or a
combination of various functions, it would seem imperative that some
sort of theoretical separation of functions be undertaken for the sake of
greater clarity and the avoidance of confusion. The list below is the re-
sult of such an analysis. Among the dozens of meanings of "meaning" we
shall enumerate only those which are of prime importance for philosophical
purposes.
        THE FUNCTIONS OF LANGUAGE, OR THE MEANINGS
                       OF "MEANING"
  Cognitive meanings                      Non-cognitive meanings
  (Informational function)                (Emotive expression and appeal
                                          function)
Purely formal                           Pictorial (Imaginative)
Logico-arithmetical                     Emotional (Affective)
Factual ( = Empirical)                  Volitional-motivational (Directive)
   This table, correctly understood and properly used, is a powerful tool
in the disentanglement of the traditional puzzles of philosophy. Many
metaphysical "problems" and their "solutions" depend upon the erroneous
presumption of the presence of factual meaning in expressions which have
only emotive appeals and/or a formally correct grammatical structure.
And many an epistemological question has been obscured by mistaking
logico-mathematical for factual meanings. It is such confusion or errone-
ous pretense that is exposed to criticism on the basis of our table of mean-
ings. N o evaluation of the functions of language as such is implied. Emo-
tive appeals are indispensable in the pursuits of practical life, in education,
in propaganda (good or bad), in poetry, in literature, in religious edi-
fication and moral exhortation. Some of the highest refinements of our
civilized existence depend upon the emotional overtones of spoken and
written language.
   However, Logical Empiricism as an approach in the theory of knowl-
           8                              INTRODUCTION
           edge is primarily concerned with cognitive meanings. It avoids the errors
           of the psychologistic approach by the sharp distinction between the pic-
           torial connotations of words, i. e., the imagery that accompanies their
           use, and the syntactical-semantical rules that govern their use. The meaning
           of words, then, or of signs quite generally, consists in the way in which
           they are used, the way they are connected with other words or related
           to objects of experience. The definition of a term, the declaration of its
           meaning, amounts to a statement of the rule according to which we em-
           ploy or intend to employ the term. Dictionary definitions are translations
           of relatively less familiar into relatively more familiar expressions; the
           meaning of the latter is presupposed. Logical analysis, however, pushes
           beyond these familiar terms of common language. By stepwise procedures
           all terms are reduced to a comparatively small number of basic or primi-
           tive terms. Though further verbal definition is then still possible—no
           term can be said to be "indefinable"—to continue the process may turn
           out to be unenlightening and hence fruitless. At this point we must con-
           nect language with something outside of language, with experience. Thus
           in all full definitions of empirical terms there is a terminal ostensive step
           as an indispensable ingredient. In contradistinction to this, the symbols
           of purely logical or mathematical systems are introduced (i. e., whatever
           meaning they have is defined) by relating them only to each other by
           formal rules. In applied mathematics, as in every language with empirical
           reference, these purely formal or syntactical rules are supplemented by
           semantical rules that correlate at least some of the symbols with items
           of experience.
              Philosophical or logical analysis, in the sense of a clarification of the
           meaning of language, differs from philological analysis in at least three
           important respects. First, logical analysis concentrates on terms of basic
           importance for the representation of knowledge. The more general these
           terms the greater is the danger of various confusions due either to un-
           clarity in type of meaning or simply to vagueness or ambiguity of mean-
    t!r\   ing. Hence the necessity and the value of such an analysis as a therapeutic
           measure. Second, the logical reconstruction is independent of the gram-
           matical (and a fortiori the emotive) peculiarities of the specific language,
           living or dead, in question. Inasmuch as it is the cognitive meanings that we
           are interested in, idealized models, or in the extreme limit, an ideal lan-
           guage (something in the direction of Leibniz' Mathesis Universalis) may
           be used. The tools developed in modern symbolic logic prove of utmost
           value for this purpose. Third, logical analysis is usually directed analysis.
           That is to say, it is either posttdational codification (as in the mathematical
           and the exact empirical sciences) or epistemological reduction (the re-
    0      construction of factual terms and propositions on a basis of observational
           evidence).
/             A characteristic difference between two types of procedure in logical
                             LOGICAL EMPIRICISM                                    9
analysis is worth observing. Wittgenstein, very much like G. E. Moore
before him, and like the English analytic school on the whole, pursues
the Socratic task in a casuistic fashion; individual confusions are subjected
to elucidation. It is the specific case that is treated, and the general theory
of the treatment is not elaborated systematically. Carnap and his followers,
on the other hand, proceeded with the development of a complete sys-
tem, very much like Whitehead and Russell in Principia Mathematica. A
whole system is set up, and the theory of the machinery fully set forth. In
the course of later developments this difference in procedure became asso-
ciated with another one; in their choice of a basis for logical reconstruc-
tion, Wittgenstein, followed by Schlick, Waismann, and others, remained
experientialistic, whereas Neurath, Carnap, Hempel, and others became
physicalistic.

                 T H E CRITERION OF FACTUAL MEANING
                   AND THE CRITIQUE OF METAPHYSICS
   The most important, the most widely debated, and, unfortunately, the
most frequently misunderstood regulative principle used by Logical Em-
piricism is the criterion of factual meaningfulness. The purpose of this
criterion is to delimit the type of expression which has possible reference
to fact from the other types which do not have this kind of significance:
the emotive, the logico-mathematical, the purely formal, and—if there
should be such—the completely non-significant.
   If it is the ostensive steps that connect a purely formal array of signs
(e. g., words) with something outside of language, no sign or combination
of signs can have factual meaning without this reference to experience.
Furthermore, if a sentence is considered true when it corresponds to an
existing state of affairs, a sentence is factually-meaningful only if we are
in principle capable of recognizing such states of affairs as would either
validate or invalidate the sentence. If we cannot possibly conceive of
what would have to be the case in order to confirm or disconfirm an asser-
tion we would not be able to distinguish between its truth and its falsity.
In that case we would simply not know what we are talking about. C. S.
Peirce's pragmatic maxim, formulated in his epoch-making essay, "How             /-
to Make Our Ideas Clear," 4 has essentially the same import. We may para-      ^ ^
phrase it crudely: A difference that is to be a difference (i. e., more than 6^9
merely a verbal or an emotive one) must make a difference. Or, a little f>+'Af~~~
more precisely: If and only if assertion and denial of a sentence imply
a difference capable of observational (experiential, operational, or ex-
perimental) test, does the sentence have factual meaning. Another useful
formulation is Ayer's: 5 "It is the mark of a genuine factual proposition
  4
    "PopularScience Monthly, Vol. 12, 1878. Reprinted in Chance, Love, and Logic, and
in Collected Papers of C. S. Peirce, Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss, eds.
  5
     A. J. Ayer, Language, Truth, and Logic, p. 26.
    IO                                INTRODUCTION

     . . . that some experiential propositions can be deduced from it in con-
     junction with certain other premises without being deducible from these
     other premises alone." This is simply empiricism brought up to date. The
     psychologistic formulations, an example of which may be found in Hume
     (ideas must have their basis and origin in impressions), are replaced by
     logical ones. The most helpful exposition of these concepts for physical
     scientists was given by P. W . Bridgman.6 Realizing the close relation-
     ship between knowledge and action, or as Dewey would put it, the place
     of meaning in the context of inquiry, he asks by what procedures we de-
     cide the validity of our assertions. Thus Bridgman maintains that con-
     cepts and assertions are meaningless if no operations can be specified that
     define the former and test the latter.
       It was, however, a typical reductive fallacy on the part of Auguste
    Comte to rule out as meaningless such a question as that concerning the
    chemical constitution of the stars because at that time no procedure was
    known to answer that question. Of course we can hardly blame him for
    not having conceived of spectroscopy before Bunsen and Kirchhoff de-
    veloped it, yet even in Comte's day it should have been clear that the im-
    possibility of solving that problem was neither a physical nor a logical one.
    It was a technical-practical difficulty of the sort that may have a bearing
    on the fruitfulness of an inquiry but certainly not on the meaningfulness
    of a question. Similar reductive fallacies are inherent in the insistence of
    some of the more radical positivists that only directly and completely
    verifiable or refutable sentences are factually meaningful. Although most
    of these thinkers never intended as drastic a restriction of meaningful dis-
    course as they were accused of doing in effect,7 it seems terminologically
    more convenient today to classify as factually-meaningful all sentences
    which are in principle capable of being confirmed or disconfirmed, i. e.,
    capable of at least indirect and incomplete test.
       Thus in a general classification of sentences and expressions we dis-
    tinguish today: ( i ) Logically true sentences, also called analytic sen-
    tences. (2) Logically false sentences, also called contradictions. These
    sentences are true or false, respectively, by virtue of their form. Even if
    descriptive empirical terms are contained in them they function only
    "vacuously," and their factual reference is irrelevant to the validity of the
X   sentence. (3) Factually true and (4) factually false sentences whose
    validity depends upon their correspojidence to observed fact. In the major-
    ity of instances this correspondence or non-correspondence is only incom-
    pletely and indirectly indicated by whatever is immediately observable.
    Therefore these sentences are usually not known to be true or false but
      6
        In The Logic of Modern Physics, N e w York, 1927.
      7
        Scientific laws, hypotheses, and theoretical assumptions, for example, were con-
    sidered by them perfectly legitimate frames for the formation of empirical sentences
    although, by terminological decision, they were not classified as genuine propositions.
                              LOGICAL EMPIRICISM                                     II
 are considered to be confirmed or discontinued to an extent which may
 vary considerably with the accumulation of favorable or unfavorable
 evidence. (5) Emotive expressions without cognitive meaning and the
 emotive components of otherwise cognitive expressions. Pictorial, figur-
 ative, and metaphorical expressions, exclamations, interjections, words of
 praise or blame, appeals, suggestions, requests, imperatives, commands,
 questions, and prayers belong to this category. Even in definitions we
 recognize a motivational element: the resolution or invitation to use a
 term in a certain way.
    In the light of the preceding distinctions, we may say that an expres-
 sion is devoid of empirical meaning (i. e., of factual reference) or, briefly,
is -factually-meaningless, if it belongs to any one or several of the follow-
ing five groups: (a) Expressions violating the syntactical formation-rules
of a given language; (b) Analytic sentences; (c) Contradictory sentences;
 (d) Sentences containing extra-logical terms for which no experiential or
operational definitions can be provided; (e) Sentences whose confirm-
ability, i. e., even indirect and incomplete testability-in-principle, is log-
ically excluded by the assumptions of the system of which they are a
part. 8
    As indicated above, the positivistic critique of metaphysics is primarily
an attack upon confusions of meanings and is not intended as a wholesale
repudiation of what has been presented under that label. In point of fact,
"metaphysics" has been used in such a wide variety of ways that here also
a little logical analysis of meanings is indispensable. The customary defi-
nitions of metaphysics as the discipline concerned with "first principles"
or with "reality as a whole" are not illuminating as long as the methods of
procedure remain unspecified. From the point of view of method, then,
we may distinguish intuitive, deductive, dialectical, transcendental, and
inductive metaphysics.
   T o take the last-mentioned first, we may say that inductive meta-
physics, in the sense of a speculative cosmology derived by extrapola-
tion from scientific evidence and scientific theory, need not contain
factually-meaningless elements at all. There is no sharp line between the
inductive generalizations of common sense and science on one side and
those of cosmology on the other. It scarcely needs to be mentioned that
metaphysics in this sense, though logically unassailable, is open to criti-
cism from the point of view of the criteria of adequacy and precision,
   8
     Illustrations: ad (a): "Soft is the square of green." "Nor here I you neither was."
Also, Hegel's famous definitions of light and heat (these suffer as well from the defect
classified under d). ad (b): "Octogenarians are more than ten years old." "Birds can
build nests without previous training because they have nest-building instincts." ad
 (c): "Octogenarians are sometimes more than ninety years old." Also, H. G. Wells'
idea of a time-machine, ad (d): "Entelechies are responsible for the adaptability of
organisms to their environment." "The true essence of electricity is undiscoverable."
ad (e); The ether hypothesis; and metaphysical realism—both as discussed below.
12                             INTRODUCTION

reliability and fruitfulness. Conjectures regarding the heat-death of the
universe, the origin of life, and the future of evolution may be perfectly
meaningful. But anyone with even a superficial acquaintance with scien-
tific method will realize how uncertain and vague these guesses must be.
Occasionally they may be valuable as suggestions for new approaches in
scientific research, but with the exception of a few notable instances like
the ancient atomic hypothesis, they are apt to remain barren, if not actually
misleading. Inductive metaphysics is thus merely the risky, sanguine, dis-
reputable extreme of science.
   The critique of meaning, however, applies with full force to the other
approaches in metaphysics. Deductive metaphysics indulges in the rational-
istic practice of producing factual conclusions of a relatively specific char-
acter from a few sweepingly general (and often completely vague)
premises. It thus misconstrues the nature of logical derivation and is guilty
of a confusion of logical with factual meaning. Similarly, dialectical meta-
physics, especially the Hegelian, confuses what may—most charitably in-
terpreted—appear as a psychological thought-movement or as a form of
historical processes with the logical forms of inference. Intuitive meta-
physics, convinced of the existence of a privileged shortcut to "Truth,"
mistakes having an experience for knowing something about it. Then, too,
it is habitually insensitive to the distinction between pictorial and emotional
appeals and factual meaning. Finally, transcendental metaphysics in its
attempt to uncover the basic categories of both thought and reality may
turn out to be nothing else than an unclear combination of epistemology
and cosmology, which is then dignified with the name "ontology." It
could thus be salvaged and restated in purified form. But it is precisely
in ontology that we find the greatest accumulation of factually-meaningless
verbalisms. Speculations concerning the "Absolute," even if not entirely
devoid of empirical components, generally contain an ample measure of
"absolutely" untestable pseudo-propositions. The customary excuse that
further experience or reasoning will validate these ideas has no bearing on
the question of meaningfulness. The most a patient empiricist can do
here is to hope that doubtful promises to define empirically the terms, used
so far only emotively, will sometime be fulfilled. But until that happens,
the empiricist will fail to attach any glimmering of factual-meaning to the
metaphysics which rotates about these terms.
    To the empiricist one of the most gratifying trends in the history of sci-
ence is the gradual liberation of theory from metaphysical bondage. The
ideas of absolute space, time, and substance, of numbers as real entities,
of the cause-effect relation as an intrinsic necessity, of vital forces and
entelechies, and of all manner of obscure faculties and mythical powers
have gradually disappeared from respectable science as it was seen that
they were either ad hoc explanations or samples of verbal legerdemain
or both. One incident in this process of growing epistemological sophis-
                           LOGICAL EMPIRICISM                                I3
tication must suffice for illustration. When after many experiments (Fizeau,
Michelson-Morley, de Sitter, Trouton-Noble) physicists realized that it
was hopeless to look for effects of the universal ether upon moving bodies,
some of them were nevertheless not ready to give up the ether hypothesis.
H. A. Lorentz, certainly one of the greatest physicists, pardoned the ether
of its undiscoverability by postulating an ingenious set of assumptions,
which jointly guaranteed that whatever effects might be produced by
the ether, such effects would be exactly cancelled by other counter-
effects. Einstein very soon afterwards realized that by this token the
stationary-ether hypothesis had become not only scientifically superfluous
but strictly meaningless as well. An essentially similar situation prevailed
long before in the Newton-Leibniz controversy regarding absolute space
and time in which Leibniz used arguments very much like those of the
modern pragmatists and positivists.
   A word of warning should not be amiss here. The danger of a falla-
ciously reductive use of the meaning-criterion is great, especially in the
hands of young iconoclasts. It is only too tempting to push a very difficult
problem aside and by stigmatizing it as meaningless to discourage further
investigation. If, for example, some of the extremely tough-minded psy-
chologists relegate questions such as those concerning the instincts, the un-
conscious, or the relative roles of constitution and environment to the
limbo of metaphysics, then they cut with Ockham's razor far into the
flesh of knowledge instead of merely shaving away the metaphysical
whiskers. No meaningful problem is in principle insoluble, but there is no
doubt that the human race will leave a great many problems unsolved.

        T H E LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
   The question "How do we know?" presupposes the question "What
do we mean?", and in the pursuit of both these questions we find our-
selves urged to reconstruct our knowledge and to justify its truth-claims
on a basis of observational evidence. Not the origin and psychological
development of knowledge but its logical structure and empirical valida-
tion are the subject of a thus reformed epistemology. The psychology of
knowledge (from the experimental study of discrimination behavior on
the animal level to the scarcely begun investigation of the higher creative
thought processes on the human level) is, after all, only one among the
sciences and, therefore, itself one of the subjects of epistemological analysis.
   As we shall deal with logical and mathematical knowledge somewhat
more fully in the next section, only a few words are necessary to de-
limit it from empirical knowledge. A pair of Kant's distinctions, though
not his philosophy as it elaborates them, are most helpful here. He dis-
tinguished between analytic (i. e., true by definition) and synthetic (i. e.,
factual) sentences and between a priori (i. e., logically independent of ex-
perience) and a posteriori (i. e., empirical) validity. All forms of em-
14                             INTRODUCTION
piricism agree in repudiating the existence of synthetic a priori knowledge.
Here the logical empiricists differ from the pre- and the post-Kantian
rationalists, from Kant and the Xeo-Kantians, as well as from Husserl, the
phenomenologists, and the English intuitionists. Logical Empiricism, with
Hume and Leibniz, places both mathematical knowledge and formal logic
in the class of analytic and hence a priori truth. In this respect, Logical
Empiricism differs from the extreme empiricism of Mill, who considered
mathematics and most of logic synthetic a posteriori. We agree with Mill,
however, in the statement that all factual knowledge depends for its
validity upon confirmation by experience.
   As a consequence of all this, the concept of truth is disclosed to be
ambiguous. In mathematical knowledge truth amounts to accordance
with the formal (syntactical) definitions, the postulates, of the system. In
the factual context it means accordance with the empirical definitions,
the semantical rules. Thus we call a sentence true if its terms are so applied
to fact that none of the designation-rules of the language in question
are violated. Error, whatever its source may be (illusion, misinterpretation
of evidence, or only misspeaking), simply consists in the disrupting of the
one-to-one or many-one correspondence between the terms in the sen-
tence and their referents, i. e., the constituents of the facts described. This
version of the "correspondence" view of truth has none of the psy-
chologistic inadequacies of the earlier "copy" or "picture" versions.
   Yet we are guilty here of one gross oversimplification, if not distortion,
of the actual situation. We presupposed that sentences can simply be con-
fronted with the states of affairs which they claim to represent. At best,
this is the case for the sentences describing facts of direct observation, and
even this has been seriously disputed by many a full-fledged empiricist.
But whatever the status of these basic observational (or "protocol") sen-
tences may be, it is obvious that most of our knowledge, and especially
almost all of the more interesting and important part of it, is highly in-
direct. It is shot through with interpretation, construction, and inference,
and consequently is dependent on very general assumptions. It is
here that empiricism finds itself confronted with what is traditionally
considered to be its greatest problem: the validity of inductive inference
and the meaning of probability. All attempts to "justify" inductive infer-
ence on rational, empirical, intuitive, or probabilistic grounds have turned
out to be utter failures. Hume's critique stands still unshaken. If all a priori
knowledge is analytic, then we cannot deduce a synthetic assertion, like
the principle of the uniformity of nature, from a priori premises. And if we
try to validate induction on the basis of its certainly eminent success in the
past, we are simply making an induction about induction and thus pre-
suppose the very principle we set out to prove. Similarly question-begging
are the intuitive and probabilistic approaches. Both must assume that the
samples of the world immediately experienced or statistically observed are
                          LOGICAL EMPIRICISM                               15
fair samples, thereby relying also on an implicit premise of uniformity. In
the same manner, Kant's ingenious twist of a transcendental deduction
depends tacitly upon the constancy of the categories as embedded in our
mental organization.
   Logical Empiricism cuts the Gordian knot by bluntly asking the question,
"What can 'justification' possibly mean here?" And the surprisingly simple
answer is that the only clear meanings of that term in common life and
science are deductive proof for one thing and exhibition of inductive evi-
dence for another. The "great problem of induction," therefore, consisted
in the impossible demand to justify the very principles of all justification.
If we must have a Principle of Induction, though, it had better be formu-
lated not as a piece of knowledge but as a rule of procedure. As such it
turns out to be a tautology with an added directive appeal: If you wish
to discover reliable laws, you must try, try, and try again to generalize from
a maximum of past experience and as simply as feasible. Then, if there is an
order in nature, not too deeply hidden or too complicated, you will find it.
   In this manner we are able to avoid the skeptical and psychologistic
features of Hume's animal faith doctrine. Anxious to avert metaphysical
pseudo-solutions, Hume concluded with a reductive fallacy by declaring
inductive inference irrational. Here even the illustrious Hume created a
pseudo-problem by a misuse of terms. In ordinary language we call a
person "rational" if he is capable of learning from experience. Thus "ra-
tionality" does not even predominantly mean logicality in the narrower
sense of formal consistency. The procedure of induction, therefore, far
from being irrational, defines the very essence of rationality. The stub-
born but misguided demand to know what we really don't know (or
don't know yet) is perhaps only one of the expressions of an infantile quest
for certainty.
   A very similar, albeit somewhat more complex, group of confusions
underlies the even more hotly argued issues of the reality of the external
world and the existence of other minds. Reductive and seductive tendencies
have dominated the scene here as elsewhere. Phenomenalists and subjective
idealists, who rightly observe that knowledge must remain within the scope
of experience (but note how vague that is), arrive at the conclusion of the
immanence of the world within the human mind. (Any need to emphasize
how absurd that is?) And metaphysical realists on the other hand, soundly
maintaining that human experience is part and parcel of nature (very vague
again), define the relation of subjective experience to the objective world
in such a way that our knowledge of that world becomes something of a
mystery, if not an outright impossibility. This has the logical result of mak-
ing statements about the world by definition incapable of test. Analogous
positions are taken in regard to the existence of "other minds."
   Empirical Realism, held by most logical empiricists, removes the mean-
ingless and the absurd elements from the contending philosophies in order
