                       FREE WILL AS A SCIENTIFIC PROBLEM
                                         David Layzer


                             I. Philosophy and the “basic facts”


According to John Searle1, “the overriding question in contemporary philosophy” is
“How do we fit in?” How can we reconcile “a conception of ourselves as conscious,
intentionalistic, rational, social, institutional, political, speech-act performing, ethical and
free will possessing agents” with “the basic facts,” our present “reasonably well-
established conception of the basic structure of the universe.” As an example of the
tension between our self-conception and the basic facts, Searle cites the problem of
freedom and determinism. He argues that free will is a fact of conscious experience and
that consciousness is a biological phenomenon, a “higher-level biological feature of the
brain” (p. 48). If free will is not an illusion, physical laws and the antecedent state of a
deliberator’s brain cannot determine the outcome of a deliberative process. It follows that
“consciousness is a feature of nature that manifests indeterminism.” Up to this point I
agree with the argument. But now Searle appeals to what he considers to be one of the
“basic facts”: “[W]e know that quantum indeterminism is the only form of indeterminism
that is indisputably established as a fact of nature” (p. 74). So, Searle concludes,
“consciousness manifests quantum indeterminism” (p. 75).
    Although quantum indeterminism is indeed a fact of nature – a feature of our present
scientific description of the world that future advances seem highly unlikely to change –
its origin remains controversial. There is no settled view about how the world that
classical macrophysics describes – a refined version of the world of experience – is
related to quantum microphysics. This paper sketches a novel scientific approach to this
issue and discusses its implications for determinism, the nature of free will, and the
relations between physics and biology and between biology and consciousness. One of
my conclusions will be that for reasons that have little to do with quantum indeterminism
we have the capacity to shape the future through our choices, plans, and actions.




                                                                                               1
                            II. What is quantum indeterminism?


Quantum indeterminism is sometimes thought to imply that processes governed by the
laws of quantum mechanics have indeterminate outcomes. In fact, quantum mechanics’
law of change, Schrödinger’s equation, is deterministic in exactly the same sense as
Newton’s second law of motion: both laws determine how isolated systems – idealized
physical systems that do not interact with the outside world – change with time. Although
quantum mechanics and classical mechanics describe physical states differently, they
agree that the state of an isolated system at any given moment determines its state at any
subsequent moment. Yet quantum mechanics also predicts that certain processes, such as
radioactive decay, have indeterminate outcomes. How does quantum mechanics reconcile
the deterministic character of its law of change with its prediction that the lifetime of an
unstable atomic nucleus is unpredictable in principle?
   The quantum description of the history of an isolated radium nucleus is indeed
deterministic. But the decay of an isolated radium nucleus – an event in the history of an
isolated radium nucleus – is unobservable. What is observable is the result of an
interaction between one of the decay products (in this example, a radon nucleus and a
helium nucleus, or alpha particle) and a macroscopic detector whose construction has
been specified in the language of classical physics. Quantum mechanics predicts that the
measured lifetime of a radium nucleus has different values on different occasions, and it
predicts the probability distribution of measured lifetimes. Experiments confirm these
predictions.
   Quantum indeterminism manifests itself only in processes of this kind: processes in
which a microscopic system initially in a definite quantum state interacts with a classical
measuring apparatus designed to measure one of the microscopic system’s properties. A
quantum measurement leaves the measured system in one of several possible quantum
states and leaves the apparatus in a correlated classical state. For example, each possible
post-measurement state of the quantum system might be correlated with the position of a
pointer. Quantum mechanics predicts both the possible outcomes of such a measurement
and their probabilities.




                                                                                               2
   Could measurement-like processes in the brain mediate exercises of free will? Free
will, as defended by Immanuel Kant, William James, Robert Kane, and John Searle, is
more than the ability to make unforced choices between given alternatives. It is the
capacity to shape future events. Our present understanding of neurophysiology offers
little support for the view that measurement-like processes in the brain underlie choices
that are neither forced nor random. Must we then conclude that our felt capacity to shape
the future through our free choices is an illusion? This dilemma invites a closer look at
how physicists describe quantum indeterminism.




                   III. The standard account of quantum indeterminism


Physical theories are self-contained mathematical structures linked to the results of
possible measurements by auxiliary rules. Newtonian mechanics represents a physical
system’s measurable properties by real variables (i.e., mathematical objects whose
possible values are real numbers). The auxiliary rule that links these variables to the
outcomes of possible measurements identifies the value of each variable either with the
result of an idealized measurement or with the result of a calculation that expresses the
result of the measurement in terms of measurements of other variables such as position
and elapsed time. In this respect, Newtonian descriptions are refined versions of
descriptions in ordinary language.
   The mathematical structure of quantum mechanics is less closely tied to experience.
Quantum mechanics represents an isolated system’s possible physical states by “state
vectors,” vectors of unit length in an abstract multidimensional vector space. It represents
the system’s measurable properties by operators, mathematical objects that act on vectors
in this space. The standard formulation of quantum mechanics2 contains a rule that links
the mathematical description of an isolated physical system to the results of possible
measurements of the system’s properties. This rule, the measurement postulate, equates
the average of “a large number” of measurements of a given property to a quantity that
depends on the operator that represents the measured property and the state vector that
represents the state of the measured system. From this rule and quantum mechanics’


                                                                                            3
mathematical formalism one deduces: (a) that a single measurement does not in general
have a definite outcome; (b) the set of possible outcomes; and (c) the probability
associated with each possible outcome (or range of possible outcomes). Thus quantum
indeterminacy is a consequence not of the mathematical formalism alone but of the
formalism plus a rule that links the mathematical formalism to the results of (ideal)
measurements.
   Experiments leave no room for doubt that the standard formulation of quantum
mechanics is correct. As an instrument for making predictions about the outcomes of
measurements, the standard formulation leaves nothing to be desired. But many
physicists have sought a deeper account of the linkage between quantum physics and
classical physics than that provided by the measurement postulate. This account would
not just postulate that a composite system consisting of a quantum system coupled to a
classical measuring apparatus evolves indeterministically. It would explain why. The
account that emerges from the following discussion implies that contrary to conventional
opinion, quantum indeterminism is not the only form of indeterminism. A variety of
macroscopic processes, I will argue, have indeterminate outcomes; chance is endemic in
the macroscopic domain.




                      IV. Quantum mechanics and classical physics


Quantum mechanics and classical mechanics are closely related. Not only do classical
properties like position, momentum, and energy have quantum counterparts. At a deep
formal level the laws that govern classical properties and their rates of change are
identical with the laws that govern their quantum counterparts. Moreover, the domains in
which classical mechanics and quantum mechanics are valid overlap. For example, the
classical description of an electron circling a proton approximates the quantum
description of an electron in a hydrogen atom when the electron’s angular momentum
(the product of its momentum and the radius of its circular orbit) greatly exceeds Planck’s
constant. The formal similarity between quantum and classical mechanics and the overlap
between their domains have motivated many attempts over many years to formulate


                                                                                         4
quantum mechanics in a way that includes classical mechanics as a limiting case. That
these attempts have not yet been completely successful is due largely to a central feature
of quantum mechanics: the principle of superposition.
   To illustrate the principle, consider a free electron. Because its position coordinates
are represented by operators in an abstract vector space, they do not have definite values
at a given moment. The electron could, however, be in a state in which its measured
position was almost certain to lie inside a small sphere S. It could also be in a different
state, in which its measured position was almost certain to lie inside a different, non-
overlapping sphere S′ arbitrarily distant from S. Call the state vectors that represent these
two states U and V. The principle of superposition says that any linear combination of
these state vectors, aU + bV, represents a possible state, where a and b are complex
numbers whose squared magnitudes add up to 1. States represented by such state vectors
have no classical analogue; a point-like particle cannot be in two non-overlapping regions
at the same time. Of course, quantum mechanics (which includes the measurement
postulate) does not claim that they can be. It predicts (and experiments confirm) that
when an electron is in a superposition of the states U and V its measured position will
either be a point in S or a point in S′. It also predicts the probabilities of these outcomes:
they are the squared magnitudes of the coefficients a and b.
   The domain of quantum mechanics has no clearly defined boundary. Nothing in the
mathematical formalism indicates that it applies only to small or simple systems. Let us
therefore assume, as most physicists do and as I will do, that the domain of quantum
mechanics includes macroscopic systems. In other words, let us assume that an isolated
macroscopic system has a set of possible quantum states and that it is in one of these
states. Now assume that the measuring apparatus in a quantum measurement, which is
necessarily a macroscopic system, is initially in a definite quantum state and that the
combined system (measured system + measuring apparatus) remains isolated during the
measurement. Then, as John von Neumann, showed in 1932, an ideal measurement
would cause the state vector of the combined system to evolve into a superposition of
state vectors each of which represents one of the measurement’s possible outcomes as
given by the measurement postulate; and the probability of each outcome, as given by the




                                                                                                 5
measurement postulate, would coincide with the squared magnitude of the coefficient of
the corresponding state vector in the superposition.
   But a quantum measurement does not, as this account predicts, produce a
superposition of outcome states. It produces just one of them. To bring his account into
agreement with the measurement postulate (and experiment), von Neumann postulated
that the predicted superposition of outcome states no sooner forms than it collapses
unpredictably onto one of them, with a probability given by the squared magnitude of the
coefficient of the corresponding state vector in the superposition. (This hypothetical
process is called the collapse, or reduction, of the state vector.)
   Now, superpositions do not collapse in other physical contexts. Every quantum state
of a composite system AB made up of interacting quantum systems A and B is a
superposition of states in each of which A is in a definite quantum state and B is in a
correlated quantum state; and such superpositions never collapse. They are a ubiquitous
(as well as distinctive) feature of quantum descriptions. Their existence has been
experimentally confirmed on innumerable occasions. What, then, distinguishes quantum
measurements from other physical processes governed by quantum laws? Here are three
answers that have been offered by physicists:
   1. Eugene Wigner3 once argued that what distinguishes quantum measurements from
other physical processes is that a quantum measurement necessarily involves
consciousness, for it is completed only when an observer becomes aware of its outcome.
And it is at that point that our knowledge of the state of the combined system (measured
system + measuring apparatus) changes in a way not governed by Schrödinger’s
deterministic law of change:


   In other words, the impression which one gains at an interaction [between an
   observer and a physical system], called also the result of an observation, modifies
   the wave function of the system. The modified wave function is, furthermore, in
   general unpredictable before the impression gained at the interaction has entered
   our consciousness: it is the entering of an impression into our consciousness
   which alters the wave function ... . It is at this point that consciousness enters the
   theory unavoidably and unalterably (pp. 175-6).


                                                                                            6
    Wigner regarded the argument summarized in the preceding passage as the weaker of
two arguments “support[ing] the existence of an influence of … consciousness on the
physical world” (p. 181).” The stronger argument “is based on the observation that we do
not know of any phenomenon in which one subject is influence by another without
exerting an influence thereupon.” I will return to the question of how consciousness fits
into a scientific description of the world later in this essay.
    2. Wigner4 later defended an instrumental interpretation of quantum mechanics.


    It appears that the statistical nature of the outcome of a measurement is a basic
    postulate, that the function of quantum mechanics is not to describe some
    “reality,” whatever this term means, but only to furnish statistical correlations
    between [an observation and] subsequent observations. This assessment reduces
    the state vector to a calculational tool, an important and useful tool, but not a
    representation of “reality.”


Many if not most contemporary physicists agree with this view. It provides a
philosophical justification for the standard formulation, preempting the question “Why
does the state vector collapse?”
    3. Hugh Everett III5 postulated that the domain of quantum mechanics includes all
physical systems up to and including the physical universe. He argued that we should
identify the measuring apparatus in a quantum measurement with the universe minus the
measured system. Von Neumann’s account then predicts that a quantum measurement
creates a superposition of quantum states of the universe. But since quantum mechanics is
universally valid, this superposition never collapses. Its components represent
macroscopically distinguishable, coexistent states of the universe, all equally real.
    Several contemporary cosmological theories incorporate Everett’s assumption that
quantum mechanics is universally valid. All of these theories raise Searle’s question
“How do we fit in?” with a vengeance. For in that question “we” now means not just “we
humans” but more broadly “the world that classical physics describes.” So far as I know,
that question has not yet been satisfactorily answered. We lack a physical theory that


                                                                                            7
postulates the universal validity of quantum mechanics and contains classical physics and
general relativity, the classical (and strongly confirmed) theory of the physical universe
and of the structure of space-time, as limiting cases.




                 V. Microphysics and macrophysics: statistical mechanics


The measurement postulate and von Neumann’s collapse postulate serve in different
ways to bridge the gap between microphysics and macrophysics. The gap itself predates
quantum mechanics by almost two and a half centuries. In the Principia Newton, a
convinced atomist, proposed a molecular model of air to account for Robert Boyle’s
empirical law relating the pressure and the volume of an enclosed sample of air. He
attributed the fact that an isolated sample of air expands to fill any enclosure, no matter
how capacious, to a hypothetical repulsive force between neighboring air molecules.
   In 1738 Daniel Bernoulli proposed a much simpler molecular model. He assumed that
the hypothetical air molecules travel freely between relatively short-lived collisions.
When a molecule bounces off a wall it transfers momentum to the wall, in accordance
with Newton’s second and third laws of motion. Averaged over many molecular impacts
and over a macroscopic time interval, the result is a steady pressure. This model, like
Newton’s, predicted that the pressure a gas sample exerts on the walls of its container is
inversely proportional to its volume. But it does more. If one identifies the average
kinetic energy of a gas molecule with the gas temperature, as was done a century later,
Bernoulli’s formula for gas pressure includes the remaining empirical gas laws as well as
Avogadro’s hypothesis.
   These successes were gratifying – but also, in one respect, surprising. A macroscopic
sample of air has a vast number of microscopic degrees of freedom – six for every
molecule in the sample. Yet it seems to have only two macroscopic degrees of freedom:
experiments show that the values of two macroscopic properties of the sample, such as its
temperature and its pressure, determine all of its measurable properties. In two papers,
published in 1860 and 1866, James Clerk Maxwell explained why. He argued that
molecular collisions, governed by Newton’s laws of motion, cause the distribution of


                                                                                              8
molecular velocities in an isolated gas sample to evolve toward a unique equilibrium
distribution that depends on a single parameter, the average molecular kinetic energy.
Rudolf Clausius and others had earlier identified this quantity with the gas temperature.
Experiments show that a gas sample that is well insulated from its surroundings does
indeed quickly relax into a state whose macroscopic properties are averages of
appropriate molecular properties over the Maxwell distribution of molecular velocities.
   In 1872 Ludwig Boltzmann extended Maxwell’s theory. Maxwell had studied the
distribution of molecular velocity in a uniform gas sample; Boltzmann studied the joint
distribution of molecular position and momentum in (possibly) nonuniform gas samples,
and derived a mathematical law – his transport equation – that governs changes in this
distribution produced by molecular collisions. Boltzmann also discovered a statistical
counterpart of entropy6 and proved that in a uniform gas sample it increases
monotonically until it reaches the largest value that is consistent with the combined
energy of the molecules in the sample. The distribution of molecular velocities then
becomes the Maxwell distribution. This counterpart to the law of entropy growth is
known as Boltzmann’s H theorem. Its proof depends in part on the fact that a Newtonian
description of an encounter between two molecules doesn’t change when one reverses the
direction of the time axis.
   The Maxwell-Boltzmann theory applies to samples of an ideal gas. It predicts that
molecular collisions cause an isolated sample an ideal gas to relax into a state in which its
molecules are uniformly distributed within the enclosure and have a Maxwell velocity
distribution. This state is the counterpart of thermodynamic equilibrium. Relations
between appropriate molecular properties, averaged over the distribution of molecular
position and velocity, mirror relations between thermodynamic quantities that prevail in
thermodynamic equilibrium.
   In 1901 Josiah Willard Gibbs published a more general statistical theory of
thermodynamic equilibrium. It applies to any system of N particles whose motions and
interactions are governed by Newton’s laws. Gibbs characterized the macrostates of such
a system by probability distributions of its microstates, each specified by a set of 6N real
numbers, the three position coordinates and three momentum components of each of the
system’s N particles. As Maxwell and Boltzmann had done, he identified the system’s


                                                                                               9
macroscopic properties with mean values of appropriate microscopic properties. In
particular, he identified entropy with statistical entropy as given by Boltzmann’s formula.
He proved that the statistical entropy of his “canonical distribution” – a generalization of
the Maxwell molecular-velocity distribution – exceeds that of any other distribution with
the same mean micro-energy. He also proved that the statistical entropy of any N-particle
distribution of microstates of an isolated system is constant in time.
   Gibbs’s theory, which he called statistical mechanics, requires only small formal
changes7 when one uses quantum mechanics rather than classical mechanics to describe
microstates. So modified, it reproduces all the laws of equilibrium thermodynamics and
goes far beyond it. Like the standard formulation of quantum mechanics it leaves nothing
to be desired as an instrument for making predictions about measurement outcomes. Also
like the standard formulation of quantum mechanics it raises questions that fall in an area
where physics and philosophy overlap. One of these questions concerns the interpretation
of probability.
   The probability distributions that figure in Maxwell’s and Boltzmann’s statistical
theories represent relative frequencies: we can identify the probability that the position
coordinates and momentum components of a gas molecule lie in given ranges with the
fraction, or proportion, of gas molecules in a macroscopic sample whose position
coordinates and momentum components lie in these ranges at a given moment. Since a
macroscopic sample contains a vast number of molecules, this interpretation is virtually
exact. But how are we to interpret the probability distributions of microstates that
characterize macrostates in Gibbs’s theory?
   Gibbs imagined a large or infinite collection of replicas of the macroscopic system,
each in a definite microstate. He identified the probability associated with a given range
of microstates with the fraction of the imaginary replicas whose microstates lie in that
range. Recognizing that relative frequencies in an imaginary collection are just as abstract
as the probabilities they represent, Gibbs referred to his statistical descriptions as
analogues of thermodynamics. But because, as I have mentioned, quantum statistical
mechanics not only duplicates the predictions of thermodynamics but also goes well
beyond them, it is presumably the more fundamental theory. And if that is the case, the




                                                                                             10
probability distributions that represent macrostates in quantum statistical mechanics need
a physical interpretation.
   The most obvious possibility is to suppose that the isolated macroscopic system
whose equilibrium macrostates are characterized by a probability distribution of
microstates is actually in one of these microstates. The probability distribution then
represents an observer’s limited knowledge of the system’s microstate:


    [M]acroscopic observers, such as we are, are under no circumstances capable of
   observing, let alone measuring, the microscopic dynamic state of a system which
   involves the determination of an enormous number of parameters, of the order of
   1023. ... [Thus] a whole ensemble of possible dynamical states corresponds to the
   same macroscopic state, compatible with our knowledge.8


   E. T. Jaynes carried this interpretation a step further. He argued that “statistical
mechanics [is] a form of statistical inference rather than a physical theory.” Its
“computational rules are an immediate consequence of the maximum-entropy principle,”
which yields “the best estimates that could have been made on the basis of the
information available” 9 On this view, the statistical entropy of a probability distribution
that represents an isolated system’s equilibrium macrostate represents physicists’ lack of
information about the system’s microstate; and Gibbs’s theorem that the statistical
entropy of the canonical distribution exceeds that of any other distribution subject to the
same constraints exemplifies the principle of maximum-entropy inference.
   Werner Heisenberg interpreted statistical mechanics in much the same way. He also
linked physicists’ incomplete knowledge of the microstructure of macroscopic systems
(and, more generally, of the world) to their inability to predict the outcomes of quantum
measurements:


   [The interaction between a measured quantum system and a measuring device]
   introduces a new element of uncertainty, since the measuring device is necessarily
   described in terms of classical physics; such a description contains all the
   uncertainties concerning the microscopic structure of the device which we know


                                                                                           11
   from thermodynamics, and since the device is connected with the rest of the
   world, it contains in fact the uncertainties of the microscopic structure of the
   whole world. These uncertainties may be called objective in so far as they are
   simply a consequence of the description in terms of classical physics and do not
   depend on any observer. They may be called subjective in so far as they refer to
   our incomplete knowledge of the world.10


   Another version of the epistemic interpretation of probability distributions in
equilibrium statistical mechanics begins with the remark that every macroscopic system
interacts weakly with its surroundings. This interaction causes the system to visit a range
of microstates with nearly the same energy. One then identifies the probability that the
system’s actual (but unknown) microstate lies in a given range of microstates with the
relative frequency with which the system’s microstate visits this range; see, for example,
Schrödinger,11 Landau and Lifshitz,12 and Feynman,13
   In contrast with these epistemic interpretations, I will argue that probability
distributions of microstates, viewed in a particular cosmological context, characterize
macrostates completely. This view does not assume that macroscopic systems are “really”
in definite – however short-lived – microstates. Thus it is a variety of what Lawrence
Sklar14 in his insightful account of the foundations of equilibrium and non-equilibrium
statistical mechanics calls “tychism.”




                    VI. Microphysics and macrophysics: time’s arrow


Whereas equilibrium statistical mechanics fully reproduce the mathematical laws of
equilibrium thermodynamics, statistical theories that describe how systems initially in
non-equilibrium states relax into equilibrium run into two problems. These are
exemplified by Boltzmann’s transport equation, which governs changes in the joint
probability distribution of molecular position and momentum resulting from molecular
collisions in an isolated gas sample. Boltzmann proved that these changes have a one-
way character. They cause the statistical entropy of this probability distribution to


                                                                                           12
increase monotonically toward the largest value that is consistent with the sample’s mean
energy per molecule; and this value characterizes the equilibrium distribution
(Boltzmann’s H theorem). Two questions now arise. 1. How can molecular interactions
governed by Newton’s time-reversal-invariant laws of motion give rise to one-way
macroscopic behavior? 2. How can the growth of molecular statistical entropy be
reconciled with Gibbs’s proof that the statistical entropy of the joint N- particle
probability distribution (for an isolated system of N particles) is constant in time?
   The source of directionality in Boltzmann’s derivation of his transport equation isn’t
hard to spot. Following Maxwell, Boltzmann assumed that the incoming velocities of
colliding molecules are statistically uncorrelated. That is, he assumed that the joint
probability distribution of the incoming velocities of the collision partners is the product
of the individual probability distributions. Now, Newton’s laws of motion imply that the
combined energy and the combined momentum of colliding molecules have the same
values before and after a collision. So if the incoming velocities of the collision partners
are uncorrelated, their outgoing velocities must be correlated. Boltzmann’s derivation
assumes, however, that molecular correlations are permanently absent. This assumption
cannot be true for an isolated gas sample. Even if molecular correlations were absent
initially, they would subsequently be produced by molecular collisions.
   Yet Boltzmann’s equation enjoys strong experimental support. Not only does it
include as special cases the phenomenological laws that govern such irreversible
processes as heat flow, molecular diffusion, and viscous dissipation of relative fluid
motions, it also enables one to express the coefficients that figure in these laws in terms
of quantities that characterize molecular properties, molecular motions, and molecular
interactions.15 Predictions based on Boltzmann’s equation have passed all experimental
tests with flying colors.
   Boltzmann’s statistical theory belongs to a large class of statistical theories that
describe irreversible processes and that contain counterparts to his H theorem. Van
Kampen16 has pointed out that these theories all depend on “repeated randomness
assumptions,” analogous to Boltzmann’s assumption that molecular correlations are
permanently absent; Sklar, in the book cited in Note 14, calls them “rerandomization
posits.” What justifies them?


                                                                                           13
    Prigogine has argued that subjective justifications are implausible:


    [In Boltzmann’s theory] irreversibility comes from supplementary
    phenomenological or subjectivist assumptions, from ‘mistakes.’ But how can we
    account for the wealth of important results and concepts that derive from the
    second law? In a sense living things, we ourselves, are then ‘mistakes.’ 17


Prigogine and his collaborators have argued that macroscopic irreversibility must be
rooted in irreversible microscopic laws that underlie quantum mechanics in its present
form.
    A more modest suggestion justifies repeated-randomness assumptions by an appeal to
environmental interactions. Experimental physicists can effectively prevent an enclosed
gas sample from exchanging matter or energy with the outside world. But they cannot
prevent the leakage of information associated with molecular correlations. For if the
molecules that make up the walls of the enclosure have a maximally random probability
distribution (i.e., a probability distribution whose statistical entropy is as large as
possible), collisions between gas molecules and wall molecules create statistical
correlations between wall molecules and gas molecules and attenuate correlations
between gas molecules, thus preventing them from building up to a point where they
invalidate the assumption that the incoming velocities of colliding molecules are
statistically uncorrelated.
    The assumptions that enclosed gas samples initially lack molecular correlations and
are embedded in random environments, which wick away correlation information,
exemplify an approach that J. M. Blatt18 and others have called “interventionism.” Blatt
constructed a mathematical model that allowed him to estimate the rate at which random
interactions between an enclosed gas sample and the walls of its container destroys
correlation information. He noted that interventionism had not been a popular approach:


    There is a common feeling that it should not be necessary to introduce the wall of
    the system in so explicit a fashion. ... Furthermore, it is considered unacceptable
    philosophically, and somewhat “unsporting,” to introduce an explicit source of


                                                                                           14
   randomness and stochastic behavior directly into the basic equations. Statistical
   mechanics is felt to be a part of mechanics, and as such one should be able to start
   from purely causal behavior [p. 747].


Sklar, in the book cited in Note 14, gave a more detailed critique of interventionism.
Shenker19 responded to this critique and offered a qualified defense of interventionism.
   The physical problems broached by interventionism are (a) to supply objective
definitions of “randomness” and “correlation information” and (b) to justify the
assumption that macroscopic systems are initially deficient in correlation information and
are embedded in random environments. I will address these problems in due course.
   Interventionist theories of irreversibility in statistical mechanics are analogous to
decoherence theories of quantum measurement.20 As emphasized by Niels Bohr, the
measuring apparatus in a quantum measurement is necessarily a macroscopic system, and
the registration of a measurement outcome is an irreversible macroscopic process.
Decoherence calculations show how interaction between the combined system in a
quantum measurement and a random environment, such as a dilute gas or a radiation
field, effectively randomizes the relative phases of the coefficients in the superposition
predicted by von Neumann’s account of an ideal measurement. Decoherence calculations
explain why the superposition of macroscopically distinguishable quantum states
predicted by that account cannot exhibit effects analogous to interference between light
waves in diffraction experiments.21 But as Erich Joos and Hans-Dieter Zeh emphasized in
a classic paper22 on decoherence and quantum measurement, decoherence alone does not
explain why quantum measurements have definite outcomes.
   Interventionism resolves the apparent contradiction between Gibbs’s theorem that the
statistical entropy of the N-particle distribution is constant in time and Boltzmann’s
theorem that the statistical entropy of an initially non-equilibrium one-particle
distribution increases monotonically with time:


   If (and only if) molecular correlations are absent, the N-particle distribution reduces
   to a product of identical one-particle distributions, and the statistical entropy of the N-




                                                                                             15
    particle distribution becomes N times the statistical entropy of the one-particle
    distribution.


    It is easy to prove that if molecular correlations are present (so that the N-particle
    distribution does not reduce to a product of identical one-particle distributions), the
    statistical entropy of the N-particle distribution (call it SN) is less than N times the
    statistical entropy S1 of the one-particle distribution. The difference represents
    correlation information: I correlation = NS1 − SN . Since SN is constant in time, the growth

    of correlation information requires that the one-particle statistical entropy S1 to
    increase with time, as Boltzmann inferred from his transport equation.


If correlation information is initially absent, it is created by molecular encounters, and the
one-particle statistical entropy increases. This state of affairs continues to prevail if the
gas sample under consideration interacts weakly with a random environment that wicks
away correlation information and disperses it to the wider universe.




                              VII. The relevance of cosmology


Much of physics treats systems whose interaction with the rest of the universe is either
negligible or can be described in a simple way. As Heisenberg reminded his readers in
the essay I have been quoting,


    [I]t is important to remember that in natural science we are not interested in the
    universe as a whole, including ourselves, but we direct our attention to some part
    of the universe and make that the object of our study [p. 52]



But as Zeh23 has pointed out, we cannot consistently assume that macroscopic systems
are truly isolated; we must allow for their interaction with their surroundings. And once
we do that, we find ourselves on a slippery slope.


                                                                                                16
   Zeh’s argument is straightforward. An isolated system is in a definite quantum state.
But the possible quantum states of a macroscopic system are so closely spaced in energy
that they must be “entangled” with the quantum states of the part of the environment with
which the system interacts.24 The same argument applies to every bounded part of the
environment. So – this is the slippery slope – if quantum mechanics applies on all scales,
the quantum states of any macroscopic system must be entangled with quantum states of
the rest of the universe. This conclusion forms the starting point of many-worlds
interpretations of quantum mechanics, beginning with Everett’s “relative state”
interpretation.
   But if we accept the conclusion that the universe is in a definite quantum state, we
face the (unsolved) problem of explaining how the world of classical physics, which
includes the world of experience, fits in. We also face the problem of explaining how
Einstein’s theory of space, time, and gravitation – general relativity – fits in. A theory
that included quantum mechanics and general relativity as limiting cases would, of
course, solve that problem; but such a theory doesn’t yet exist. Nevertheless, many
physicists postulate that quantum mechanics does apply at all scales and that the universe
is in a definite quantum state.
   The relation between quantum mechanics and classical physics is problematic in
another respect. Quantum mechanics and general relativity enjoy overwhelming
observational and experimental support in their respective domains. But their domains
overlap. And this poses a problem. General relativity is a classical, deterministic theory;
but quantum measurements can produce unpredictable macroscopic changes in the
structure of space-time. How can these apparently contradictory features of our two most
fundamental theories be reconciled?
   As I have discussed, many physicists postulate that quantum mechanics is universally
valid. They hope and expect that general relativity will one day be shown to be a limiting
case of a quantum theory of gravity. Einstein, by contrast, hoped that quantum mechanics
would one day be found to be a limiting case of a deeper deterministic field theory – a
hope shared by few contemporary physicists.
   I will suggest a third way. We do not yet have a unified set of mathematical laws that
includes the laws of quantum mechanics and the field equations of general relativity as


                                                                                             17
limiting cases. But I will sketch a theory of initial and boundary conditions that makes
quantum mechanics and general relativity compatible in their shared domain. At the same
time it offers solutions to the quantum measurement problem and the problem of time’s
arrow. The framework of the proposed theory of initial and boundary conditions is a
version of relativistic cosmology. It unites but does not unify quantum mechanics and
general relativity, showing that they coexist peaceably in their common domain.




                 VIII. Relativistic cosmology: the cosmological principle


Newton speculated that the stars were distant suns uniformly distributed throughout an
infinite Euclidean space. But because his theory of gravitation does not apply to an
infinite, unbounded distribution of mass, he was unable to formulate a mathematical
theory based on this idea. Before formulating his generalization of Newton’s theory,
general relativity, Einstein had hoped that it would fill this gap, and soon after completing
the theory, in 1915, he tried to apply it to an idealized model of the universe: a uniform,
unbounded, pressure-free, static medium. He found that his field equations had no
solution that satisfied these conditions, and in 1917 he suggested a modification of his
1915 field equations that allowed them to have a static solution. Five years later
Alexander Friedmann showed that while the original field equations do not have static
solutions, they do have non-static solutions, in which space and its contents undergo a
uniform expansion from (or towards) a singular state of infinite mass density.
   In 1929 Edwin Hubble announced that the most distant galaxies whose distances and
line-of-sight velocities could then be measured were systematically25 receding from Earth
at speeds proportional to their distances; they were taking part in a uniform expansion,
just as Friedmann, unbeknownst to Hubble, had predicted. Modern observations of
galaxies and of the cosmic microwave background, discovered in 1965, support this
conclusion.
   To estimate the distances of distant galaxies, Hubble assumed that they and their
stellar populations have the same statistical properties as nearby galaxies and stellar
populations. (This enabled him to use distance criteria calibrated on objects close enough


                                                                                           18
to have measurable parallaxes.) The cosmological principle, the starting point for
conventional cosmological theories, is a generalization of Hubble’s assumption (which he
called the principle of uniformity). It says that there is a system of spacetime coordinates
relative to which no statistical property of the universe at a given moment serves to
define a preferred position or direction in space.
   Physicists usually study idealized models of real physical systems. They take it for
granted that the initial and boundary conditions that characterize these models hold only
approximately. Galileo assumed that the effects of air resistance on the motions of falling
and sliding objects masked simple and exact mathematical laws, and in his experiments
he took pains to minimize these effects. Astrophysicists know that stars rotate and are
chemically inhomogeneous; but they begin by idealizing them as chemically
homogeneous, nonrotating gas spheres. In the same spirit one might – and many
physicists do – regard the cosmological principle as characterizing a class of simplified
models of the universe. By contrast, the following considerations take as their starting
point the assumption that the cosmological principle is an exact symmetry of the initial
conditions that characterize the universe (as it is of all our present physical laws). I
assume further that a statistical description that enjoys this symmetry cannot be
augmented by nonstatistical information. In this sense a statistical description that
comports with the assumption (which I will refer to as the strong cosmological principle)
is complete.
   A Newtonian universe cannot satisfy the strong cosmological principle. Consider, for
example, a statistically uniform distribution of free particles. A complete Newtonian
description of such a distribution at a given moment would specify the distance between
every particle and its nearest neighbor. Thus it would assign every particle a real number
– the instantaneous distance of its nearest neighboring particle. But the number of
particles (and pairs of nearest neighbors) is at most countably infinite. So if the
distribution is random, there is zero probability that two of these real numbers coincide.
Every particle is uniquely situated with respect to its neighbors.
   In contrast, it follows from Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle that quantum
mechanics assigns any bounded region of a uniform distribution of free particles a finite
number of quantum states, provided the particles’ momenta (or energies) are also


                                                                                            19
bounded. Suppose the distribution is infinitely extended, as comparisons between
astronomical observations and refined versions of Friedmann’s cosmological models
indicate, and that all its statistical properties are uniform. Then with probability one, any
given bounded region will have infinitely many replicas in the same quantum state. It
follows that any two realizations of the same (uniform) statistical description are finitely
indistinguishable in the sense that any bounded region of one realization has infinitely
many exact matches in any other realization. This conclusion and its supporting argument
can easily be extended to any statistical description of an infinite universe that satisfies
the cosmological principle. In effect, a statistical description of an infinite universe that
does not privilege any point or direction in space has a single realization.




                    IX. The growth of order and the growth of entropy


Extrapolating the present state of the (observable) universe backward in time, one arrives
at an era when, at each moment, the cosmic medium closely approximates a mixture of
free particles in thermal and chemical equilibrium.26 The relative concentrations of
particle kinds in thermodynamic equilibrium depend on the mass density and the
temperature. As the medium expands, its mass density and its temperature decrease. At
sufficiently early times the rates of equilibrium-maintaining particle reactions greatly
exceed the rate at which the mass density and the temperature are changing, so particle
reactions are able to maintain equilibrium at the instantaneous values of the mass density
and the temperature. Now, particle reaction rates and the rate at which space is expanding
both decrease with decreasing mass density; but the expansion rate decreases more
slowly. Eventually the particle reactions tasked with maintaining the relative
concentrations of particle kinds appropriate to chemical equilibrium at the instantaneous
mass density and temperature become unable to do so, and the relative abundances of
helium and some other light elements become frozen in.27
   If we define the statistical information of a probability distribution as the amount by
which the distribution’s statistical entropy falls short of its largest allowed value, then the
process just described – nucleogenesis – creates information – specifically, chemical


                                                                                               20
information. Much later, thermonuclear reactions in the core of the Sun degrade some of
this information when they burn hydrogen into helium. Some of the energy released by
these reactions is converted into sunlight, which drives the biological processes that
sustain life on Earth.
   The expansion also creates structural information. Self-gravitating astronomical
systems could not have existed at the high mass densities that prevailed when helium and
light nuclei were formed. They must have come into being later in the cosmic expansion.
There is no consensus about how this happened. On one scenario28 an initially cold
cosmic medium solidifies as metallic hydrogen.29 As the expansion continues, the
medium breaks up into fragments whose cohesion energies are approximately equal to
their gravitational binding energies. These fragments, the first self-gravitating systems,
are less massive by one or two orders of magnitude than the giant planets. At this stage
the cosmic medium is a cold “gas” whose “particles” are solid-hydrogen fragments.
Because the “particles” are randomly distributed, the gas’s internal energy contains a
negative contribution associated with the fluctuating part of their local gravitational
interactions as well as a positive contribution due to the particle motions relative to the
expanding background produced by the fluctuating local gravitational field. Initially these
contributions are equal, but the expansion attenuates the positive contribution faster than
the negative contribution, so that eventually small self-gravitating clusters of “particles”
separate out as self-gravitating systems. These newly formed self-gravitating systems
now take over the role of particles, and the process – gravitational clustering – continues,
giving rise to self-gravitating systems on progressively larger scales.
   This scenario predicts that the initial binding energy per unit mass of a self-
gravitating system is proportional to the one-third power of the system’s mass.
Astronomical measurements are consistent with the predicted relation over a range of
masses that extends from giant planets and their satellites to rich galaxy clusters –
eighteen powers of ten.
   The assumption that the early universe was cold, first suggested by Zel’dovich in
1962, conflicts with the standard interpretation of the cosmic microwave background as a
relic of a primordial radiation-dominated phase of cosmic evolution, the hot big bang.
The standard interpretation accounts for some observed features of the cosmic microwave


                                                                                              21
background. The cold-universe scenario, in contrast, interprets the cosmic microwave
background as thermalized radiation from an early generation of supermassive stars.30
   Self-gravitating systems evolve toward states of dynamical equilibrium, in which the
cohesive effect of gravity balance the disruptive effect of internal motions. But these
states differ radically from states of thermodynamic equilibrium. Consider, for example, a
self-gravitating gas cloud of nearly uniform temperature. As the cloud loses energy by
radiation, it contracts and its temperature increases. Thus a self-gravitating gas cloud in
dynamical equilibrium has negative heat capacity. (By contrast, a system in
thermodynamic equilibrium necessarily has positive heat capacity.) As the cloud evolves
it departs progressively further from the featureless state of thermodynamic equilibrium:
a radial temperature gradient develops and heat flows outward from the center. If the core
temperature becomes high enough, thermonuclear reactions produce a radial gradient of
chemical composition.
   Of course, the local macroscopic processes that take place in a self-gravitating gas
cloud – the transfer of heat from the cloud to its cooler surroundings, the flow of heat
down the steepening radial temperature gradient, the thermonuclear reactions in the
cloud’s core – all generate entropy. But these entropy-generating processes drive the
cloud and its surroundings away from global thermodynamic equilibrium.
   Thus in bounded self-gravitating systems, as in the expanding cosmic medium,
gravity opposes the macroscopic processes that seek to establish thermodynamic
equilibrium.




                        X. Entropy and the law of entropy growth


If thermodynamic equilibrium prevails locally in a self-gravitating system, one can define
the system’s entropy as the sum of the entropies of its infinitesimal parts. The law of
entropy growth then applies to an expanding universe composed of self-gravitating
systems and radiation. But one cannot infer from this extended law of entropy growth
that the universe is tending toward the unchanging, featureless state of global
thermodynamic equilibrium (“heat death”) envisioned by Clausius and Kelvin in the mid-


                                                                                           22
nineteenth century, because as discussed above, the expansion of the cosmic medium and
the contraction of bounded self-gravitating systems drive local conditions away from
thermodynamic equilibrium.
   Clausius extrapolated the law of energy conservation and the law of entropy growth
(the first and second laws of thermodynamics) from macroscopic systems and processes
to the universe as a whole. Neither extrapolation is valid.
   The law of energy conservation does not apply in the uniformly expanding space
predicted by Friedmann’s cosmological solutions to Einstein’s field equations. For
example, if the cosmic medium is a uniform ideal gas, the theory predicts that every
particle slows down relative to its local standard of rest; its momentum and its kinetic
energy both decrease as the medium expands. The energy of an ideal-gas sample likewise
decreases with time, though it does no work on its surroundings.
   The thermodynamic law of entropy growth applies in a much narrower domain than
the law of energy conservation: Clausius’s definition of entropy applies only to systems
in local thermodynamic equilibrium. Boltzmann’s definition of statistical entropy is far
more general. Statistical entropy is a property of the probability distribution of
microstates that characterizes a macrostate. And if such probability distributions have an
objective character, as I argue below, statistical entropy is just as objective as
thermodynamic entropy. Yet Boltzmann’s H theorem cannot be viewed as an instance of
a universal law, because its derivation depends on the assumption that information
associated with molecular correlations is permanently absent. This assumption in turn
follows from an initial condition (that correlation information is absent), a boundary
condition (that nominally isolated gas samples actually interact with random
environments), and a plausible but not rigorous physical argument (that correlation
information flows from a sample to its random environment). As mentioned above,
analogues of Boltzmann’s H theorem for other macroscopic systems rely on analogous
initial and boundary conditions and an analogous argument about the role of the
environment.
   Because experiments confirm the predictions of Boltzmann’s H theorem and its
analogues, we can infer that the initial and boundary conditions on which the derivations
of these theorems rest are ordinarily satisfied: the probability distributions that


                                                                                           23
characterize macrostates of newly formed – or newly prepared – macroscopic systems
ordinarily lack correlation information; and these systems ordinarily have random
surroundings. These initial and boundary conditions have a quasi-universal character.
They are ordinarily but not necessarily satisfied.
   E. L. Hahn’s spin echo experiment31 shows that when appropriate kinds of
   correlation information are present initially and are sufficiently resistant to
   degradation by random interactions, a random distribution of microstates can
   evolve into a highly nonrandom distribution. The microstates in question are
   orientations of magnetic moments of nuclei in a macroscopic liquid sample. The
   sample is in an applied magnetic field whose direction is the same throughout the
   sample but whose magnitude has a small position-dependent random component.
   The state of the collection of magnetic moments is characterized by the joint
   distribution of their orientations and positions. The collection is prepared in a
   state in which the magnetic moments are all accurately parallel (or antiparallel) to
   a direction perpendicular to the direction of the applied magnetic field. The joint
   distribution of orientations and positions then contains a large quantity of
   orientation information and virtually no information associated with orientation-
   position correlations. The magnetic field exerts a torque on each magnetic
   moment, causing it to rotate in a plane perpendicular to the direction of the field.
   Owing to the random component of the applied field, the magnetic moments
   rotate at slightly different rates, gradually getting out of alignment. During this
   part of the experiment orientation information is converted into correlation
   information. Eventually the orientations of the magnetic moments are randomly
   distributed in directions perpendicular to the direction of the applied magnetic
   field; the orientation information that was present initially has all been converted
   into correlation information. In a gas sample, correlation information produced by
   the decay of single-particle information is quickly dispersed by molecular
   interactions. In the spin echo experiment it remains localized and is amenable to
   experimental manipulation. An ingenious experimental intervention now reverses
   the flow of information, converting the correlation information back into
   orientation information. The process just described – the conversion of orientation


                                                                                          24
   information into correlation information and back again into orientation
   information – is accompanied by the ordinary entropic decay of single-particle
   information through particle-particle interactions, but on a time scale significantly
   longer than that of the “anti-entropic” process.

   To sum up, I have argued that the thermodynamic law of entropy growth does not
apply beyond its original domain: isolated macroscopic systems in local (or global)
equilibrium. In particular, it does not apply to self-gravitating systems. Boltzmann’s
transport equation, his H theorem, and their generalizations (master equations,
generalized H theorems) apply to macroscopic systems that are not in local
thermodynamic equilibrium, but they, too, are not laws. They rest on initial and boundary
conditions that are ordinarily, but not necessarily, satisfied by both natural and prepared
systems. This, I will now argue, is a consequence of the simplest account of the structure
and evolution of the universe that is consistent with our most fundamental and most
highly confirmed physical laws.




              XI. Initial and boundary conditions; the prevalence of chance


The initial and boundary conditions that characterize physical systems are products of
historical processes. We can think of these processes as episodes in a history of the
physical universe. Of course, we are not yet able to construct, or even sketch, a complete
history of the physical universe. The fragmentary history I propose rests on two
assumptions: the strong cosmological principle; and the assumption that at some early
time the cosmic medium closely approximated a uniform, uniformly expanding
distribution of free particles in local thermodynamic equilibrium.
   A full history would ground the second assumption in antecedent initial conditions
and in physical laws that contain fewer unexplained constants than our current laws and
cosmological models. But if both assumptions should turn out to be correct, a full account
would preserve the distinctive features of the present account:
   1. The classical variables that figure in Einstein’s description of the structure and
contents of spacetime are to be interpreted as random variables – mathematical objects


                                                                                           25
characterized not by a definite value at each point of space-time but by a set of possible
values and corresponding probabilities. We can interpret these probabilities as relative
frequencies, or proportions, in infinite samples whose members are randomly distributed
throughout space. For example, the probability that the mass density at a point lies in a
given range of values is the fraction of points in a uniformly and randomly distributed
sample of points at which the mass density lies in that range; the joint probability that the
mass densities at two points with a given separation lie in given ranges is the fraction of a
sample of pairs of points that have the given separation in which the mass densities at the
two points lie in the given ranges, and so on.
   As discussed below, this interpretation of Einstein’s description of spacetime and its
contents resolves the prima facie conflict between the deterministic character of
Einstein’s field equations and the fact that quantum measurements alter the macroscopic
structure of spacetime unpredictably.
   2. The probability distributions of microstates that characterize early states of the
universe contain little or no statistical information per unit mass. As the universe
expands, macroscopic processes create information or change its qualitative character
(through processes that always generate statistical entropy). But the quantity of
information per unit mass remains far smaller than its largest allowed value. Thus
randomness prevails.
   3. The initial and boundary conditions that characterize macroscopic systems and
processes are expressed by probability distributions of microstates, which in turn are
determined by their history.
   4. Such histories usually determine the values of macroscopic mechanical and
thermodynamic variables but do not usually create information associated with persistent
micro-level information (though as the spin echo experiment illustrates, they can do so).
Theories that describe irreversible macroscopic processes rest on instances of this
generalization. This remark explains why the arrow of time defined by varied
macroscopic processes in nominally isolated macroscopic systems coincides with the
arrow defined by the cosmic expansion.
   5. As discussed below, many macroscopic processes other than quantum
measurements have indeterminate outcomes.


                                                                                             26
The present account of chance resembles in important ways an account given a century
ago by Henri Poincaré32 in a popular essay. Poincaré asked why the outcomes of certain
deterministic processes seem to be correctly predicted by “the laws of chance.” As his
first example Poincaré considered an ideal cone initially balanced on its tip. Imprecision
in its initial positioning and tiny uncontrollable external disturbances cause the cone to
topple in an unpredictable direction. But if the experiment is repeated many times, the
final azimuth of the cone’s axis will be smoothly (though not necessarily uniformly)
distributed between 0 and 2π radians. In this example a deterministic law maps small
differences between initial values of the azimuth of the cone’s axis onto large differences
between its final values. The smooth distribution of final azimuths requires only that the
initial azimuths be smoothly distributed over a narrow subrange of their possible values.
   In the 1880s Poincaré discovered the phenomenon now called deterministic chaos.
The outcomes of chaotic processes depend sensitively on their initial conditions. In the
discovery context small differences between the initial conditions of test particles in a
gravitating system may cause their orbits to diverge at an exponential rate. If the initial
values of the parameters that define an orbit are smoothly distributed over a small
subrange of their possible values, the possible values of these parameters at a later time
will be smoothly distributed over the entire range. Examples of chaotic processes are
legion, ranging from meteorology to biology.
   Poincaré argued that the initial conditions that characterize the cone balanced on its
tip as well as those that characterize chaotic orbits in the solar system are in fact smoothly
distributed on very small scales because historical processes have smoothed out
irregularities on the smallest scales. The present historical account of initial and boundary
conditions suggests a closely related but somewhat simpler explanation: The
experimental setup that creates the initial state of Poincaré’s cone specifies a probability
distribution of initial conditions that does not contain enough information to specify the
cone’s final azimuth. Similarly, the historically determined probability distribution that
characterizes the initial position and velocity of an asteroid in a chaotic orbit does not
contain enough information to specify the asteroid’s position after a lapse of 4.5 billion
years.


                                                                                              27
   We can define a classical microstate of Poincaré’s cone, in part, by the azimuth of its
axis. We can define the cone’s macrostates, in part, by the precision of a given measuring
apparatus. Initially the cone is in a macrostate in which the azimuth of its axis doesn’t
have a definite value, but as the cone’s angle of tilt increases, the number of
experimentally distinguishable azimuths – and hence the number of distinguishable
macrostates – increases. Analogously, the orbit of an asteroid may be sensitive to small
changes in its initial position and velocity. A historical account characterizes the initial
state by a joint probability distribution of positions and velocities, which evolves into a
distribution that characterizes a multitude of observationally distinguishable orbits.
   To accommodate such situations we need to modify the rule that links probability
distributions of (classical or quantum) microstates to classical macrostates. The standard
rule equates the value of a macroscopic variable in a given macrostate to the result of
averaging the corresponding microscopic variable over the probability distribution of
microstates that represents the given macrostate. We modify it in three ways.
   First, we characterize macrostates by experimentally distinguishable ranges (or
aggregates) of microstates, as in the above examples. A probability distribution of
microstates may then represent two or more experimentally distinguishable macrostates.
   Second, we equate the result of averaging a microscopic variable over such a
probability distribution to the result of averaging the measured value of the corresponding
macroscopic variable over a “large number” of replicas of the measurement.
   Finally, to incorporate into our rule the fact that neither physical laws nor initial and
boundary conditions that comply with the strong cosmological principle serve to define a
particular position, we interpret the set of replicas mentioned in the preceding paragraph
as a “cosmological ensemble” – a set of replicas randomly and uniformly distributed
throughout an infinite space. (Like Gibbs’s ensembles, a cosmological ensemble is made
up of imaginary replicas. But each replica in a cosmological ensemble is in a definite
macrostate. And cosmological ensembles have a physical interpretation: they allow us to
express the assumption that physics cannot make unconditional predictions about where
in the universe given measurement outcomes are realized.)
   These rules enable us to calculate the probabilities of experimentally distinguishable
measurement outcomes from measurements of mean values:


                                                                                               28
   Following an argument given by Dirac33 in a related context, let V denote a
   macroscopic property whose possible values are real numbers. Let the index k label
   the possible outcomes of a measurement of V and let the index r label replicas in a
   cosmological ensemble. Let I(V, k, r) be the function of V, k, and r that is equal to 1 if
   a measurement of V at the rth replica has the kth outcome and is equal to 0 otherwise.
   The value of I(V, k, r) averaged over the members of a cosmological ensemble is the
   fraction f(V, k) of replicas for which a measurement of V has the outcome k. We can
   think of the set {k} of outcomes as a sample space and the set of fractions { f(V, k)}
   as a set of probabilities on this sample space.




                                XII. Quantum measurement


The preceding rule for linking a probability distribution of (classical or quantum)
microstates to the possible outcomes of a measurement and their probabilities applies to
quantum measurements. The isolated macroscopic system now consists of a quantum
system one of whose properties we wish to measure, a macroscopic measuring apparatus
that interacts with the quantum system, and a bounded random environment34 that
interacts with the measuring apparatus. We assume, as in decoherence calculations, that
this system has quantum states that evolve in accordance with Schrödinger’s equation.
But we do not make the customary assumption that the system is initially in one or
another of its microstates. We assume instead that it is in a macrostate characterized by a
probability distribution of its microstates. Application of the preceding rule then
reproduces the measuring postulate of the standard formulation without further ado: it
predicts that ideal measurements have definite outcomes given, along with their relative
frequencies in a cosmological ensemble, by the measuring postulate.




                                                                                            29
                                      XIII. QM and GR


As mentioned earlier, general relativity’s deterministic description of the evolution of
space-time structure clashes with the fact that quantum measurements affect the local
structure of space-time in unpredictable ways. The present account dissolves this
contradiction. From a macroscopic standpoint the unpredictability of the post-
measurement position of a pointer in a quantum measurement is no more problematic
than the unpredictability of the final orientation of Poincaré’s cone. In both cases
macroscopic unpredictability results from an objective absence of information in the
probability distribution of microstates that characterizes the initial state of an isolated
system. In both cases a deterministic law – Schrödinger’s equation in the first case,
Newton’s laws of motion and gravitation in the second – governs the evolution of the
system’s microstates.




             XIV. The irreducibility of macrophysics and the unity of physics


The holy grail of physics is a Theory of Everything. Such a theory would include as
limiting cases our present strongly confirmed laws and would contain far fewer
adjustable physical constants than figure in these laws. As I have already emphasized,
accounts of physical systems and processes depend on initial and boundary conditions as
well as laws; and it has long been understood that laws and initial/boundary conditions
are not entirely distinct categories. To derive macrophysical laws such as Boltzmann’s H
theorem and its generalizations from more fundamental microscopic laws one needs to
impose appropriate initial and boundary conditions. In this essay I have argued that these
conditions are products of a historical process whose description rests on simple
cosmological initial conditions and a strong version of the cosmological principle.
   The account I have sketched of this historical process knits together our present laws
in other ways as well. It shows how initial and boundary conditions link the temporal
direction of macroscopic processes to the direction of the cosmic expansion, it offers a
simple and direct answer to the question of why quantum measurements have definite but


                                                                                              30
unpredictable outcomes, and it reconciles the unpredictability of quantum measurement
outcomes with the deterministic character of Einstein’s field equations.
   Besides joining these loose ends, a historical account of initial conditions offers a new
view of the role of chance in macroscopic processes. Physicists have conventionally held
that the outcomes of macroscopic processes other than quantum measurements are
predictable in principle. Some, though not all, evolutionary biologists have taken issue
with this doctrine, which also seems to be at odds with judgments based on ordinary
experience. But physics as conventionally interpreted assures us that to a contemporary
version of the omniscient mind posited by Laplace in his essay on chance, nothing except
quantum measurement outcomes would be unpredictable. The historical account of initial
conditions sketched in this essay supports the contrary view suggested by evolutionary
biology and experience: much of what we observe in the world around us is influenced
by chance. This generalization applies not just to aspects of our physical environment,
like weather. As discussed in a little more detail below, randomness plays an essential
role in the biological world.




                                XV. Is biology a part of physics?


Some physicists consider physical theories to be nothing more than devices for linking
measurements to other measurements. Others – realists – regard our present theories as
descriptions, perhaps partial or approximate, of a unified mathematical structure behind
experience. The second view, which was held by Einstein, draws support from the history
of physics. Strongly confirmed theories have not been overturned by their successors.
They have remained in place as limiting cases, valid in circumscribed domains, of the
successor theories.35 And as the scope of physical theories and the accuracy of their
predictions has increased, the fundamental theories have become fewer, more
comprehensive, and more abstract. History thus supports the view that our present
physical theories capture, or at least approximate mathematical regularities behind
experience and that these regularities belong to a unified mathematical structure.




                                                                                           31
    What characterizes the objects and processes that belong to the world that physics
describes and physicists try to understand? Consider atoms. Two and a half millennia ago
Leucippus and Democritus tried to link the sizes and shapes of hypothetical atoms to
observed properties of bulk matter. Newton in the Principia tried to account for Thomas
Boyle’s empirical law relating the pressure and the volume of an enclosed sample of air
by positing air atoms moving and interacting in ways governed by his laws of motion.
Half a century later, Daniel Bernoulli introduced a much simpler atomic model of air, and
in the nineteenth century Rudolf Clausius and James Clerk Maxwell significantly
extended Bernoulli’s model. But Maxwell realized that Newtonian physics and his own
theory of electricity and magnetism could not explain the observation that atoms always
absorb and radiate light at a fixed set of frequencies. Meanwhile Ernst Mach argued that
the atomic hypothesis was methodologically unsound because it invoked unseen entities.
Physical theories, in his view, should seek to represent, rather than explain, experience.
    In his 1905 paper on Brownian motion Einstein invoked a different criterion for
physical hypotheses: falsifiability (as Popper later called it). If his predicted relation
between the motions of a liquid’s hypothetical molecules and the observable motions of
microscopic particles suspended in the liquid should be shown to be incorrect, he wrote,
this would “provide … a weighty argument … against the molecular-kinetic conception
of heat [i.e., the atomic hypothesis].” Experimental confirmation of Einstein’s law, which
came a few years later, strengthened the case not only for the atomic hypothesis but for a
way of doing theoretical physics that relies more heavily on mathematical invention and
the testing of theoretical predictions than on the analysis of facts.
    At the other end of the size scale, the physical universe crossed the boundary that
separates physics from metaphysics in two steps. In 1915 Einstein published a theory of
gravitation that applies to an unbounded, statistically uniform distribution of mass, and in
the 1920s Edwin Hubble supplied observational evidence that the astronomical universe
is indeed unbounded and statistically uniform.
    In short, a combination of mathematical invention, experiment, and observation
shapes a physical realist’s conception of the physical world. The question “Is X a
constituent of the physical world” can be rephrased as “Does X figure in a mathematical
theory that is tightly linked to fundamental physical theories and is strongly confirmed by


                                                                                             32
experiment or observation?” According to this criterion, quarks are constituents of the
physical world, while “dark energy” is not – or at least not yet.
   What about living organisms and biological processes? Living organisms are physical
systems, because they are made up entirely of atoms and molecules drawn from the
nonliving environment; and biological processes are physical processes, because they
obey the same physical and chemical laws as nonliving systems. Yet living organisms
and biological processes are not just physical systems and processes. They have a
distinctive character, which they owe entirely to their distinctive initial and boundary
conditions.
   Like the initial and boundary conditions that characterize nonliving systems, those
that characterize living organisms and biological processes were shaped by history.
Although the opening chapter of the history of life exists only in rough, competing drafts.
the authors of these drafts agree that life arose by chance in a nonliving environment
through processes governed by well-understood physical and chemical laws. Can we then
conclude that biology is at bottom a branch of physics, like condensed-matter physics and
astrophysics? Do biological systems and processes belong to the world that physics
describes or could describe? Or, as Ernst Mayr36 and other biologists have argued, is
biology an autonomous science?
   Biology has a number of terms that do not appear in the physical sciences, such as
function, fitness, purpose, adaptation. Can such terms be explained, however clumsily, in
the language of physics and chemistry, augmented if necessary by explicit definitions?
   Take function. Molecular physics and chemistry supply detailed accounts of the
physical structure and chemical properties of hemoglobin. For example, they explain its
capacity to bind oxygen molecules. But molecular physics and chemistry alone cannot
tell us that in vertebrates the biological role of hemoglobin depends on its affinity for
oxygen. Biochemistry continues the chemical story. It seeks to understand not only how
hemoglobin performs its biological function but also how the molecule and its function
have evolved from simpler precursors. Can this continuation of the chemical story be
recast in the language of physics and chemistry?
   Part of it is already in that language. The chemical processes that involve or depend
on hemoglobin belong to the common subject matter of chemistry and biochemistry. The


                                                                                            33
other part of the story involves the notion of fitness. Changes in the structure of
hemoglobin that affect its ability to bind and release oxygen molecules under specific
environmental conditions affect an animal’s prospects for survival and reproduction.
Fitness is a measure of these prospects.
    And there’s the rub. Population geneticists have defined fitness in various ways, but
all the definitions are prospective; they all refer to the future.
    In a given population, genetic changes that have a significant random component give
rise to variants of hemoglobin. If the population’s environment doesn’t change for a
sufficiently long period of time, heritable variants whose oxygen affinity is optimal for the
given, unchanging conditions will gradually come to dominate the population’s gene
pool: the possessors of sub-optimal variants will have fewer descendants than the
descendants of possessors of optimal variants.
    This example illustrates an essential aspect of evolution: the emergence and
subsequent fixation of new or modified traits through random genetic variation and
natural selection in an unchanging environment.
    The example of hemoglobin evolution in an unchanging environment resembles the
“evolution” of a cone initially balanced, imperfectly, on its tip. The fate of any given
molecular variant is predictable; so is the path of a cone whose initial orientation and
angular momentum have been specified. The cone’s initial state is characterized by a
probability distribution of micro-conditions; analogously, one might perhaps be able to
assign a probability per unit time to the appearance of each possible variant of the
hemoglobin molecule and then go on to predict the relative frequencies of variants after
many generations. So the story of hemoglobin evolution in an unchanging environment
can perhaps be recast in language familiar to physicists and chemists.
     The emergence of evolutionary novelties poses a more formidable challenge to the
view that evolutionary stories can be recast as physic-chemical stories. Evolutionary
novelties are the results of a creative process:


    Evolution is a creative process, in exactly the same sense in which composing a
    poem or a symphony, carving a statue, or painting a picture are creative acts. An
    artwork is novel, unique, and unrepeatable; ... The evolution of every phyletic line


                                                                                           34
   yields a novelty that never existed before and is a unique, unrepeatable, and
   irreversible proceeding.37


Evolutionary novelties are also unpredictable:


   Evolutionary change in every generation is a two-step process, the production of
   genetically unique new individuals and the selection of the progenitors of the next
   generation. The important role of chance at the first step, the production of
   variability, is universally acknowledged (Mayr 1962), but the second step, natural
   selection, is on the whole viewed rather deterministically: Selection is a non-
   chance process. What is usually forgotten is the important role chance plays even
   during the process of selection. In a group of sibs it is by no means necessarily
   only those with the most superior genotypes that will reproduce. Predators mostly
   take weak or sick prey individuals but not exclusively, nor do localized natural
   catastrophes (storms, avalanches, floods) kill only inferior individuals. Every
   founder population is largely a chance aggregate of individuals, and the outcome
   of genetic revolutions, initiating new evolutionary departures, may depend on
   chance constellations of genetic factors.36



   According to the central argument of the present essay, the random element in both
genetic variability and natural selection is objective and irreducible. In physical contexts
the randomness inherent in initial conditions entails that many kinds of macroscopic
processes (besides quantum measurement) have objectively unpredictable outcomes; but
the possible outcomes of such processes are predictable, along with their probabilities;
and we may interpret the probability that attaches to a particular outcome or range of
outcomes as its relative frequency in a cosmological ensemble. In the context of
evolution, the possible outcomes – evolutionary novelties – are themselves unpredictable.
Even if these outcomes and their probabilities could be predicted – a feat that would
perhaps require the expenditure of more free energy than the Sun could supply in its




                                                                                           35
lifetime – the prediction would be useless, for it would assign an infinitesimal probability
to the novelties that have actually been produced in the course of evolution.
   To sum up, although living organisms are physical systems and biological processes
obey physical laws, life and its history are not part of the world current physical theories
describe. Life is a natural phenomenon, firmly anchored in the physical world and its
laws; but the initial and boundary conditions that characterize living systems and
biological processes ensure that the history of life is creative and hence, in a way that
transcends physical indeterminacy, unpredictable.




                               XVI. The problem of free will


Defenders of libertarian free will usually grant at the outset that events other than the
outcomes of quantum measurements are determined by universal physical laws and
antecedent conditions. They must then explain how it can be that we are able to shape the
future through our choices and decisions. In this essay I have argued that the premise is
false: Events in the macroscopic world are not determined by universal physical laws and
antecedent conditions; a wide class of macroscopic processes have indeterminate
outcomes. And if the processes involved in reflective choice belong to this class, there is
no scientific reason why we should not accept the proposition that we shape the future
through our choices and decisions.
   Biology supplies a strong positive case for libertarian free will.38 As mentioned
earlier, Mayr and other evolutionary biologists have stressed the central role of chance in
evolution. Genetic variation has a random component, but if genetic variation were
entirely random, complex adaptations could never have evolved. The evolution of
complexity requires genetic regulation of the ways in which chance manifests itself in
genetic variation.
   It is easy to see why. A central and strongly confirmed tenet of evolutionary theory is
that complex organs such as eyes evolved from less complex but fully functional
predecessors. These predecessors themselves evolved from less complex but also
functional predecessors, and so on until we arrive at “a simple light sensor for circadian


                                                                                            36
(daily) and seasonal rhythms around 600 million years ago”39 At each stage of this
multistage process genetic modifications that improved the eye’s function emerged
through the usual combination of genetic variation and selection. But for the process to
work, the genetic variations that occur at each stage must not significantly impair the
function achieved at that stage. This means that at each stage the genes and gene
combinations that encode the eye’s developmental program must be held safe from
harmful variation – not from all variation, just harmful variation. And indeed experiments
show that genetic variation is suppressed to varying degrees at different genetic loci. For
example, proofreading and error-correction processes suppress transcription errors
(which when not suppressed are a source of variability); exchanges of genetic material
between homologous chromosomes during meiosis are nonrandom in ways that preserve
gene combinations whose disruption would lower fitness while allowing others.
Molecular mechanisms that regulate and channel genetic variation are themselves
products of evolution’s two-stage process.
   Open behavioral programs enable animals, including single-celled animals, to thrive
in environments that change in unpredictable ways. All animals learn from experience.
They tend to repeat behaviors for which they have been rewarded in the past and to avoid
behaviors for which they have been punished. Some animals also learn from experience
in ways that allow for risk-taking, exploratory behavior, and delayed rewards.
Economists, students of animal behavior, and cognitive neuroscientists have developed
algorithms that seek to mimic such flexible learning strategies, and have constructed
hypothetical neural networks that instantiate algorithms of this kind.40
   In light of what ethologists have learned about the behavior of monkeys and apes, we
can plausibly conjecture that much of human learning and decision-making is mediated
by neural architecture that embodies complex and sophisticated algorithms of this kind.
But humans have an extra, qualitatively different capacity for learning and decision-
making: a capacity for reflective choice. We are able construct mental representations of
scenes and scenarios that are not directly coupled to external stimuli (as in perception) or
to movement (as in reflexes). We call on this capacity when we imagine possible courses
of action and then go on to imagine the possible consequences of each of these invented
candidates for choice. Our ancestors used it when they painted pictures on the walls of


                                                                                           37
their caves and created the first human languages. We use it when we compose an
original sentence or a tune or when we try to solve an abstract problem. It allows us to
reconstruct the distant past from fragmentary evidence and to envision the distant future.
It makes possible the life of the mind.
    The brain of every animal contains a model (or “theory”) of the world – a hierarchical
set of schemata that regulate the animal’s behavior. Some of these schemata can be
modified by the animal’s experience. According to the psychologist Thomas
Suddendorf,41 children exhibit “the ability to entertain and collate offline mental models
(e.g., about past, future, or imaginary situations) in addition to the primary reality model”
around the age of two. He cites behavioral evidence that great apes, but not monkeys, also
have this capacity. Around age four, children demonstrate a new capacity: they become
able to understand representations as representations. Their world models begin to
include a “theoretical” component: a set of beliefs about animals, gods, weather, the Sun,
the stars, other people, and ourselves. Although great apes have “offline” mental models,
Suddendorf writes, they show no behavioral evidence for this second capacity – the
capacity to understand that mental representations are products of their own imagining.
Creative thought requires the second capacity. We have it; according to Suddendorf,
nonhuman primates do not. So free will in the strong or libertarian sense is a distinctively
human biological capacity. Like evolution itself, it harnesses chance in the service of
creativity.




                       XVII. Free will, consciousness, and the brain


How does free will fit into a scientific picture of the world? The preceding account of
free will rests on psychology and, more broadly, on biology. I have argued that the
capacity to invent and evaluate possible courses of action is a distinctively human
biological adaptation whose precursors are found in other animals. I have also argued that
biology is not only different from physics in the ways that Mayr and other evolutionary
biologists have discussed; it is also not reducible to physics. Fitness, for example, is a
property of genes or gene combinations that encode particular developmental programs in


                                                                                             38
members of a particular population; but for the reasons I have discussed, it is not a
physical property. Talk about the functions of biomolecules, organs, and behavioral traits,
is a necessary (and perfectly scientific) part of biological discourse, but it cannot be
paraphrased in the vocabulary of the physical sciences.
    Nor can talk about mental models and the conscious aspects of creative decision-
making be translated into talk about neural circuitry and neural processes. Neuroscience
seeks to understand the biological underpinnings of mental states and of conscious and
unconscious mental processes, but as Max Bennett and P.M.S. Hacker42 have argued in
considerable detail and with great clarity, mental states and processes are not reducible to
brain states and processes. Just as biology rests on but cannot be reduced to physics,
psychology rests on but cannot be reduced to neuroscience. Nevertheless mental states
and processes can be studied and at least partially understood by the methods of
psychology and comparative psychology.
    Do conscious acts of will cause our voluntary actions? From a thorough examination
of the evidence bearing on this question the psychologist Daniel Wegner 43 has concluded
that the answer is no. “Conscious will arises from processes that are psychologically and
anatomically distinct from the processes whereby mind creates action [p. 29].” This
conclusion accords well with the arguments and conclusions of the present essay. I have
argued, as Henri Bergson did a century ago, that we act most freely when we act most
creatively. Whether conscious acts of will are essential features of the extended mental
processes involved in reflective decision-making is an empirical question. My own
experience, for what it is worth, suggests that conscious acts of will play at most a minor
part in reflective decision-making. What seems undeniable is that we believe we can alter
the course of events through our plans and projects. This essay has argued that that is not
an illusion.


                                                                       17 August 2011




                                                                                           39
                                            NOTES


1
    Searle, John R., 2004. Freedom and Neurobiology, Columbia University Press, New
      York

2
    Dirac, P. A. M., 1967. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, fourth edition (revised),
       Clarendon Press, Oxford

3
    Wigner, E. P., 1962 Wigner, “Remarks on the Mind-Body Question” in Symmetries and
       Reflections, MIT Press, Cambridge

4
 Wigner, E. P., 1976. “Lecture Notes” in J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek, eds., Quantum
Theory and Measurement, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ, 1983
5
    Everett, Hugh, III, 1957. Reviews of Modern Physics 29, 454
6
 The statistical entropy of a discrete probability distribution is the mean value of the
negative logarithm of the probability. The statistical entropy of a continuous probability
distribution is the mean value of the negative logarithm of the probability density.
7
    Notably, classical microstates are continuous, whereas quantum microstates are discrete.
8
    Jancel, R., 1963, Foundations of Classical and Quantum Statistical Mechanics
      Pergamon, Oxford, p. xvii

9
    Jaynes, E.T., 1957, Phys. Rev. 106, 620; 108, 171

10
     Heisenberg, W., 1958. Physics and Philosophy, Allen and Unwin, London, pp. 53-54
11
     Schrödinger, E. 1948. Statistical Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
      1948), p. 3
12
     Landau, L. and Lifshitz, E.M., 1980. Statistical Physic, Part 1, revised, translated from
      the Russian by J.B. Sykes and M.J. Kearsley, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
      Massachusetts




                                                                                           40
13
     Feynman, R., 1972. Statistical Mechanics, a Set of Lectures, W.A. Benjamin, Reading,
      Massachusetts
14
     Sklar, L., 1993. Physics and Chance: Philosophical Issues in the Foundations of
      Statistical Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge [England], New York
15
     Clausius, in 1857, derived these phenomenological laws from Bernoulli’s model,
      supplemented by an additional molecular parameter: the average distance a molecule
      travels between collisions. And Maxwell, in the two papers mentioned above,
      improved Clausius’s theory by constructing a detailed account of molecular collisions
      and their effects.
16
     Van Kampen, N.G., 2007. Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry, 3rd ed.,
      Elsevier, Amsterdam
17
     Prigogine, I.,1980. From Being to Becoming, W. H. Freeman, New York, p. 157
18
     Blatt, J. M. 1959, Prog. Theor. Phys. 22, 745
19
     Shenker, O.R., 2000, “Interventionism in Statistical Mechanics: Some Philosophical
      Remarks” (preprint)
20
     For a clear and comprehensive review of decoherence theories, see Schlosshauer, M.,
      2008, Decoherence and the Quantum-to-Classical Transition, corrected 2d printing
      Springer, Berlin


21
     How two light waves with the same wavelength interfere at a given point depends on
      their relative phases at that point: they interfere constructively if they are in phase
      destructively if they are out of phase. Interference between state vectors in a
      superposition depends on the relative phase of their coefficients in the superposition.
      The interaction between the combined system in a quantum measurement and a
      random environment, such as a dilute gas or a radiation field, effectively randomizes
      the relative phases of the coefficients in the superposition predicted by von
      Neumann’s account of an ideal measurement.
22
     Joos, E. and Zeh, H. D., 1985. Zeitschrift für Physik B 59, 223

23
     Zeh, H-D, 1970/ Foundations of Physics 1, 69
24
     Interaction between two systems entangles their quantum states in the same sense as
       the interaction between a measured system and a measuring apparatus entangles the
       quantum states of the system and the apparatus, or the interaction between the
       electrons in a helium atom entangles the quantum states of the individual electrons.



                                                                                            41
25
     Galaxies also have “peculiar” velocities associated with local deviations from
      uniformity. Until Hubble’s observations, these masked the systematic component
      associated with the expansion of space.
26
     Weinberg, S., Gravitation and Cosmology, 1972, Wiley, New York
27
     Weinberg (footnote 26) gives a detailed account of nucleogenesis in an initially hot
      universe; Anthony Aguirre (Astrophysical Journal *** 20**) discusses nucleogenesis
      in an initially cold universe.
28
     Layzer, D. Constructing the Universe, W. H. Freeman, New York, 1984;
      Cosmogenesis, Oxford University Press, New York. 1990
29
     Layzer, D. and Hively, R., 1973, Astrophysical Journal 179, 361

30
     Aguirre, A., 1999. Astrophysical Journal 521, 17 (1999)
31
     Hahn, E. L., 1950, Phys. Rev. 80, 580
32
     Poincaré, H. “Chance” in in Science and Method (New York, Dover, 2003)

33
     Dirac, P.A.M., Reference cited in Note 2, p. 47
34
     The random environment could consist of the microscopic degrees of freedom of the
      macroscopic measuring apparatus.
35
     Thomas Kuhn, argued in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1959) that a successor
      theory overturns its predecessor because meanings of scientific terms common to the
      two theories are incommensurable. But physical theories are mathematical constructs;
      they are not verbal-conceptual constructs that have been made more precise through
      the use of mathematical “language.” The axioms of Newtonian mechanics are neither
      inconsistent nor incommensurable with the axioms of relativistic mechanics; in a
      precise and completely describable sense they approximate those axioms.
36
     Mayr, Ernst, 1988. “How To Carry Out The Adaptationist Program?” in Toward a New
       Philosophy of Biology, Cambridge, Harvard University Press, p. 159

37
     Dobzhansky, Theodosius, 1970. Genetics of the Evolutionary Process, Columbia
      University Press, New York
38
  For a more detailed version of the following argument see Layzer, “Naturalizing Free
Will” (preprint)
39
     Lamb, T. D. “Evolution of the Eye,” Scientific American, July 2011


                                                                                         42
40
  For recent reviews, see Nature Neuroscience, Volume 111, Number 4, April 2008, pp.
387-416.
41
     Suddendorf, T., 1998. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 131
42
     Bennett, M. R. and Hacker, P.M.S.,2003. Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience,
      Blackwell, Oxford

43
     Wegner, Daniel M., 2002. The Illusion of Conscious Will, MIT Press, Cambridge




                                                                                      43
