   Mind Association


   The Identity of Indiscernibles
   Author(s): Max Black
   Source: Mind, New Series, Vol. 61, No. 242 (Apr., 1952), pp. 153-164
   Published by: Oxford University Press on behalf of the Mind Association
   Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2252291
   Accessed: 13-02-2016 18:33 UTC


   REFERENCES
   Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
   http://www.jstor.org/stable/2252291?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents

   You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.



   Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
   info/about/policies/terms.jsp

   JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content
   in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
   For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




            Mind Association and Oxford University Press are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Mind.




http://www.jstor.org



                                    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                                                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
VOL. LXI.         No. 242.]                                 [April, 1952




               A QUARTERLY                     REVIEW
                                    OF

PSYCHOLOGY AND PHILOSOPHY
                                ,_S*::

   I.-THE        IDENTITY            OF INDISCERNIBLES
                              By MAx BLACK

   A. The principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles seems to me
obviously true. And I don't see how we are going to define
identity or establish the connexion between mathematics and
logic without using it.
  B. It seems to me obviously false. And your troubles as a
mathematical logician are beside the point. If the principle is
false you have no right to use it.
   A. You simply say it's false-and even if you said so three
times that wouldn't make it so.
   B. Well, you haven't done anything more yourself than assert
the principle to be true. As Bradley once said, " assertion can
demand no more than counter-assertion; and what is affirmed
on the one side, we on the other can simply deny ".
   A. How will this do for an argument ? If two things, a and b,
are given, the first has the property of being identical with a.
Now b cannot have this property, for else b would be a, and we
should have only one thing, not two as assumed. Hence a
has at least one property, which b does not have, that is to say
the property of being identical with a.
   B. This is a roundabout way of saying nothing, for " a has the
property of being identical with a "means no more than " a is a
When you begin to say " a is . . . " I am supposed to know what
thing you are referringto as ' a 'and I expect to be told something
about that thing. But when you end the sentence with the
words " . . . is a " I am left still waiting.         The sentence " a is
a " is a useless tautology.
     11




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
 154                           MAX BLACK:

     A. Are you as scornful about difference as about identity ?
  For a also has, and b does not have, the property of being different
  from b. This is a second property that the one thing has but
  not the other.
     B. All you are saying is that b is different from a. I think the
  form of words " a is different from b " does have the advantage
  over " a is a " that it might be used to give information. I might
  learn from hearing it used that ' a ' and ' b ' were applied to
  different things. But this is not what you want to say, since
  you are trying to use the names, not mention them. When I
 already know what ' a' and ' b ' stand for, " a is different from
  b " tells me nothing. It, too, is a useless tautology.
     A. I wouldn't have expected you to treat ' tautology' as a
 term of abuse. Tautology or not, the sentence has a philosophical
 use. It expresses the necessary truth that different things
 have at least one property not in common. Thus different
 things must be discernible; and hence, by contraposition,
 indiscernible things must be identical. Q.E.D.
    B. Why obscure matters by this old-fashioned language ?
 By " indiscernible " I suppose you mean the same as " having
 all properties in common ". Do you claim to have proved that
 two things having all their properties in common are identical ?
    A. Exactly.
    B. Then this is a poor way of stating your conclusion. If a
 and b are identical, there is just one thing having the two names
 ' a' and ' b '; and in that case it is absurd to say that a and b
are two. Conversely, once you have supposed there are two
things having all their properties in common, you can't without
contradicting yourself say that they are " identical ".
    A. I can't believe you were really misled. I simply meant to
say it is logically impossible for two things to have all their
properties in common. I showed that a must have at least
two properties-the property of being identical with a, and the
property of being different from b-neither of which can be a
property of b. Doesn't this prove the principle of Identity of
Indiscernibles ?
    B. Perhaps you have proved something. If so, the nature of
your proof should show us exactly what you have proved. If
you want to call " being identical with a " a " property " I
suppose I can't prevent you. But you must then accept the
consequences of this way of talking. All you mean when you
say " a has the property of being identical with a " is that a is a.
And all you mean when you say " b does not have the property
of being identical with a " is that b is not a. So what you have




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                  THE IDENTITY       OF INDISCERNIBLES                    155
 "proved " is that a is a and b is not a, that is to say, b and a are
 different. Similarly, when you said that a, but not b, had the
 property of being diflerent from b, you were simply saying that
 a and b were different. In fact you are merely redescribing the
 hypothesis that a and b are different by calling it a case of
 "difference of properties ". Drop the misleading description
 and your famous principle reduces to the truism that different
 things are different. How true! And how uninteresting!
    A. Well, the properties of identity and difference may be
 uninteresting, but they are properties. If I had shown that
 grass was green, I suppose you would say I hadn't shown that
 grass was coloured.
   B. You certainly would not have shown that grass had any
 colour otherthan green.
   A. What it comes to is that you object to the conclusion of
my argument following from the premise that a and b are
different.
   B. No, I object to the triviality of the conclusion. If you
want to have an interesting principle to defend, you must inter-
pret " property" more narrowly-enough so, at any rate, for
"identity " and "difference " not to count as properties.
   A. Your notion of an interesting principle seems to be one
which I shall have difficulty in establishing. Will you at least
allow me to include among " properties " what are sometimes
called " relational characteristics "-like being married to Caesar
or being at a distancefrom London?
   B. Why not ? If you are going to defend the principle, it is
for you to decide what version you wish to defend.
   A. In that case, I don't need to count identity and difference
as properties. Here is a different argument that seems to me
quite conclusive. The only way we can discover that two
different things exist is by finding out that one has a quality not
possessed by the other or else that one has a relational character-
istic that the other hasn't.
   If bothare blue and hard and sweet and so on, and have the
same shape and dimensions afnd are in the same relations to
everything in the universe, it is logically impossible to tell them
apart. The supposition that in such a case there might really
be two things would be unverifiable in principle. Hence it
would be meaningless.
   B. You are going too fast for me.
   A. Think of it this way. If the principle were false, the
fact that I can see only two of your hands would be no proof that
you had just two. And even if every conceivable test agreed with




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
 156                               MAX BLACK:

  the supposition that you had two hands, you might all the time
  have three, four, or any number. You might have nine hands,
  diflerent from one another and all indistinguishable from your
  left hand, and nine more all different from each other but in-
  distinguishable from your right hand. And even if you really
  did have just two hands, and no more, neither you nor I nor
  anybody else could ever know that fact. This is too much for
  me to swallow. This is the kind of absurdity you get into, as
  soon as you abandon verifiability as a test of meaning.
     B. Far be it from me to abandon your sacred cow. Before I
  give you a direct answer, let me try to describe a counter-
  example.
     Isn't it logically possible that the universe should have
  contained nothing but two exactly similar spheres ? We might
  suppose that each was made of chemically pure iron, had a dia-
  meter of one mile, that they had the same temperature, colour, and
  so on, and that nothing else existed. Then every quality and
  relational characteristic of the one would also be a property of the
  other. Now. if what I am describing is logically possible, it is
  not impossible for two things to have all their properties in
  common. This seems to me to refute the Principle.
    A. Your supposition, I repeat, isn't verifiable and therefore
 can't be regarded as meaningful. But supposing you have
 described a possible world, I still don't see that you have refuted
 the principle. Consider one of the spheres, a, . . .
    B. How can I, since there is no way of telling them apart ?
  Which one do you want me to consider ?
    A. This is very foolish. I mean either of the two spheres,
 leaving you to decide which one you wished to consider. If I
 were to say to you " Take any book off the shelf " it would be
 foolish on your part to reply " Which ? "
    B. It's a poor analogy. I know how to take a book off a
 shelf, but I don't know how to identify one of two spheres
 supposed to be alone in space and so symmetrically placed with
 respect to each other that neither has any quality or character
the other does not also have.
    A. All of which goes to show as I said before, the unveri-
fiability of your supposition. Can't you imagine that one sphere
has been designated as 'a' ?
   B. I can imagine only what is logically possible. Now it is
logically possible that somebody should enter the universe I
have described, see one of the spheres on his left hand and proceed
to call it 'a'. I can imagine that all right, if that's enough to
satisfy you.




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                 THE IDENTITY       OF INDISCERNIBLES                     157
    A. Very well, now let me try to finish what I began to say
about a . . .
    B. I still can't let you, because you, in your present situation,
have no right to talk about a. All I have conceded is that if
 something wereto happen to introduce a change into my universe,
 so that an observer entered and could see the two spheres, one
 of them could then have a name. But this would be a different
 supposition from the one I wanted to consider. My spheres
 don't yet have names. If an observer were to enter the scene,
 he could perhaps put a red mark on one of the spheres. You
 might just as well say " By 'a' I mean the sphere which would
 be the first to be marked by a red mark if anyone were to arrive
 and were to proceed to make a red mark!" You might just
 as well ask me to consider the first daisy in my lawn that would
 be picked by a child, if a child were to come along and do the
 picking. This doesn't now distinguish any daisy from the others.
 You are just pretending to use a name.
    A. And I think you are just pretending not to understand me.
 All I am asking you to do is to think of one of your spheres, no
 matter which, so that I may go on to say something about it
 when you give me a chance.
    B. You talk as if naming an object and then thinking about it
 were the easiest thing in the world. But it isn't so easy. Suppose
 I tell you to name any spider in my garden: if you can catch one
 first or describeone uniquely you can name it easily enough. But
 you can't pick one out, let alone " name " it, by just thinking.
 You remind me of the mathematicians who thought that talking
 about an Axiom of Choice would really allow them to choose a
 single member of a collection when they had no criterion of
 choice.
    A. At this rate you will never give me a chance to say anything.
 Let me try to make my point without using names. Each of the
 spheres will surely differ from the other in being at some distance
from that other one, but at no distance from itself-that is to say,
it will bear at least one relation to itself-being at no distance
from, or being in the sameplace as-that it does not bear to the
 other. And this will serve to distinguish it from the other.
    B. Not at all. Each will have the relational characteristic
 being at a distanceof two miles, say, from the centreof a sphereone
mile in diameter,etc. And each will have the relational character-
istic (if you want to call it that) of beingin the sameplace as itself.
The two are alike in this respect as in all others.
    A. But look here. Each sphere occupies a different place;
and this at least will distinguish them from one another.




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
158                           MAX BLACK:

    B. This sounds as if you thought the places had some inde-
 pendent existence, though I don't suppose you really think so.
 To say the spheres are in " different places " is just to say that
 there is a distance between the two spheres; and we have already
 seen that will not serve to distinguish them. Each is at a
 distance-indeed the same distance--from the other.
    A. When I said they were at different places I didn't mean
 simply that they were at a distance from one another. That one
 sphere is in a certain place does not entail the existence of any
 other sphere. So to say that one sphere is in its place, and the
 other in its place, and then to add that these places are different
 seems to me different from saying the spheres are at a distance
 from one another.
   B. What does it mean to say " a sphere is in its place"?
 Nothing at all, so far as I can see. Where else could it be?
 All you are saying is that the spheres are in different places.
   A. Then my retort is, What does it mean to say " Two spheres
are in different places"? Or, as you so neatly put it, " Where
else could they be ? "
   B. You have a point. What I should have said was that your
assertion that the spheres occupied different places said nothing
at all, unless you were drawing attention to the necessary truth
that different physical objects must be in different places. Now
if two spheres must be in different places, as indeed they must, to
say that the spheres occupy different places is to say no more than
they are two spheres.
   A. This is like a point you made before. You won't allow me to
deduce anything from the supposition that there are two spheres.
   B. Let me put it another 'way. In the two-sphere universe,
the only reason for saying that the places occupied were different
would be that different things occupied them. So in order to
show the places were different you would first have to show, in
some other way, that the spheres were different. You will never
be able to distinguish the spheres by means of the places they
occupy.
   A. A minute ago, you were willing to allow that somebody
might give your spheresdifferentnames. Will you let me suppose
that some traveller has visited your monotonous " universe
and has named one sphere " Castor " and the other " Pollux "
   B. All right-provided you don't try to use those names
yourself.
   A. Wouldn't the traveller, at least, have to recognise that
being at a distanceof two milesfrom Castorwas not the same pro-
perty as being at a distance of two miles from Pollux ?




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                 THE IDENTITY       OF INDISCERNIBLES                     159
    B. I don't see why. If he were to see that Castor and Pollux
 had exactly the same properties, he would see that " being at a
 distance of two miles from Castor " meant exactly the same as
 "being at a distance of two miles from Pollux ".
    A. They couldn't mean the same. If they did, " being at a
 distance of two miles from Castor and at the same time not being
 at a distanceof twomilesfromPollux " would be a self-contradictory
 description. But plenty of bodies could answer to this de-
 scription. Again if the two expressions meant the same, any-
thing which was two miles from Castor would have to be two
miles from Pollux-which is clearly false. So the two expressions
don't mean the same and the two spheres have at least two
properties not in common.
    B. Which ?
    A. Being at a distance of two miles from Castorand being at a
distance of two miles from Poltux.
    B. But now you are using the words " Castor " and " Pollux"
as if they really stood for something. They are just our old
friends" a ' and ' b ' in disguise.
    A. You surely don't want to say that the arrival of the name-
giving traveller creates spatial properties ? Perhaps we can't
name your spheres and therefore can't name the corresponding
properties; but the properties must be there.
   B. What can this mean? The traveller has not visited the
spheres, and the spheres have no names-neither 'Castor ',
nor ' Pollux', nor ' a ', nor ' b ', nor any others. Yet you still
want to say they have certain properties which cannot be referred
to without using names for the spheres. You want to say " the
property of being at a distance from Castor " though it is logically
impossible for you to talk in this way. You can't speak, but
you won't be silent.
   A. How eloquent, and how unconvincing! But since you seem
to have convinced yourself, at least, perhaps you can explain
another thing that bothers me: I dor't see that you have a right
to talk as you do about places or spatial relations in connexion
with your so-called " universe ". So long as we are talking
about our own universe-the universe-I know what you mean
by "distance ", "diameter ", " place " and so on. But in what
you want to call a universe, even though it contains only two
objects, I don't see what such words could mean. So far as I
can see, you are applying these spatial terms in their present
usage to a hypothetical situation which contradicts the pre-
suppositions of that usage.
   B. What do you mean by " presupposition" ?




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
160                            MAX BLACK:

    A. Well, you spoke of measured distances, for one thing.
 Now this presupposes some means of measurement. Hence
 your " universe " must contain at least a third thing-a ruler or
 some other measuring device.
    B. Axe you claiming that a universe must have at least three
 things in it? What is the least number of things required to
 make a world ?
    A. No, all I am saying is that you cannot describe a configura-
 tion as spatial unless it includes at least three objects. This is
 part of the meaning of " spatial "-and it is no more mysterious
than saying you can't have a game of chess without there
 existing at least thirty-five things (thirty-two pieces, a chess-
 board, and two players).
    B. If this is all that bothers you, I can easily provide for three
 or any number of things without changine the force of my
 counter-example. The important thing, for my purpose, was
that the configurationof two spheres was symmetrical. So long
as we preservethis feature of the imaginary universe, we can now
allow any number of objects to be found in it.
    A. You mean any even number of objects.
    B. Quite right. Why not imagine a plane running clear
through space, with everything that happens on one side of it
always exactly duplicated at an equal distance in the other side.
    A. A kind of cosmic mirror producing real images.
    B. Yes, except that there wouldn't be any mirror! The point
is that in this world we can imagine any degree of complexity and
change to occur. No reason to exclude rulers, compasses, and
weighing machines. No reason, for that matter, why the Battle
of Waterloo shouldn't happen.
    A. Twice over, you mean-with Napoleon surrendering later
in two different places simultaneously!
   B. Provided you wanted to call both of them " Napoleon ".
   A. So your point is that everything could be duplicated on the
other side of the non-existent Looking Glass. I suppose when-
ever a man got married, his identical twin would be marrying
the identical twin of the first man's fiancee ?
   B. Exactly.
   A. Except that " identical twins " wouldn't be numerically
identical ?
   B. You seem to be agreeing with me.
   A. Far from it. This is just a piece of gratuitous metaphysics.
If the inhabitants of your world had enough sense to know what
was sense and what wasn't, they would never suppose all the
events in their world were duplicated. It would be much more




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                  THE IDENTITY       OF INDISCERNIBLES                    161
  sensible for them to regard the " second " Napoleon as a mere
 mirror image-and similarly for all the other supposed
  "duplicates'-'
    B. But they could walk through the " mirror " and find water
 just as wet, sugar just as sweet, and grass just as green on the
 other side.
    A. You don't understand me. They would not postulate
  "another side ". A man looking at the " mirror " would be
 seeing himself, not a duplicate. If he walked in a straight line
 toward the " mirror " he would eventually find himself back at
 his starting point, not at a duplicate of his starting point. This
 would involve their having a different geometry from ours-
 but that would be preferable to the logician's nightmare of the
 reduplicated universe.
    B. They might think so-until the twins really began to
 behave differently for the first time!
    A. Now it's you who are tinkering with your supposition.
 You can't have your universe and change it too.
    B. All right, I retract.
    A. The more I think about your " universe " the queerer it
 seems. What would happen when a man crossed your invisible
 " mirror " ? While he was actually crossing, his body would
have to change shape, in order to preserve the symmetry. Would
it gradually shrink to nothing and then expand again ?
    B. I confess I hadn't thought of that.
    A. And here is something that explodes the whole notion.
Would you say that one of the two Napoleons in your universe
had his heart in the right place-literally, I mean ?
    B. Why, of course.
    A. In that case his " mirror-image" twin would have the
heart on the opposite side of the body. One Napoleon would
have his heart on the left of his body, and the other would have it
on the right of his body.
    B. It's a good point, though it would still make objects like
spheres indistinguishable. But let me try again. Let me
abandon the original idea of a plane of symmetry and to suppose
instead that we have only a centre of symmetry. I mean that
everything that happened at anyplace wouldbe exactlyduplicated
at a place an equal distance on the opposite side of the centre of
symmetry. In short, the universe would be what the mathe-
maticians call "radially symmetrical".        And to avoid com-
plications we could suppose that the centre of symmetry itself
was physically inaccessible, so that it would be impossible for
any material body to pass through it. Now in this universe,




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
162                         MAX BLACK:

identical twins would have to be either both right-handed or
both left-handed.
   A. Your universes are beginning to be as plentiful as black-
berries. You are too ingenious to see the force of my argument
about verifiability. Can't you see that your supposed de-
scription of a universe in which everything has its " identical
twin " doesn't describe anything verifiably different from a cor-
responding universe without such duplication ? This must be
so, no matter what kind of symmetry your universe manifested.
   B. You are assuming that in order to verify that there are two
things of a certain kind, it must be possible to show that one has a
property not possessed by the other. But this is not so. A pair
of very close but similar magnetic poles produce a characteristic
field of force which assures me that there are two poles, even if
I have no way of examining them separately. The presence of
two exactly similar stars at a great distance might be detected by
some resultant gravitational effect or by optical interference-
or in some such similar way-even though we had no way of
inspecting one in isolation from the other. Don't physicists say
something like this about the electrons inside an atom ? We can
verify that there are two, that is to say a certain property of the
whole configuration, even though there is no way of detecting
any character that uniquely characterises any element of the
configuration.
   A. But if you were to approach your two stars one would have
to be on your left and one on the right. And this would dis-
tinguish them.
   B. I agree. Why shouldn't we say that the two stars are
disti:nguishable-meaning that it would be possible for an observer
to see one on his left and the other on his right, or more generally,
that it would be possible for one star to come to have a relation to
a third object that the second star would not have to that third
object.
   A. So you agree with me after all.
   B. Not if you mean that the two stars do not have all their
properties in common. All I said was that it was logically
possible for them to enter into different relationships with a third
object. But this would be a change in the uriverse.
   A. If you are right, nothing unobserved would be observ-
able. For the presence of an observer would always change it,
and the observation would always be an observation of some-
thing else.
   B. I don't say that every observation changes what is observed.
My point is that there isn't any being to the right or being to the




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                  THE IDENTITY      OF INDISCERNIBLES                     163
 left in the two-sphere universe until an observer is introduced,
that is to say until a real change is made.
    A. But the spheres themselves wouldn't have changed.
    B. Indeed they would: they would have acquired new
relational characteristics. In the absence of any asymmetric
observer, I repeat, the spheres would have all their properties in
common (including, if you like, the power to enter into different
relations with other objects). Hence the principle of Identity
of Indiscernibles is false.
    A. So perhaps you really do have twenty hands after all ?
    B. Not a bit of it. Nothing that I have said prevents me from
holding that we can verify that there are exactly two. But we
could know thattwo things existed without there being any way
to distinguish one from the other. The Principle is false.
   A. I am not surprised that you ended in this way, since you
assumed it in the description of your fantastic "universe ".
Of course, if you began by assuming that the spheres were
numerically diflerent though qualitatively alike, you could end
by " proving " what you first assumed.
   B. But I wasn't " proving " anything. I tried to support my
contention that it is logically possible for two things to have all
their properties in common by giving an illustrative description.
(Similarly, if I had to show it is logically possible for nothing at
all to be seen I would ask you to imagine a universe in which
everybody was blind.) It was for you to show that my de-
scription concealed some hidden contradiction. And you haven't
done so.
   A. All the same I am not convinced.
   B. Well, then, you ought to be.'

Cornell University.
   1 The followingnotes and referencesmight be helpful to anybody wishing
to make up his own mind on the questions raised:
   The Definitionof Identity: See Principia Mathematica,vol. i, definition
13.01. The theory of types required Whitehead and Russell to say
x and y are identical if and only if the same predicative functions are
satisfied by both. For a similar definition see W. V. Quine, Mathematical
Logic (1940), definition D 10 (p. 136). See also G. Frege, The Foundations
of Arithmetic(Oxford, 1940, p. 76).
  Self-evidenceof the Principle: " I think it is obvious that the principle
of Identity of Indiscernibles is not true " (G. E. Moore, Philosophical
Studies, 1922, p. 307). "Leibniz's,' principles of indiscernibles' is all
nonsense. No doubt, all things differ; but there is no logical necessity
for it " (C. S. Peirce, CollectedPapers, 4.311). " Russell's definition of
     'won't do; because according to it one can;notsay that two objects
have all their propertiesin common (even if this proposition is never true,




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
164      MAX BLACK:       THE IDENTITY       OF INDISCERNIBLES

it is nevertheless significant)." (L. Wittgenstein, TractatusLogico-Philo-
sophicus,5.5302). See also C. H. Langford," Othernessand dissimilarity"
in, MIND, vol. xxxix (1930),pp. 454-461.
    Bradley'sremark: Not made in connexion with this topic. See Ethical
Studies, 2nd edn., 1927, p. 165. Bradley affirmedwhat he called " the
Axiom of the Identity of Indiscernibles" (The Principles of Logic, 2nd
 ed., 1928, p. 288).
   Identity as a relational property: ". . . numerical identity, which is
a dyadic relation of a subject to itself of which nothing but an existent
individual is capable" (C. S. Peirce, CollectedPapers, 1.461).
   The proof of theprinciple by treatingidentityas a property: "It should
be observed that by 'indiscernibles' he [Leibniz] canrot have meant two
objects which agree as to all their properties,for one of the properties of
x is to be identical with x, and therefore this property would necessarily
belong to y if x and y agreed in all their properties. Some limitation of
the common propertiesnecessary to make things indiscernibleis therefore
implied by the necessity of an axiom " (Principia Mathematica,vol. i,
p. 51). Cf. K. Grelling," Identitas indiscernibilium" in Erkenntnis, vol.
vi (1936), pp. 252-259.
   Counter-examples:C. D. Broad tries to refute McTaggart'sform of the
principle (" The dissimilarityof the diverse ") by the example of a universe
consistingof two minds, without bodies,that are exactly alike in all respects.
(Examination of McTaggart'sPhilosophy, vol. i, p. 176). Broad holds
however,that " either spatial or temporalseparationinvolves dissimilarity"
(op. cit., p. 173).
   The argumentfrom verifiability: "To say that B and C are 'really'
two, although they seem one, is to say something which, if B and C are
totally indistinguishable, seems wholly devoid of meaning " (B. Russell,
An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, 1940, p. 127).
   The distinguishabilityof asymmetric bodies and their mirror images:
There is a famous discussion of this in Kant's Critiqueof Pure Reason.
See, for instance, H. Vaihinger, Kommentarzur Kant's Kritik der reinen
Vernunft, 1922, vol. ii, pp. 518-532 (" Anhang- Das Paradoxon der
symmetrischen Gegensta.nde").




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sat, 13 Feb 2016 18:33:34 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
