   Identity through Possible Worlds: Some Questions
   Author(s): Roderick M. Chisholm
   Source: Noûs, Vol. 1, No. 1 (Mar., 1967), pp. 1-8
   Published by: Wiley
   Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2214708
   Accessed: 09-02-2016 17:52 UTC



   Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
   info/about/policies/terms.jsp

   JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content
   in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
   For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




            Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Noûs.




http://www.jstor.org



                                     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                                                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
         IdentityThroughPossibleWorlds:
                           SomeQuestions

                       RODERICK M. CHISHOLM
                             BROWN     UNIVERSITY




        It is now easy to see a simple way of avoiding undesirable existential
  generalizations in epistemic contexts. Existential generalization with re-
  spect to a term-say b-is admissible in such contexts if b refers to one
  and the same man in all the "possible worlds" we have to consider.1


       In an article on Hintikka's Knowledge and Belief, I suggested
that certain difficult questions come to mind when we consider the
thought that an individual in one possible world might be identical
with an individual in another possible world.2 The present paper
is written in response to the editor's invitation to be more ex-
plicit about these questions.
       Let us suppose, then, that the figure of an infinity of possible
worlds makes good sense and let us also suppose, for simplicity of
presentation, that we have a complete description of this one.
We may consider some one of the entities of this world, alter its
description slightly. adjust the descriptions of the other entities
in the world to fit this alteration, and then ask ourselves whether
the entity in the possible world that we thus arrive at is identical
with the entity we started with in this world. We start with
Adam, say; we alter his description slightly and allow him to live
for 931 years instead of for only 930; we then accomodate our

      1 JaakkoHintikka, Knowledge and Belief: An Introductionto the Logic of
the Two Notions (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1962), p. 152.
      2 "The Logic of Knowing," Journal of Philosophy, LX (1963), pp. 773-
795; see especially pp. 787-795.
                                        1




   This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                   All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
2                                                                             NOtS

 descriptionsof the other entities of the world to fit this possibility
  (Eve, for example, will now have the property of being married
 to a man who lives for 931 years instead of that of being married
 to a man who lives for only 930); and we thus arrive at a descrip-
 tion of another possible world.3
       Let us call our present world "W'"and the possible world we
 have just indicated "W2".Is the Adam of our world W1 the same
 person as the Adam of the possible world W2? In other words,
 is Adam such that he lives for just 930 years in WI and for 931
 in W2? And how are we to decide?
       One's first thought might be that the propositionthat Adam
is in both worlds is incompatible with the principle of the in-
discernibilityof identicals. How could our Adam be identical with
that one if ours lives for just 930 years and that one for 931?
Possibly this question could be answered in the following way:
      "Comparethe question: How can Adam at the age of 930 be
the same person as the man who ate the forbidden fruit, if the
former is old and the latter is young? Here the proper reply
would be: it is not true that the old Adam has properties that
render him discerniblefrom the young Adam; the truth is, rather,
that Adam has the property of being young when he eats the
forbiddenfruit and the property of being old in the year 930, and
that these properties,though different,are not incompatible. And
so, too, for the different possible worlds: It is not true that the
Adam of W1 has properties that render him discernible from the
Adam of W2; the truth is, rather, that Adam has the property of
living for 930 years in W1 and the property of living for 931 in
W2, and that these properties, though different, are not incom-
patible."
      I think it is clear that we must deal with the old Adam and
the young Adam in the manner indicated; but in this case, one
could argue, we know independently that the same Adam is in-
volved throughout. But are we justified in dealing in a similar
way with the Adam of W1 and the Adam of W2? In this latter
case, one might say, we do not know independently that the

       'It should be noted that the possible world in question is not one that
Hintikkawould call epistemically possible, for it could be said to contain certain
states of affairs (Adam living for 931 years) which are incompatible with
what we know to hold of this world; hence it is not one of the worlds Hintikka
is concerned with in the passage quoted above. But it is logically possible, and
that is all that matters for purposes of the present discussion.




    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
IDENTITY   THROUGH POSSIBLE       WORLDS:     SOME   QUESTIONS                    3

same Adam is involved throughout. Here, then, is one of the
questions that I do not know how to answer. Let us suppose,
however, that we answer it affirmatively.
      The Adam of this world, we are assuming, is identical with
the Adam of that one. In other words, Adam is such that he
lives for only 930 years in W1 and for 931 in W2. Let us now
suppose further that we have arrived at our conception of W2,
not only by introducingalterationsin our descriptionof the Adam
of W1, but also by introducing alterations in our description of
the Noah of W1. We say; "SupposeAdam had lived for 931 years
instead of 930 and suppose Noah had lived for 949 years instead
of 950."We then arriveat our descriptionof W2 by accommodating
our descriptions of the other entities of- W1 in such a way that
these entities will be capable of inhabitingthe same possible world
as the revised Noah and the revised Adam. Both Noah and
Ajdam,then, may be found in W2 as well as in W1.
      Now let us move from W2 to still another possible world
W3. Once again, we will start by introducing alterations in Adam
and Noah and then accommodatethe rest of the world to'what we
have done. In W3 Adam lives for 932 years and Noah for 948. Then
moving from one possible world to another, but keeping our
fingers, so to speak, on the same two entities, we arrive at a
world in which Noah lives for 930 years and Adam for 950. In
that world, therefore, Noah has the age that Adam has in this
one, and Adam has the age that Noah has in this one; the Adam
and Noah that we started with might thus be said to have ex-
changed their ages. Now let us continue on to still other possible
worlds and allow them to exchange still other properties.We will
imagine a possible world in which they have exchanged the first
letters of their names, then one in which they have exchanged
the second, then one in which they have exchanged the fourth,
with the result that Adam in this new possible world will be called
"Noah"and Noah "Adam."Procedingin this way, we arrivefinally
at a possible world Wn which would seem to be exactly like our
present world W1, except for the fact that the Adam of Wn may be
traced back to the Noah of W1 and the Noah of Wn may be traced
back to the Adam of W'.
      Should we say of the Adam of Wn that he is identical with
the Noah of W' and should we say of the Noah of Wn that he
is identical the Adam of W'? In other words, is there an x such
that x is Adam in WI and x is Noah in Wn, and is there a y such




   This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                   All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
4                                                                             NOUS

 that y is Noah in W' and y is Adam in Wn? And how are we to
 decide?
        But let us suppose that somehow we have arrived at an
 affirmativeanswer. Now we must ask ourselves: How is one to
 tell the differencebetween the two worlds W1 and Wn? Shall we
say that, though they are diverse, they are yet indiscernible from
 each other-or, at any rate, that the Adam of W' is indiscernible
from the Adam of Wn (who is in fact the Noah of W') and that
the Noah of W' is indiscerniblefrom the Noah of Wn (who is in
fact the Adam of WI')?There is a certain ambiguityin "discernible"
and in "indiscernible".The two Adams could be called "discerni-
ble" in that the one has the property of being Noah in the other
world and the other does not, and similarly for the two Noahs.
But in the sense of "indiscernible"that allows us to say that
"Indiscerniblesare identical"tells us more than merely "Identicals
are identical," aren't the two Adams, the two Noahs, and the
two worlds indiscernible?Could God possibly have had a sufficient
reason for creating W' instead of Wn?
       If W' and Wn are two different possible worlds, then, of
course, there are indefinitely many others, equally difficult to dis-
tinguish from each other and from W' and Wn. For what we have
done to Adam and Noah, we can do to any other pair of entities.
Therefore among the possible worlds which would seem to be in-
discernible from this one, there are those in which you play the
role that I play in this one and in which I play the role that you
play in this one.4 (If this is true, there may be good ground
for the existentialist's Angst; since, it would seem, God could
have had no sufficientreason for choosing the world in which you
play your present role instead of one in which you play mine.)
       Is there really a good reason for saying that this Adam and
Noah are identical, respectively, with that Noah and Adam? We
opened the door to this conclusion by assuming that Adam could
be found in more than one possible world-by assumingthat there
is an x such that x is Adam in W' and lives here for 930 years
and x is also Adam in W2 and lives there for 931. If it is reason-
      '"She (Ivich) looked at the glass, and Mathieu looked at her. A violent
and undefined desire had taken possession of him; a desire to be for one instant
that consciousness . .. to feel those long slender arms from within. . . . To
be Ivich and not to cease to be himself." Sartre, The Age of Reason. Compare
N. L. Wilson, "Substance without Substrata," Review of Metaphysics, XII
(1959), and A. N. Prior, "Identifiable Individuals," Review of Metaphysics,
XIII ( 1960).




    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
IDENITUY THROUGH POSSIBLE WORLDS: SOME QUESTIONS                                  5

able to assumethat Adamretainshis identity throughthe relatively
slight changes involved in the transitionfrom W1 to W2, and so,
too, for Noah, then it would also seem reasonableto assume that
each retains his identity through the equally slight changes in-
volved in all the other transitions that took us finally to Wn.
(These transitions,of course, may be as gradual as one pleases.
Instead of it being a year that we take away from Noah in our first
step and give to Adam, it could be only a day, or a fraction
of a second.) But identity is transitive.And therefore, one might
argue, once we allow Adam to exist in more than one possible
world, we commit ourselvesto affirmativeanswers to the puzzling
questions we have encountered.
      Is there a way, then, in which we might reasonably counte-
nance identity throughpossible worlds and yet avoid such extreme
conclusions?The only way, so far as I can see, is to appeal to
some version of the doctrine that individual things have essential
properties.One possibility would be this:
       For every entity x, there are certainpropertiesN and certain
properties E such that: x has N in some possible worlds and
x has non-N in others; but x has E in every possible world in
which x exists; and, moreover, for every y, if y has E in any
possible world, then y is identical with x. (If "being identical
with x7 refers to a property of x, then we should add that E
includes certain propertiesother than that of being identical with
x.) The propertiesE will thus be essential to x and the properties
N twn-essential,or accidental."
        To avoid misunderstanding,we should contrast this present
 use of "essentialproperty"with two others.
        (1) Sometimesthe "essentialproperties"of a thing are said
 to be just those properties that the thing has necessarily. But
 it is not implausibleto say that there are certain propertieswhich
 are such that everything has those properties necessarily; the
 properties,for example, of being either red or non-red, of being
 colored if red, and of being self-identical.6Thus the Eiffel Tower
      6 We could put the doctrine more cautiously by saying that the distinction
between the two types of property holds, not for every entity x, but only for
some entities x. But what reason could there be for thinking that it holds of
some entities and not of others?
      ' Sometimesthese propertiesare called "analyticproperties"or 'tautologi-
cal properties";but the property of being colored if red should not be so-
called if, as some have argued, "Everything that is red is colored" is not
analytic.




   This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                   All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
6                                                                              NONS

 is necessarilyred or non-red,necessarily colored if red, and neces-
 sarily self-identical; and so is everything else.7
        (2) And sometimes it is said (most unfortunately,it seems
to me) that each individual thing is such that it has certain
properties which are essential or necessary to it "under certain
 descriptions of it" and which are not essential or necessary to it
"under certain other descriptions of it." Thus "under one of his
descriptions,"the property of being President is said to be essen-
tial to Mr. Johnsonwhereas "underthat description"the property
of being the husband of Lady Bird is not; and "underanother one
of his descriptions,"it is the other way around. Presumablyevery
property P of every individual thing x is such that, "under some
description of x," P is essential or necessary to x.
       But if E is the set of propertiesthat are essential to a given
thing x, in the sense of "essential' that we have defined above,
then: E will not be a universal property (indeed, nothing but x
will have E); some of the properties of x will not be included in
E; and E will not be such that there are descriptionsof x "under
which" E is not, in the sense defined, essential to x.
       If we accept this doctrine of essentialproperties,we may say,
perhaps, that the property of living for just 930 years is essential
to Adam and therefore that he may inhabit other possible worlds
without living for just 930 years in each of them. And so, too,
perhaps, for having a name which, in English, ends with the letter
"In". But, we may then go on to say, somewhere in the journey
from W' to Wn, we left the essential properties of Adam (and
therefore Adam himself) behind. But where? What are the prop-
erties that are essential to Adam? Being the first man? Having a
name which, in English, begins with the first letter of the alpha-
bet? But why these properties?If we can contemplateAdam with
slightly different properties in another possible world, why can't
we think of him as having ancestors in some possible worlds and
as having a differentname in others? And similarly for any other
property that might be proposed as being thus essential to Adam.
       I From the propositionthat the Eiffel Tower is red and necessarily colored

if red, it would be fallacious to infer that the Eiffel Tower is necessarily colored;
this is the fallacy of inferring necessitate consequentis from necessitate conse-
quentiae. And from the proposition that the Eiffel Tower is necessarily red or
non-red, it would be fallacious to infer that the proposition that the Eiffel
Tower is red or non-red is a necessary proposition;the proposition could hardly
be necessary, for it implies the contingent proposition that there is an Eiffel
Tower. This latter fallacy might be called the fallacy of inferring necessitate
de dicto from necessitate de re.




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
IDENTITY THROUGH POSSIBLE WORLDS: SOME QUESTIONS                                  7
      It seems to me that even if Adam does have such essential
properties,there is no procedure at all-for finding out what they
are. And it also seems to me that there is no way of finding out
whether he does have any essential properties. Is there really a
good reason, then, for supposing that he does?
      The distinctionbetween essential and non-essentialproper-
ties seems to be involved in one of the traditionalways of dealing
with the problem of knowing who.8 If this way of dealing with
that problem were satisfactory, then the doctrine of essential
propertiesmight have a kind of independent confirmation.But I
am not sure that is satisfactory.The problemof knowing who may
be illustratedin this way. I do not know who it was who robbed
the bank this morning,but I do know, let us assume,that there is
someone who robbed the bank and I also know that that person
is the man who drove off from the bank at 9:20 A.M. in a Buick
Sedan. For me to know who he is, therefore,it is not enough for
me to have informationenabling me to characterizehim uniquely.
What kind of information,then, would entitle me to say that I
know who he is? The essentialisticanswer would be: "Youknow
who the bank robber is, provided that there is a certain set of
propertiesE which are essential to the x such that x robbed the
bank and you know that x has E and x robbed the bank."But if
my doubts about essential properties are well-founded, this solu-
tion to the problemof knowing who would imply that the police,
though they may finally "learn the thief's identity," will never
know that they do. For to know that one knows who the thief is
(according to the proposed solution) one must know what prop-
erties are essential to the thief; and if what I have said is correct,
we have no way of finding out what they are. How are the police
to decide that they know who the thief is if they have no answer
to the metaphysical question "What are the essential properties
of the man we have arrested?""
      8 Compare Aristotle, De Sophisticis Elenchis, 179 b 3; Petrus Hispanus,
SummulaeLogicales, ed. I. M. Bochenski (Turin, 1947), 7.41; Franz Brentano,
Kategorienlehre(Leipzig, 1933), p. 165.
      ' Hintikka says that we know who the thief is provided that there exists
an x such that we know that the thief is identical with x (op. cit., p. 153). But
under what conditions may it be said that there exists an x such that we know
that the thief is identical with x? Presumably,if ever, when we catch him in the
act-when we see him steal the money. But the teller saw him steal the money
and she doesn t know who he is. I have suggested elsewhere a slightly different
way of looking at these questions;compareop. cit., pp. 789-791, and "Believing
and Intentionality,"Philosophy and PhenomenologicalResearch, XXV (1964),
pp. 266-269, esp. p. 268.




   This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                   All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
8                                                                             NONS

       It is assumed, in many writings on modal logic, that 'Neces-
sarily, for every x, x is identical with x" implies "For every x,
necessarily x is identical with x," and therefore also "For every x
and y, if x is identical with y, then necessarily x is identical with
y." But is the assumptionreasonable?It leads us to perplexingcon-
clusions: for example, to the conclusion that every entity exists in
every possible world and therefore,presumably,that everything is
an ens necessarium.
       Why assume that necessarily the evening star is identical
with the evening star? We should remind ourselves that "The eve-
ning star is identical with the evening star"is not a logical truth,
for it implies the contingent proposition "There is an evening
star," and that its negation is not "The evening star is diverse
from the evening star." Wouldn't it be simpler to deny that
"Necessarily,for every x, x is identical with x" implies "For every
x, necessarily x is identical with x"? Then we could deny the
principle de dicto, "Necessarilythe evening star is identical with
the evening star,"and also deny the principle, de re, "The evening
star is necessarily identical with the evening star."0LWe could
still do justice to the necessity that is here involved, it seems to
me, provided we continued to affirmsuch principles, de dicto, as
"Necessarily,for every x, x is identical with x" and "Necessarily,
for every x and y, if x is identical with y then y is identical with
x," and such principles, de re, "The evening star, like everything
else, is necessarily self-identical."
      10 I have discussed this possibility in "Query on Substitutivity,"in Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. II, ed., Robert S. Cohen and Marx
W. Wartofsky (New York: The Humanities Press, 1965), pp. 275-278.
      If we deny that "Necessarily, for every x, x is F" implies "For every x,
necessarily x is F," then presumably we should also deny that "It is possible
that there exists an x such that x is F" implies "There exists an x such that it
is possible that x is F." But isn't this what we should do? One could hold
quite consistently, it seems to me, that though it is possible that there exists
something having the properties that Christians attribute to God, yet nothing
that does exist is such that it is possible that that thing has the properties that
Christians attribute to God.




    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 17:52:58 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
