8

    Reprinted from F oundations of P hysics                                            Vol. 12, No. 10, October 1982
                                                                                                  Printed in Belgium




    On the Impossible Pilot Wave
                    J. S. Bell1
                    Received April 13, 1982

                    The strange story o f the von Neumann impossibility proof is recalled, and the
                    even stranger story o f later impossibility proofs, and how the impossible was
                    done by de Broglie and Bohm. Morals are drawn.




    1. INTRODUCTION

    When I was a student I had much difficulty with quantum mechanics. It was
    comforting to find that even Einstein had had such difficulties for a long
    time. Indeed they had led him to the heretical conclusion that something was
    missing in the theory(1): “I am, in fact, rather firmly convinced that the
    essentially statistical character of contemporary quantum theory is solely to
    be ascribed to the fact that this (theory) operates with an incomplete
    description of physical systems.”
          More explicitly,<2) in “a complete physical description, the statistical
    quantum theory would ... take an approximately analogous position to the
    statistical mechanics within the framework of classical mechanics . . . . ”
          Einstein did not seem to know that this possibility, of peaceful coex­
    istence between quantum statistical predictions and a more complete
    theoretical description, had been disposed of with great rigor by J. von
    Neumann.(3) I myself did not know von Neumann’s demonstration at first
    hand, for at that time it was available only in German, which I could not
    read. However I knew of it from the beautiful book by Born,<4) Natural
    Philosophy o f Cause and Chance, which was in fact one of the highlights of



    ' CERN, Geneva.

                                                          989
                                              0015-9018/82/1000-0989S03.00/0 <E) 1982 Plenum Publishing Corporation
990                                                                        Bell


my physics education. Discussing how physics might develop Born wrote: “I
expect ... that we shall have to sacrifice some current ideas and to use still
more abstract methods. However these are only opinions. A more concrete
contribution to this question has been made by J. v. Neumann in his brilliant
book, Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. He puts the theory
on an axiomatic basis by deriving it from a few postulates of a very plausible
and general character, about the properties of “expectation values”
(averages) and their representation by mathematical symbols. The result is
that the formalism of quantum mechanics is uniquely determined by these
axioms; in particular, no concealed parameters can be introduced with the
help of which the indeterministic description could be transformed into a
deterministic one. Hence if a future theory should be deterministic, it cannot
be a modification of the present one but must be essentially different. How
this could be possible without sacrificing a whole treasure of well established
results I leave to the determinists to worry about.”
       Having read this, I relegated the question to the back of my mind and
got on with more practical things.
       But in 1952 I saw the impossible done. It was in papers by David
Bohm.<5) Bohm showed explicitly how parameters could indeed be
introduced, into nonrelativistic wave mechanics, with the help of which the
indeterministic description could be transformed into a deterministic one.
More importantly, in my opinion, the subjectivity of the orthodox version,
the necessary reference to the “observer,” could be eliminated.
       Moreover, the essential idea was one that had been advanced already by
de Broglie(6) in 1927, in his “pilot wave” picture.
       But why then had Born not told me of this “pilot wave?” If only to
point out what was wrong with it? Why did von Neumann not consider it?
More extraordinarily, why did people go on producing “impossibility”
proofs,<7~12) after 1952, and as recently as 1978(I3,14)? When even Pauli,<l5)
Rosenfeld,'16’ and Heisenberg,<17) could produce no more devastating
criticism of Bohm’s version than to brand it as “metaphysical” and
“ideological?” Why is the pilot wave picture ignored in text books? Should it
not be taught, not as the only way, but as an antidote to the prevailing
complacency? To show that vagueness, subjectivity, and indeterminism, are
not forced on us by experimental facts, but by deliberate theoretical choice?
       I will not attempt here to answer these questions. But, since the pilot
 wave picture still needs advertising, I will make here another modest attempt
to publicize it, hoping that it may fall into the hands of a few of the many to
 whom even now it will be new. I will try to present the essential idea, which
 is trivially simple, so compactly, so lucidly, that even some of those who
 know they will dislike it may go on reading, rather than set the matter aside
for another day.
On the Impossible Pilot Wave                                               991


2. A SIMPLE MODEL

    Consider a system whose wavefunction has one discrete argument, a,
and one continuous argument, x, as well as time, t:

                                     ¥(a, x, t)
                                     0 = 1 , 2,... N
                                     — 00 < X < + 0 0


It might be a particle free to move in one-dimension and having an “intrinsic
spin.” Consider “observables” O which involve only the spin, and so can be
represented by finite matrices:

                           O'Pia, x) = Y , 0(a, b) V(b, x)

To “measure” such an observable, suppose that we can contrive an
interaction, with some external field, which is represented by the addition to
the Hamiltonian of a term<3>
                                     gO(fi/i)(8/8x)

where g is a coupling constant. Suppose for simplicity that the particle is
infinitely massive, so that this interaction Hamiltonian is the complete
Hamiltonian.(3) Then the Schrodinger equation is readily solved. It is
convenient to introduce the eigenvectors of 0

                                          a„(a)


and corresponding eigenvalues

                                            On

defined by

                                   0a„(a) = 0 „an(a)

Then the initial state can be expanded

                               '{'(a, x,o) = X          «„(«)
                                             n

and the solution of the Schrodinger equation is

                        ^(a, x, I) = X 0 n(x ~ g O „ t ) a n ( a )
992                                                                         Bell


That is to say, the various wavepackets <P move apart from one another, and
after a sufficiently long time, whatever may have been the case initially,
overlap very little. Then any probable result of a position measurement on
the particle will correspond to a particular eigenvalue On, a particular On
being obtained with probability given by the norm of the corresponding
wavepacket <Pn, i.e., by the strength of the corresponding eigenvector in the
expansion of the initial state. We have here a model of something like a
Stern-Gerlach experiment. Conventionally the process is said “to measure
observable O with result On."
     To complete this picture, a la de Broglie and Bohm, we add to the
wavefunction      a particle position

                                         m

If a position measurement is made at time t, then the result is X(t), but even
when no measurement is made X(t) exists. The particle, in this picture,
always has a definite position. The time evolution of particle position is
determined by
                       {d/dt)X(t) = j(X(t), t)/p(X(t), t)

where
                   p{x, t) = y            x, t) ^ a , x, t)
                             a

                   j(x, t ) = y ¥'*(a, x, t) gO{a, b) !P(b, x, /)
                             a ,b

Note that the Schrodinger equation implies the continuity equation

                             (8/dt)p + (d/8x)j = o

It is assumed that, over many repetitions of the experiment, various X(o)
occur with the probability distribution

                                    p(X(o), o)dX(o)

where p is given as above in terms of the initial wavefunction. Then it is a
theorem that the probability distribution over X{t) is

                                    p(X(t), t) dX(t)

This is the conventional quantum distribution for position, and so we have
the conventional predictions for the result of the Stern-Gerlach experiment.
For the experiment, despite all the talk about “spin,” is finally about position
observations.
On the Impossible Pilot Wave                                                993


      Note that in this theory probability enters once only, in connection with
initial conditions, as in classical statistical mechanics. Thereafter the joint
evolution of P and X is perfectly deterministic.
      Note that in this theory the wavefunction P has the role of a physically
real field, as real here as Maxwell’s fields were for Maxwell. Quantum
mechanics students sometimes have difficulty with the fact that in the pilot
wave picture the particle position X and the argument of the wavefunction x
are separate variables. But the situation, in this respect, is just that of
Maxwell. He also had fields extending over space, and particles located at
particular points. Of course the field at the particular point is that most
immediately relevant for the motion of the particular particle.
      Although P is a real field it does not show up immediately in the result
of a single “measurement,” but only in the statistics of many such results. It
is the de Broglie-Bohm variable X that shows up immediately each time.
That X rather than P is historically called a “hidden” variable is a piece of
historical silliness.
      Note that from the present point of view the description of the
experiment as “measurement” of “spin observable” O is an unfortunate one.
Our particle has no internal degrees of freedom. It is guided however by a
multicomponent field, and when this suffers the analogue of optical multiple
refraction, the particle is dragged one way or another depending only on its
initial position. We have here a very explicit illustration of the lesson taught
by Bohr. Experimental results are products of the complete set-up, “system”
plus “apparatus,” and should not be regarded as “measurements” of preex­
isting properties of the “system” alone.



3. THE HOLES IN THE NETS

     It is easy to find good reasons for disliking the de Broglie-Bohm
picture. Neither de Broglie(18) nor Bohm<19) liked it very much; for both of
them it was only a point of departure . Einstein also<20) did not like it very
much. He found it “too cheap,” although, as Born<20> remarked, “it was quite
in line with his own ideas”.(21,22) But like it or lump it, it is perfectly
conclusive as a counter example to the idea that vaguenes, subjectivity, or
indeterminism, are forced on us by the experimental facts covered by
nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. What then is wrong with the
impossibility proofs? Here I will consider only three of them, the most
famous (incontestably), the most instructive (in my opinion), and the most
recently published (to my knowledge). More, and more details, can be found
elsewhere. (9,23~25)
                                                                                        153

994                                                                              Bell


      It will be useful to denote by

                                  R (0, n o ),X (o ))

the result of “measuring” O in the above way, for given initial X and     This
function can be calculated in principle by solving first the Schrodinger
equation for P and then solving the guiding equation for X. For some cases
this has even been done explicitly/26,27> Note well that the values taken by R
are the eigenvalues of O.
     The vital assumption in the famous proof of von Neumann is that, for
operators connected by a linear relation,

                                    0 = pP + qQ

the results R are similarly related:

          r (o , n o ) , x(o ) ) = pr (p , n o ) , *(o)) + qR{Q, n o ) , *(o))

Now this must certainly hold when averaged over X(o) to give quantum
expectation values. But it cannot possibly hold before averaging, for the
individual results R are eigenvalues, and eigenvalues of linearly related
operators are not linear related. For example let P and Q be components of
spin angular momentum in perpendicular directions

                                P = S X,       Q —S y

and let O be the component along an intermediate direction

                                  0 = (P + Q) / ^ 2

In the simple case of spin-1/2, the eigenvalues of O, P, Q, are all of
magnitude 1/2, and the von Neumann requirement would read

                             ±1/2 = (±1/2 ± l/2)A /2

—which is impossible indeed. Because the de Broglie-Bohm picture agrees
with quantum mechanics in having the eigenvalues as the results of
individual measurements—it is excluded by von Neumann. His “very general
and plausible” postulate is absurd.
     More instructive is the Gleason-Jauch proof. I was told of it by J. M.
Jauch in 1963. Not all of the powerful mathematical theorem of Gleason128’
is required, but only a corollary which is easily proved by itself/9’ (The idea
was later rediscovered by Kochen and Specker'11’; see also Belinfante'24’
and Fine and Teller'29’.) Jauch saw that Gleason’s theorem implied a result
On the Impossible Pilot Wave                                              995


like that of von Neumann but with a weaker additivity assumption- -for
commuting operators only

                                     [p ,Q \
Since the eigenvalues of commuting operators are additive, additivity of the
“measurement” results is not manifestly absurd. Perhaps it seems
particularly plausible when the commuting “observables” involved are
“measured” at the same time. So let us go immediately to that case. It is
sufficient to consider a complete set of orthogonal spin projection operators
P„, i.e., a set such that
                               Pn Pm - P mP n- P n $nm

and

                                      y p n= i
                                       n
The eigenvalues of such projection operators are all either zero or unity and,
because the operators add to unity, the additivity hypothesis for
“measurement” results means simply that on “measurement” one and only
one of the operators will give unity, the others giving zero. It is easy to
model this situation by an adaptation of the model described above. In the
interaction Hamiltonian, gO is replaced by

                                      y    g5 n Ap n
                                       n

The solution of the Schrodinger equation goes through as before in terms of
simultaneous eigenvectors a of all the Pn. The various final wavepackets are
displaced by distances gn. The particle is found finally in one of these
wavepackets; and, if the gn are all different, this singles out one of the
operators Pn as that for which the result of the “measurement” is unity
rather than zero. However the Gleason-Jauch argument depends also on
another assumption. For a given operator P, it is possible (when the
dimension N of the spin space exceeds 2) to find more than one set of other
orthogonal projection operators to complete it:

                                 1 = P , + P 2 + P3...
                                   = P, + P '+ P ( ...

where P2... commute with P ,, and with one another, but not with P 2.... And
the extra assumption is this: the result of “measuring” P, is independent of
996                                                                          Bell


which complementary set, P2... or P'2..., is “measured” at the same time. The
de Broglie-Bohm picture does not respect this. Even though the two sets of
operators have P, in common, the eigenvectors a are different, and the
particle orbits X (t) are different, as well as P{t), for given X(o) and P(o).
There is nothing unacceptable, or even surprising, about this. The
Hamiltonians are different in the two cases. We are doing a different
experiment when we arrange to “measure” P2... rather than P2... along with
P{. The apparent freedom of the Gleason-Jauch argument from implausible
assumptions about incompatible “observables” is illusory. In denying the
Gleason-Jauch independence hypothesis, the de Broglie-Bohm picture
illustrates rather the importance of the experimental set-up as a whole, as
insisted on by Bohr. The Gleason-Jauch axiom is a denial of Bohr’s insight.
      The proof of Jost(13) concerns unstable “identical” particles. He
remarks that if decay times of similar nuclei were somehow determined in
advance, by some parameters additional to the quantum wavefunction, then
the nuclei would not be really identical and could not show the appropriate
Fermi or Bose statistics. But again the difficulty disappears in the light of the
pilot wave picture. The existing nonrelativistic version could not cope with
beta decay. But it has no difficulty with alpha decay or fission (or even
gamma decay<5)) when the unstable nuclei are regarded as composites of
stable protons and neutrons. There is no problem in generalizing the de
Broglie-Bohm picture to many particle systems.<5) The wavefunction is just
that of ordinary quantum mechanics, and respects the usual symmetry or
antisymmetry requirements. The added variables (in the simplest version of
the theory(9,30,3l)) are just particle positions, and the measured probability
distributions of these will be those of quantum mechanics. Recognizing that
it is always positions that we are in the end concerned with, all the statistical
predictions of quantum mechanics are reproduced. This includes those
phenomena associated with “identity of particles”.<5) The anticipated
difficulty does not arise.


3. MORALS

     The first moral of this story is just a practical one. Always test your
general reasoning against simple models.
     The second moral is that in physics the only observations we must
consider are position observations, if only the positions of instrument
pointers. It is a great merit of the de Broglie-Bohm picture to force us to
consider this fact. If you make axioms, rather than definitions and theorems,
about the “measurement” of anything else, then you commit redundancy and
risk inconsistency.
On the Impossible Pilot Wave                                               997


      A final moral concerns terminology. Why did such serious people take
so seriously axioms which now seem so arbitrary? I suspect that they were
misled by the pernicious misuse of the word “measurement” in contenporary
theory. This word very strongly suggests the ascertaining of some preexisting
property of some thing, any instrument involved playing a purely passive
role. Quantum experiments are just not like that, as we learned especially
from Bohr. The results have to be regarded as the joint product of “system”
and “apparatus,” the complete experimental set-up. But the misuse of the
word “measurement” makes it easy to forget this and then to expect that the
“results of measurement” should obey some simple logic in which the
apparatus is not mentioned. The resulting difficulties soon show that any
such logic is not ordinary logic. It is my impression that the whole vast
subject of “Quantum Logic” has arisen in this way from the misuse of a
word. I am convinced that the word “measurement” has now been so abused
that the field would be significantly advanced by banning its use altogether,
in favor for example of the word “experiment.”
      There are surely other morals to be drawn here, if not by physicists then
by historians and sociologists.132,33*
      Of the various impossibility proofs, only those concerned with local
causality*34"37* seem now to retain some significance outside special
formalisms. The de Broglie-Bohm theory is not a counter example in this
case. Indeed it was the explicit representation of quantum nonlocality in that
picture which started a new wave of investigation in this area. Let us hope
that these analyses also may one day be illuminated, perhaps harshly, by
some simple constructive model.
      However that may be, long may Louis de Broglie continue to inspire
those who suspect that what is proved by impossibility proofs is lack of
imagination.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

     I have profited from comments by M. Bell, E. Etim, K. V. Laurikainen,
J. M. Leinaas, and J. Kupsch.


NOTE ADDED IN PROOF

     I am sorry to have missed, before writing the above, an early paper by
E. Specker [Dialectia 14, 239 (1960), or in C. A. Hooker, ed., The Logico-
Algebraic Approach to Quantum Mechanics (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1975),
p. 135]. It announced already what I have called the Gleason-Jauch result.
                                                                                                 157

998                                                                                       Bell


Specker did not know of the work of Gleason, but mentioned rather the
possibility of an “elementary geometrical argument”—presumably of the
kind that I myself gave later<9) as a preliminary to criticism of the axioms.


REFERENCES

 1. P. A. Schilp, Ed., Albert Einstein, Philosopher Scientist (Tudor, New York, 1949), p. 666.
 2. P. A. Schilp, Ed., Albert Einstein, Philosopher Scientist (Tudor, New York, 1949), p. 672.
 3. J. von Neumann, Mathematisch Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer Verlag,
    Berlin, 1932); English translation: Princeton University Press, 1955.
 4. M. Born, Natural Philosophy o f Cause and Chance (Clarendon, Oxford, 1949).
 5. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 165, 180 (1952).
 6. L. de Broglie, in Rapport au Vie me Congres de Physique Solvay (Gauthier-Villars, Paris,
    1930).
 7. J. M. Jauch and C. Piron, Helvetica Physica Acta 36, 827 (1963); Rev. Mod. Phys. 40,
    228 (1966).
 8. J. M. Jauch, private communication (1963).
 9. J. S. Bell, SLAC-PUB-44, Aug. 1964; Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 447 (1966).
10. B. Misra, Nuovo Cimento 47, 843 (1967).
11. S. Kochen and E. P. Specker, J. Math. Mech. 17, 59 (1967).
12. S. P. Gudder, Rev. Mod. Phys. 40, 229 (1968); J. Math. Phys. 9, 1411 (1968).
13. R. Jost, in Some Strangeness in the Proportion (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1980), p. 252.
14. H. Woolf, ed., Some Strangeness in the Proportion (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1980).
15. W. Pauli, in A. George, ed., Louis de Broglie, physicien et penseur (Albin Michel, Paris,
    1953).
16. L. Rosenfeld, in A. George, ed., Louis de Broglie, physicien et penseur (Albin Michel,
    Paris, 1953), p. 43.
17. W. Heisenberg, in W. Pauli, ed., Niels Bohr and the Development of Physics (Pergamon,
    London, 1955).
18. L. de Broglie, Found. Phys. 1, 5 (1970).
19. D. Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London,
     1980).
20. M. Born, ed., The Born-Einstein Letters (Macmillan, London, 1971), p. 192, and letters
    81, 84, 86, 88, 97, 99, 103, 106, 108, 110, 115, and 116.
21. E. P. Wigner, in Some Strangeness in the Proportion (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1980),
    p. 463.
22. J. S. Bell, in Proc. Symposium on Frontier Problems in High Energy Physics, in honor of
    Gilberto Bernardini on his 70th birthday (Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, 1976).
23. M. Mugur-Schachter, Etude du charactere complet de la theorie quantique (Gauthier-
    Villars, Paris, 1964).
24. F. J. Belinfante, A Survey o f Hidden Variable-Theories (Pergamon, London, 1973).
25. M. Jammer, The Philosophy o f Quantum Mechanics (Wiley, New York, 1974).
26. C. Phillipidas, C. Dewdney, and B. J. Hiley, Nuov. Cim. 52B, 15 (1979).
27. C. Dewdney and B. J. Hiley, Found. Phys. 12, 27 (1982).
28. A. M. Gleason, J. Math. Mech. 6, 885 (1957).
29. A. Fine and P. Teller, Found. Phys. 8, 629 (1978).
30. J. S. Bell, Inter. J. o f Quantum Chem., Quantum Chemistry Symposium No. 14 * e
    New York, 1980).
On the Impossible Pilot Wave                                                           999


31. C. J. Isham, R. Penrose, and D. W. Sciama, eds., Quantum Gravity 2 (Clarendon,
    Oxford, 1980), p. 611.
32. P. Forman, “Weimar Culture, Causality, and Quantum Theory 1918-1927,” in R.
    McCormmach, ed.. Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 3 (Univ. of Pennsylvania
    Press, Philadelphia, 1971), pp. 1-115.
33. T. J. Pinch, “What Does a Proof Do if it Does Not Prove?, A Study of the Social
    Conditions and Metaphysical Divisions Leading to David Bohm and John von Neumann
    Failing to Communicate in Quantum Physics,” in E. Mendelsohn, P. Weingart, and R.
    Whitly, eds., The Social Production o f Scientific Knowledge (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1977),
    pp. 171-215.
34. J. Clauser and A. Shimony, Rep. Prog. Phys. 41, 1881 (1978).
35. F. M. Pipkin, Advances in Atomic and Molecular Physics 14 (Academic Press, New
    York, 1979), p. 281.
36. F. Selleri and G. Tarozzi, Riv. Nuov. Cim. 4 (2) (1981).
37. B. d’Espagnat, A la Recherche du Reel (Gauthier Villars, Paris, 1979).




                     Printed by the St. Catherine Press Ltd., Tempelhof 41, Bruges, Belgium
