   Knowledge and Belief: 'De Dicto' and 'De Re'
   Author(s): Roderick Chisholm
   Source: Philosophical Studies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition
   , Vol. 29, No. 1 (Jan., 1976), pp. 1-20
   Published by: Springer
   Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4319005
   Accessed: 09-02-2016 18:18 UTC



   Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
   info/about/policies/terms.jsp

   JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content
   in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
   For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




            Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophical Studies: An International
            Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition.


http://www.jstor.org



                                    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                                                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                           RODERICK       CHISHOLM




KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'




                              1. INTRODUCTION

I will attemptto explicatethe conceptsof beliefde re, knowledgede dicto,
andknowledgede re. Thegeneralapproachto be developedheremayalso
be appliedto those otherintentionalattitudes- for example,desire,hope,
fear, and endeavor- whichmay be directedeitherupon propositionsor
upon things which are not propositions.It differsfrom other contem-
porarytreatmentsof these topics in that it does not attemptto explicate
belief and knowledgeby referenceto linguisticconcepts.I assumethat
languageshouldbe explicatedby referenceto belief and knowledge,and
that it is not enlighteningto attemptto explicatebelief and knowledge
by referenceto language.2
   The definitionsI will formulatepresupposethe followingphilosophical
concepts:(i) that of beliefde dicto,or the acceptanceof a proposition,as
expressedin the locution'h is acceptedby S'; (ii) that of epistemicprefer-
ability,as expressedin 'p is epistemicallypreferableto q for S'; (iii) that
of necessityde re, as expressedin 'x is necessarilysuchthatit is F' (iv) that
of a propertyor attribute,consideredas an 'eternalobject',something
existingin everypossibleworld;and(v) the conceptof a propositionbeing
true. I will also make use of the expressionsof logic and allow myself
certainschematicdefinitions.
   I believethat the systemof conceptsto be utilizedhereis muchsimpler
than any of those presupposedby otherdiscussionsof these topics.

                             2. DE DICTO BELIEF

I proposethat, in what follows, we restrictthe schema
            S believesthatp,
(wherep maybe replacedby any Englishsentence)to its ordinaryde dicto
sense.Thiswillmean,for one thing,thatwe cannotexistentiallygeneralize

PhilosophicalStudies29 (1976) 1-20. All Rights Reserved
Copyright? 1976 by D. ReidelPublishingCompany,Dordrecht-Holland


    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
2                            RODERICK       CHISHOLM


over any termwithinthe sentencein the place of p. Thus if our de dicto
belief sentenceis
             Jones believesthat the tallestman is wise
we cannot take the propositionit expressesto entail
             Thereis an x such that Jones believesthat x is wise.
Nor can we replaceany termwithinthe sentenceoccupyingthe place of
p by any othertermhavingthe sameextension.Hence,even if we know
both that(1) the tallestmanis the fastestrunnerandthat(2) Jonesbelieves
that the tallestman is wise, we cannot, on the basis of this information,
drawthe inferenceto
             Jones believesthat the fastestrunneris wise.
   Anotherfeatureof this de dicto use of 'Jonesbelievesthat the tallest
man is wise' is this: If we know that the sentenceis true,in this de dicto
use, thenwe maysay of Jonesthat,if he is asked'Is the tallestmanwise?',
if he understandsthe question,and if he intendsto reply honestlyand
correctly,then he will endeavorto replyin the affirmative.
   In suggestingthat we restrictthe locution 'S believesthat p' to this
de dictosense,I am not suggestingthat the locutionis in fact so restricted
in ordinaryEnglish.Indeed,I believethat it is not so restricted.3
   If we are sensitiveto what seem to be the ontologicalimplicationsof
belief, the ontologicalimplicationsof the fact that peoplebelievethings,
we will realizethat
    (1)      Jonesbelievesthat the tallestman is wise
impliesthat
    (2)      Thereis somethingthat Jonesbelieves.
If we do not see this at once, perhapsit will help us if we considersuch
facts as the following.If we know, not only that (1) is true,but also that
Smithbelievesthat the tallestmanis wise,then we may inferthat thereis
somethingthat both Jones and Smithbelieve.But if there is something
that both Jonesand Smithbelieve,thenthereis an answerto the question:
And whatis thatsomething?(Orthereis an answerto the question:What
is one thingthattheyboth believe?)In the caseof ourexamplethe answer
would be: That the tallestman is wise.




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
         KNOWLEDGE         AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                       3

  We may obviouslyinfer(2) above from 'Thereis somethingthat both
Jones and Smithbelieve'.But the truth of (2) is hardlydependentupon
the fact that Smithhappensto believethe samethingJonesdoes.It would
seem, therefore,that once we are clear about what is implied by (1),
when (1) is takenin the way we have suggested,then we shouldsee that
(1) implies(2).4
  Given, then, that (1) does imply (2), it is usefulfor philosophicalpur-
poses to make(1) moreexplicit.The logicalstructureof (1) is more ade-
quatelyexposedif we rewriteit as
  (3)       Jones acceptsthe propositionthat the tallestman is wise.
Statement(3) expressesa straightforward  dyadicrelationbetweenJones
and a certainproposition,enablingus to infer 'Thereexist an x and a y
such that x acceptsy'.
  Thus our sentence(3) is an instanceof this generalschema:
            S acceptsthe propositionthatp.
I proposewe take this locution as the paradigmaticexpressionof belief
de dictoand introducethe moreordinarylocution,instancedby (1), as an
abbreviation.Thus we will have
  (DI)      S believesthatp = DfThe propositionthatp is acceptedby S.
The definitionis schematic;we may replacep by any Englishsentence.
Let us say that, if a man thus acceptsa proposition,then the proposition
is one of the objectsof his belief.
   It is essentialto note that,veryoften,the propositionswe say we believe
(even when we are speakingsincerely)are not in fact the objectsof our
belief. I might point to a certainformulain PrincipiaMathematicaand
say "I believethat proposition",when, in fact, the propositionI accept
is the one I mightexpressby saying"Thepropositionexpressedby that
formula is true". The latter propositioncould be said, in Brentano's
terminology,to be a surrogatefor the former.5

                                3. DE RE BELIEF

One may make analogous points about what has been called de re
belief.




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
4                            RODERICK       CHISHOLM


  If we remainsensitiveto what seem to be the ontologicalimplications
of belief, we will realizethat
    (1)       The tallestman is believedby Jones to be wise
implies
    (2)       There is somethingthat Jones attributesto the tallest man.
(In the placeof 'attributesto the tallestman',we mightsay 'believesof the
tallestman'.)If one does not see immediatelythat (1) implies(2), one has
only to note that, if (2) is true, and if the tallestman is also believedby
Smith to be wise, then we could say that there is somethingthat both
Jones and Smithattributeto the tallestman. The logicalstructureof (1),
then, is somewhatmore adequatelyexpressedif we rewriteit as
    (3)       Jonesattributesthe propertyof beingwise to the tallestman.
Our sentenceis thus an instanceof this generalschema
              S attributesto x the propertyof being F
wherethe letterF is replaceableby any predicate-expression    (e.g., 'wise'
or 'suchthat he is wise' or 'suchthat he is wise and all men are mortal').
  I proposewe take this locutionas the paradigmaticexpressionof belief
de re and introducethe more ordinarylocution,instancedby (1), as an
abbreviation.Thus we will have
    (D2)      x is believedby S to be F=Df S attributesthe propertyof
              being F to x.
   But the definiensof (D2), 'S attributesthe propertyof being F to x',
is not includedamong the philosophicalconceptswe allowedourselves
at the outset. One problem,then, is that of explicatingthe concept of
attributinga propertyto a thing.

    4. INTERRELATIONS          BETWEEN BELIEF 'DE RE' AND 'DE DICTO'

The followingsummarymay now throwsome light upon what has been
said about the objectsof belief.The lettersF and G occupythe placesof
predicateexpressionsand 'the F' is shortfor 'the thingwhichis F'.
    (a)       S believesthat the F is G.
    (b)       The F is believedby S to be G.




      This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                      All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
           KNOWLEDGE         AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                        5

  (c)         S believesthat the propositionthat the F is G is true.
  (d)         The propositionthat the F is G is believedby S to be true.
  (e)         The propositionthat the F is G is acceptedby S.
  (f)         S believesthat the F has the propertyof being G.
  (g)         The F is believedby S to be such that it has the propertyof
              being G.
  (h)         S attributesthe propertyof being G to the F.
  These eight locutions are easily confusedwith each other and such
confusionsometimesinfectswhat has been writtenaboutthe philosophy
of belief. Let us ask, with respectto each of these locutions,whichones
of the othersit entails.6
  If 'accepts'and 'attributes'are restrictedin the ways in which I have
proposed,thenwe mayassertthatthefollowingentailmentrelationshold:
              a entailse
              b entailsh
              c entailsa, d, and e
              e entailsa
              f entailsa and e
              g entailsb and h
              h entailsb
But no additionalentailmentrelationshold amongthese locutions.
   It is sometimesthoughtthat beliefde dictois simplya specialinstance
of belief de re. Accordingto this view, to believe(de dicto)that Socrates
is mortalis simplyto believe(de re), with respectto the propositionthat
Socratesis mortal,that that propositionis true. This view presupposes,
mistakenly,that (a) is equivalentto (d).7But (a) does not imply(d), and
(d) does not imply (a).
   The entailmentrelationswe have set forth provideus with a partial
test of anytheoryof de re belief.For any suchtheoryshouldbe compatible
with sayingthat these relationsobtain.

          5. REDUCING         BELIEF 'DE RE' TO BELIEF 'DE DICTO'

Can we exhibitbeliefde re as a speciesof beliefde dicto?In otherwords,
can we define'S attributesthe propertyof being F to x' by referenceto
such de dictoconceptsas 'S acceptsthe propositionthatp'?




        This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
6                          RODERICK CHISHOLM

   Whenthe locution'S believesx to be F' ('S attributesthe propertyof
being F to x') is warranted,then one may say of the thing in question:
'One of its propertiesis that of beingbelievedby S to be F'. If a thingx
is thus an object of a person'sbelief, then the personhas, so to speak,
gotten "outsidethe circle of his own ideas". His thoughtsare directed,
at least in part,upon the thingx. In orderfor this to happen,shouldthe
personbearsome intimateepistemicrelationto x, or is it enoughthat he
accepta propositionimplyingx to have a certainproperty?
   Thereis some disagreementabout the answersto such questionsand
therewouldseemto be no obviousprocedurefor arrivingat agreement.8
We may ask: "Whenwould we say, of a thing x, that it's believedby
someoneto be somethingor other?"But an investigationor ourlanguage
habitssuggeststwo things;firstthat, on some occasions,we requirevery
little of a personS in orderto be ableto say of a thingx thatit is believed
by S to be somethingor other;and secondlythat, on otheroccasions,we
requirea considerabledegreeof epistemicintimacybetweenS and x be-
fore we will allow ourselvesto say that x is the object of S's beliefs.
   If, insteadof consideringthe languagewe mightuse in talkingabout S
andx, we restrictourselvesto descriptivepsychology,or 'phenomenology',
andjust considerour own doxasticstates,then,it wouldseem,thereis no
obvious differencebetweende re and de dictobelief. The distinctionbe-
tween the types of belief is not like that, say, betweenbelief and desire.
One may say with perfectcertainty:"Thisis a matterof beliefand not of
desire,and that is a matterof desireand not of belief". But one may not
say with any certaintyat all: "Thisis a matterof de re and not of de dicto
belief, and that is a matterof de dictoand not of de re belief".
   It is fairly easy to set forth criteriaenablingus to reducethe de re
locutionto the de dictolocution.The difficultproblemis that of chosing
amongthem.
   To see how to formulatesuchcriteria,let us considerbrieflythe nature
of propositions,and then note some of the ways in whichthese abstract
objectsmay be relatedto particularindividualthings.

                              6. PROPOSITIONS

We will say that the markof a propositionis the fact that it is something
capableof being accepted:




    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          KNOWLEDGE         AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                       7

  (D3)       p is a proposition = Df It is possible that there is someone
             who acceptsp.
This characterizationof propositionsis suggestedby Leibniz,Bolzano,
Frege, and W. E. Johnson.9
  Sincewe arecharacterizing propositionsas possibleintentionalobjects,
as thingswhichare suchthat they may be accepted,we will introducethe
followingstrict conceptof entailment,conceivedas a relationthat may
hold amongpropositions:
  (D4)       p entailsq= Df P is necessarilysuchthat(a) if it is truethenq is
             true and (b) whoeveracceptsit acceptsq.
We may now may affirmthis nontrivialcriterionof identityfor proposi-
tions: if a propositionp is identicalwith a propositionq, thenp entailsq
and q entailsp.
   We willassumethatpropositions,likepropertiesor attributes,existnec-
essarily.Wewill also assumethat propositionsarerelatedto propertiesor
attributesin the followingway: For everypropertyG, thereis a proposi-
tionp and a propositionq whichare necessarilysuchthat:p is trueif and
only if G is exemplified,and q is trueif and only if G is not exemplified.
   Let us say that a propositionp contradictsa propositionq if p is neces-
sarilysuch that it is true if and only if q is not true. We could now say
that a negationof a propositionp is a propositionq of the followingsort:
q contradictsp, andfor everyr, if r contradictsp, thenr is necessarilysuch
that if it is true then q is true.
   We will also assumethat thereare conjunctive     propositions.That is to
say, we will assumethat for everypropositionp and everypropositionq,
thereis a propositionc whichis necessarilysuchthat, c is trueif and only
if p is trueand q is true.Sucha propositionc wouldbe a conjunction     of p
and q.
   The formulaeof the propositionalcalculusmaybe interpretedas being
generalprinciplesabout propositions,so conceived.

              7. PROPOSITIONS         AND INDIVIDUAL          THINGS

We definedabovea relationof entailmentthatmaybe saidto hold among
propositions.Let us now considerthe sense in which a proposition may
be said to entail a property.




      This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                      All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
8                            RODERICK       CHISHOLM


  Thatpropositionwhichis some dogsbeingbrownmaybe saidto entail
the propertyof beingbrown,the propertyof beinga dog (i.e., the property
of being canine),and the propertyof being both a dog and brown.For
the propositionis necessarilysuch that, if it is true, then somethinghas
those properties.Let us say, then:
    (D5)     p entailsthe propertyof beingF = Df p is necessarilysuchthat
             (i) if it is truethen somethinghas the propertyof beingF and
             (ii) whoeveracceptsit believesthat somethingis F.
This definitionis a schemain whichthe letterF may be replacedby any
Englishpredicateexpression- e.g., 'brown',or 'a dog', or 'such that all
men are mortal'.
   The point of the secondclausein the abovedefiniens('whoeveraccepts
it believesthat somethingis F') is to give us a strongsense of of 'entail'.
Withoutthis clause,our definitionwouldrequireus to say, of any contra-
dictoryproposition,that that propositionentails any propertywhatever
- say the propertyof being a unicorn.For the propositionis necessarily
such that, eitherit is not true or whoeveracceptsit believesthat some-
thing is a unicorn.
   We next add a definitionof the conceptof an individualconcept.10
    (D6)      C is an individualconcept = Df C is a propertysuchthat (i) it
              is possiblethat somethinghas C and (ii) it is not possiblethat
              more than one thing has C at a time.
Thusthe propertyof beingthe tallestmanis an individualconceptandso,
too, for the propertyof being the Presidentof the United States.
  Given this conceptof an individualconcept,we can say what it is for
a propositionto imply, with respectto someparticularthing,that that
thing has a certainproperty.This importantconceptmay be explicated
in the followingway:
    (D7)     p implies x to have the propertyof being F =Df Thereis a
             propertyG suchthat(i) Gis an individualconcept,(ii)p entails
             the conjunctionof G and the propertyof being F, and (iii) x
             has G.
An alternativereadingof the definienswouldbe, 'p implies,with respect
to x, that it is F'. Thus that propositionwhich is the Presidentof the




      This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                      All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
         KNOWLEDGE         AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                       9

United Statesbeingin Washingtonmay be said to imply,with respectto
Mr. Ford, that he is in Washington.For it entailsan individualconcept,
beingthe Presidentof the UnitedStates,andthe propositionis necessarily
such that, if it is true, then whateverhas that individualconcept is in
Washington.
  Definition(D7), as well as certaindefinitionsto follow, presupposes
that, for any two propertiesA and B, there is a propertywhich is the
conjunction of A and B, i.e., a propertywhichis necessarilysuchthat it is
exemplifiedby all and only those things that exemplifyboth A and B.

      8. A LATITUDINARIAN            CONCEPTION        OF 'DE RE' BELIEF

It is now a simplematterto formulatea latitudinarianaccountof de re
belief. Thus we could say:
            S attributesthe propertyof being F to x =Df S accepts a
            propositionwhichimpliesx to have the propertyof beingF.
   The proposeddefinitionrequires,as it should,thatif x is to be believed
by S to be F, then there must be such a thing as x. And it satisfiesthe
requirementswe formulatedat the end of Section4 above:it is compatible
with the entailmentrelationsthereset forth. But otherwisethe definition
wouldseemto be overlylatitudinarianor permissive.11    One could object:
"If S's belief is actuallyto pertainto the particularindividualx, then S
must bear some kind of intimateepistemicrelationshipto x. S must be
ableto get outsidethe circleof his own ideasanddirecthis beliefprecisely
upon that particularindividual."
   Is the epistemic objection sound? The following situation, adapted
from an exampleproposedby Sosa, mightlead us to concludethat it is
not sound.
   We assumethat a new man, called'Shorty',hasjustjoined the platoon
and that the Lieutenantis unawareof this fact. The Lieutenantexpresses
to the Sergeanthis de dictobeliefthat it wouldbe best if the shortestman
in the platoonwereto go first.SinceShortyis now the shortestman, the
Sergeantsays to him: "The Lieutenantbelievesit is best that you go
first".In such a situation,Sosa concludes,it is true to say, with respect
to the shortestman in the platoon,that the Lieutenantbelieveshe is the
one who shouldgo first.'2




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
10                           RODERICK       CHISHOLM


  Yet Shortycouldreply(or at least say to himself):"Butthe Lieutenant
can't thinkthat I am the one who shouldgo first.He doesn'teven know
that I exist, muchless that I'm now a memberof the platoon."So far as
our philosophicalquestionis concerned,I'm inclinedto thinkthat Shorty
would be right: the Lieutenanthad no beliefs that were directedupon
him. It is true that, so far as the practical,nonphilosophicalquestionis
concerned,it wassufficientfor the Sergeantto say: "TheLieutenantthinks
you are the one go first".But, I suggest,he would have been speaking
more accuratelyif he had said: "Whatthe Lieutenantbelievesimplies
that it would be best if you go first".
  I am inclined to think, therefore,that this epistemicobjectiondoes
apply to the present,latitudinarianaccountof de re belief. The account
should be qualifiedby some referenceto what the subjectknows.To do
this is a relativelysimplematter.But beforeformulatingand considering
such a qualification,let us turnto the conceptof de dictoknowledge.For
the outcomeof recentcontroversiesabout the natureof such knowledge
bearsdirectlyupon the successof our attemptto characterizebeliefde re.

                         9. KNOWLEDGE           'DE DICTO'

In orderto explicatethe conceptof de dictoknowledge,we make use of
the undefinedconceptof epistemicpreferability,as expressedin the locu-
tion, 'p is epistemicallypreferableto q for S at t'.13 In termsof this locu-
tion, we firstdefinethe conceptsof the certainand the evident.
     (D8)     h is certainfor S=Df h is true; and h is necessarilysuchthat,
              if it is true, then acceptingh is epistemicallypreferableto
              withholdingh for S, and thereis no i such that acceptingi is
              epistemicallypreferableto acceptingh for S.
(For simplicity,we omit the temporalreference.)The expression'with-
holdingh', whichappearsin this definition,may be taken to abbreviate
'neitheracceptingh nor acceptingnot-h'.
   What we know need not be certain,in this rigid sense of the term
'certain',but everythingthat we know may be said at least to be evident.
An evidentproposition,like one thatis certain,is one suchthataccepting
it is epistemicallypreferableto withholdingit, but it may fall just short
of certainty.Let us say:




      This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                      All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
         KNOWLEDGE        AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                       11

  (D9)     his evidentfor S =Df (i) Acceptingh is epistemicallypreferable
           for S to withholdingh and(ii) for everyi, if acceptingi is epis-
           temicallypreferablefor S to acceptingh, theni is certainfor S.
Many otherepistemictermsmay be definedin this manner.14
  Somepropositionsserveto makeothersevident.Thusthe thingsI know
about the past are made evidentby thingsI know about the present.In
place of 'makingevident',we could also use 'justify',but the latterterm
may be misleadingsinceit is sometimesused to expressrelationsthat are
weakerthan that of makingevident.15
  In orderto characterizethe conceptof makingevident,let us firstsay
what it is for one propositionto be such that it is a basis for another
proposition:
  (D1O) e is a basis of h for S =Df e :iscertainfor S; and necessarily,
        for everyx, if e is certainfor x, then h is evidentfor x.
I assumethat, for anythingh that is evidentfor S, thereis somethinge
whichis a basis of h for S.16 (This assumptionmight be said to charac-
terize'foundationalism'.)
  And now we may formulateour definitionof makingevident:
  (DI 1)    e makesh evidentfor S =Df e is evidentfor S; and, for every
            b, if b is a basis of e for S, then b is a basis of h for S.
It shouldbe noted that, if e is a basis of h for S, then e makesh evident
for S. But e maymakeh evidentfor S withoute therebybeinga basisof h
for S. It may be, for example,that thereare propositionsabout Neptune
and aboutastronomythat makeevident,for some astronomer,a number
of propositionsaboutthe motionsof Uranus.But the formerpropositions
do not providea basisof the latterpropositions,sincethe formerproposi-
tionscannotbe saidto be certainin the strictsensedefinedin (D8) above.17
   Accordingto the traditionalconceptionof knowledge,a man can be
said to know a propositionh providedthe followingthreeconditionsare
fulfilled:(1) he acceptsh, (2) h is true; and (3) h is evidentfor him.
   But the traditionalconception of knowledgehas been shown to be
inadequateby EdmundL. Gettier, Jr., in his classic paper entitled 'Is
JustifiedTrueBeliefKnowledge?'18      It is essentialthat we considerbriefly
the nature of this problemfor, as we shall see, it bearsdirectlyupon our




    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
12                          RODERICK       CHISHOLM


problemof explicatingbeliefde re. Theinadequacyof the traditionalcon-
ception derivesfrom the fact that some of the thingswe know are such
that they arenot logicallyimpliedby thingsthat makethemevident- the
fact, in otherwords,that our evidencefor some of the thingswe know is
nondemonstrativeor inductive.This fact implies that one proposition
may make anotherpropositionevidentfor a subjectS even though the
second propositionis false, and hence that a propositionmay be both
evidentand false. And this fact provesdisastrousfor the traditionalcon-
ception of knowledge.
   Supposean evidentfalsehoodmakesevidentstill anotherproposition
- and that the otherpropositionhappensto be true.Thenthe traditional
conceptionwould requireus to say that the latterpropositionis known
to be true, but it may be in fact that the latterpropositionis not known
to be true.
   The following example, somewhatoversimplified,will illustratethis
situation.SupposeS mistakesa dog for a sheep,but undersuch condi-
tions that the false propositionhe would expressby 'I see a sheepin the
field'is evidentto him. That is to say, thereis a set of propositionssuch
as S mightexpressby: 'I seemto see a sheepin thefield,I rememberhaving
seen one therebefore,and I don't know of any disturbancethat mightbe
affectingmy vision...'. This set of propositions,we may assume,makes
evidentthe propositionhe would expressby 'I see a sheep in the field'.
Thenthe propositionhe wouldexpressby 'A sheepis in the field'will also
be evidentto him. Suppose furtherthat, as luck would have it, thereis
a sheepin the field- butelsewherein the fieldandnot seenor eventhought
of by S. This situation,obviously,would not warrantour sayingthat S
knowsthat there is a sheep in the field. But it satisfiesthe terms of the
traditionaldefinitionof knowledge,for the propositionthat there is a
sheep in the field is a propositionh which is such that: (1) S acceptsh;
(2) h is true; and (3) h is evidentfor S.
   Whatwentwrongin the situationdescribed?Althoughthe proposition
h 'Thereis a sheepin the field',was both true and evident,the basisthe
man had for h was also a basis for thefalse proposition'1 see a sheepin
the field'. Since we do not want to count h as a case of knowledge,we
mightconsidersayingthat, if a man knowsa propositionto be true,then
his basisfor thatpropositionshouldnot also be a basisfor a falseproposi-
tion. But this would be too stringenta requirement.It would not enable




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          KNOWLEDGE       AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                       13

us to say, of the man of our example,that he knew the conjunctionof
propositionswhich made evidentfor him the false propositionthat he
saw a sheepin the field.(Sincethat conjunctionmadea false proposition
evident,thenits basiswas also basisof a falseproposition.)We may note,
however,that althoughthe conjunctionmadea false propositionevident,
none of its conjunctswas suchas to makea falsepropositionevident.We
could say, then, that if a propositionis to be known,then it is equivalent
to a conjunctionof propositionsno one of whichis such that its basis is
a basis of a false proposition.But, to be even more cautious,let us add
that, if a propositionis to be known,then it shoulditself be evident.We
may put this requirementby sayingthat what is known should be non-
defectivelyevident.19
  We will define'nondefectivelyevident'in the followingway:
  (D12)     h is nondefectivelyevidentfor S =Df h is evidentfor S and is
            entailedby a conjunctionof propositionseach havingfor S
            a basis which is not a basis of any false propositionfor S.
We may now definede dictoknowledgeas follows:
  (D13)     h is known by S =Df h is acceptedby S; h is true; and h is
            nondefectivelyevidentfor S.
In (DI) above, we definedthe schema'S believesthat p' in termsof 'S
acceptsthe propositionthatp'. The schema'S knows thatp' could now
be construedanalogously:
  (D14)     S knows that p=Df         The propositionthat p is known by S.

          10. A MORE RIGID        CONCEPTION        OF BELIEF 'DE RE'

Giventhe conceptof knowledgede dicto,we are now able to replacethe
latitudinarianconceptionof beliefde re, set forth above,by a morerigid
definition:
  (D14)     S attributesthe propertyof being F to x =Df There is an
            individualconceptC such that (i) S knows a propositionim-
            plying x to have C and (ii) S accepts a propositionwhich
            entailsthe conjunctionof the propertyC and the propertyof
            being F.




    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
14                          RODERICK       CHISHOLM


  If Scottis the authorof Waverley,andif the propositionthatthe author
of Waverleyis Scotchis one that is knownby George,then, whetheror
not Georgehas any idea that Scott might have written Waverley,Scott
may be said to be such that Georgebelieveshim to be Scotch.And this
will be so even if Georgeacceptsthe propositionthat Scottis not Scotch.
  Whatif Scott is also authorof Marmionand Georgeacceptsthe prop-
osition that the authorof Marmionis not Scotch?It will still be the case,
given our definitions, that Scott - i.e., the author of Marmion- is believed
by Georgeto be Scotch.
  Supposethat, in addition,the propositionthat the authorof Marmion
wrote many works is one that George knows to be true. Since, we are
assuming,Georgeacceptsthe propositionthat the authorof Marmionis
notScotch,mustwe now saythat Scottis the authorof believedby George
to be both Scotchand not Scotch?We arenot entitledto say this. We can
say that Georgebelieveswith respectto Scott that he is Scotch and we
canalso saythatGeorgebelieveswithrespectto Scottthathe is not Scotch.
But we cannot say that Georgebelieveswith respectto Scott that he is
both Scotch and not Scotch. It would be unjust,therefore,to say that
Georgehas a contradictorybelief or even that he has beliefsthat contra-
dict each other.20

                    11. SOME OBJECTIONS           CONSIDERED

Let us considernow four possible objectionsto this definitionof de re
belief.
  (1) "Your definitionis over-permissive.If Robinson knows that the
tallestspy is a spy and believesthat all spiesare secretive,then,if he puts
two and two together,he will believethat the tallestspy is secretive.Your
account,therefore,wouldrequireyou to say thatthe tallestspyis believed
by Robinsonto be secretive.But, surely,his knowledgethat the tallest
spy is a spy is much too easily acquired.It hardlybringshim into the
requisiterelationshipwith the tallest spy."
  Thisobjectionhas manyvariants.None takesthe conceptof knowledge
sufficientlyseriously.The knowledgein questionis not easily acquired.
To say of a propositionthat it is knownby a given personis not merely
to say that the propositionis one that he is justifiedin accepting.Nor is it
to say merelythatthe propositionis one thatfor himis beyondreasonable




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
         KNOWLEDGE         AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                       15

doubt.To knowthat the tallestspy is a spy, one mustknow,not only that
there are spies, but also that there are not two or more spies such that
they are of the same height and tallerthan all otherspies. And to know
that latterpropositionone must have informationthat probablyno one
has.21
   (2) "SupposeC is the propertyof being identicalwith the President;
q is the propositionthatthe Presidentis a Republican;andp is the propo-
sition that the Presidentis a residentof California.Imaginenow a well-
informedWashingtoncorrespondentwho hadbeen asleepfor a weekand
woke up on August 10th, 1974,still believingthat Mr. Nixon was Presi-
dent and still believingthat the Presidentwas a residentof California.
Sincethe propositionq, that the Presidentis a Republican,is a proposi-
tion that the correspondentknewto be true,your definitionwould have
the absurdconsequencethat this well-informedcorrespondentbelieves,
with respectto Mr. Ford, that he is a residentof California."
   This objection,like the precedingone, does not take the concept of
knowledgesufficientlyseriously.As we have seen, if a person knowsa
propositionto be true,then, not only mustthe propositionbe evidentor
justified,but also it should be such that the groundor basis that it has
does notjustify or makeevidentanyfalse proposition.But the ostensible
knowledgereferredto in the proposedcounter-exampledoes not fulfill
this condition.The well-informedcorrespondentdid not know that the
Presidentis a Republican;for the basishe had for this propositionmade
evidentthe false propositionthat Mr. Nixon is President.Ourdefinition
(D13) above- the definitionof 'h is knownby S' - wouldnot allowus to
say that the correspondentknows that the Presidentis a Republican.22
And so, too, for anyof the otherthingshe mightbe thoughtto knowabout
the President.
   (3) "SupposeS knows(p) that the Mayoris well respected,S believes
(r) that the man who robbedthe bank is dead, and, unsuspectedby S,
the Mayor is the man who robbedthe bank. Now S puts two and two
togetherand acceptsthe conjunction,p and r. But this conjunctionim-
plies, with respectto the Mayor,that he is dead. Thereforeyour theory
requiresyou to say,implausibly,thatS believes,withrespectto the Mayor,
that he is dead."
   The replyis that the conjunction,p and r, does not imply,with respect
to the Mayor,that he is dead. If p and r is to imply this, it must entail




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
16                          RODERICK       CHISHOLM


a conjunctionof two properties.One of the two propertiesshould be
entailedby a propositionwhichis knownby S and whichimpliessome-
thing with respectto the Mayor;the otherpropertyshouldbe the prop-
ertyof beingdead.But the conjunction,p andr, impliesno suchconjunc-
tion of properties.It is not a propositionwhichis necessarilysuch that
whoever accepts it believes that there is somethingwhich is both the
Mayor and dead. See (D5) in Section7 above.
   (4) "If thereis a personsuch that Jonesbelieves,with respectto him,
that he is the next President,then Jones knowswho that personis. And
moregenerally,if thereis an entityx whicha personS has a beliefabout,
then S knows who or what that entity is. But the conditionsof your
definitioncould be satisfiedeven if Jones didn't know who the next
Presidentis. Thereforeyour accountis over-permissive."
   But is it correctto say that a personS cannothavea beliefwithrespect
to a thing x unless S knowswho,or knowswhat,x is? Surelynot. I can
believe, with respectto a man I see standingon the corner,that he is
wearinga hat - withoutknowingwho the man is. A visitorfromanother
countrycouldvisit one of our politicalconventionsand be led to believe,
with respectto the speakeron the rostrum,that he is our next President
- withouthavingany idea as to who the speakermight in fact be. It is
a mistake,then,to equatean explicationof de re beliefwithan explication
of the extraordinarily  elusiveconceptsof knowingwhoand knowingwhat.
   It is possible,of course,to formulatemorerestrictivecharacterizations
of de re belief.For example,one mightdefine'S attributesthe propertyof
beingF to x' by saying:'Thereis a q suchthat S knowsq to be trueand q
impliesx to be F'. But I thinkthat the presentaccounthas the advantage
of being neitherexcessivelyrigoristicnor excessivelylatitudinarian.23

                           12. KNOWLEDGE          'DE RE'

Given the precedingdefinitions,it is now a relativelysimple matterto
characterizeknowledgede re. Let us say this:
  (D15)      x is knownby S to be F =Df Thereis a propositionwhichis
             knownby S and whichimpliesx to be F.
  The otherepistemictermsreferredto above may also be given a de re
interpretation.Thus we may say, not only that a certainpropositionis




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          KNOWLEDGE          AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                       17

evidentfor S, but also that thereis a certainthingx whichis such that it
is evidentfor S that x has a certainproperty.We may say:
  (D16)       x is such that it is evidentfor S that it is F =Df Thereis an
              individualconcept C such that: (i) S knows a proposition
              implyingx to have C; and (ii) thereis a propositionwhichis
              evidentfor S andwhichentailsthe conjunctionof the property
              C and the propertyof beingF.
Definitionsof otherde re epistemicconceptswould be analogous.
  Whathas been said hereaboutthe relationsbetweende re and de dicto
beliefmay be carriedover to otherpropositionalattitudes- for example,
desire,hope,fear,andendeavor- andit mayalso be appliedto the theory
of value.24

Brown University

                                        NOTES

  My thought on these questions has been influencedby discussions with Michael
Corrado,Fred Feldman,RichardFeldman,EdmundL. Gettier,HerbertHeidelberger,
Michael Hooker, Gareth Matthews, Mark Pastin, Ernest Sosa, and Robert Swartz.
2 This general point of view is defended in 'Chisholm-SellarsCorrespondenceon
Intentionality',Minnesotain the Philosophyof ScienceII (1957), 521-539; reprintedin
A. Marras(ed.), Intentionality,MindandLanguage(Universityof IllinoisPress,Urbana,
1972), p. 539.
3 I have discussedthis point in 'Leibniz'sLaw in Belief Contexts',in A. Tymieniecka
and Charles Parsons (eds.), Contributionsto Logic and Methodologyin Honor of
J. M. Bochenski(North-HollandPubl. Co., Amsterdam,1965), pp. 243-250.
4 This is the conceptionof de dictobelief that is presupposedin the writingsof Bolzano,
Frege, Husserl, W. E. Johnson, and others. For its relevanceto contemporaryprob-
lems about referenceand translation,compareStephenLeeds, 'How to Think about
Reference',Journalof PhilosophyLXX (1973), 485-503.
5 See Franz Brentano, Grundziigeder Asthetik (A. Francke, Bern, 1959), pp. 82-87,
and Die Lehre vom richtigen Urteil (A. Francke, Bern, 1956), p. 64. Compare also
Anton Marty, Untersuchungen     zurGrundlegung      derallgemeinenGrammatikundSprach-
philosophie(Max Niemeyer,Halle, 1908), pp. 455-467.
6 A strict entailmentrelation will be definedin (D4), in Section 6 below.
7 A clear exampleof this mistakemay be found in the firstedition of my book, Theory
of Knowledge(Prentice-Hall,Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1966). I there wrote: "A
belief is trueprovided,first, that it is a belief or assertionwith respectto a certainstate
of affairs that that state of affairs exists, and provided, secondly, that that state of
affairsexists". (p. 103) CompareFrege: "Judging,we may say, is acknowledgingthe
truth of something list etwas als wahranerkennen];what is acknowledgedto be true
can only be a thought.The originalkernelnow seems to have crackedin two; one part




      This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                      All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
18                           RODERICK       CHISHOLM


of it lies in the word 'thought'and the other in the word 'true"'. The passage is from
'Negation', in Frege'sPhilosophicalWritings,ed. by Black and Geach, p. 126n.
8 Comparethe discussionsof this question in W. V. Quine, 'Quantifiersand Proposi-

tional Attitudes', Journal of PhilosophyLIUI(1956), 177-187; W. V. Quine, Word
and Object (The MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., 1960).
ChapterIV; and Robert Sleigh, 'Quantifyinginto EpistemicContexts',Nous I (1967),
 23-21.
9 CompareLeibniz, 'Dialogus de Connexioneinter Res et Verba, et VeritatisReali-
tate', in J. E. Erdmann (ed.), OperaPhilosophica,Vol. I, p. 76; Bernard Bolzano,
 Theoryof Science,ed. by Rolf George (Basil Blackwell,Oxford, 1972),p. 26; G. Frege
PhilosophicalWritings,ed. by Peter Geach and Max Black, p. 120; W. E. Johnson,
Logic, Part I (The UniversityPress, Cambridge,1921), pp. 3-4. Comparealso Anton
 Marty, Untersuchungenzur Grundlegungder allgemeinen Grammatikand Sprach-
philosophie(Max Niemeyer, Halle, 1908), pp. 288-362.
10 Wilfrid Sellarsmakes essentialuse of the concept of an individualconcept in ana-
lyzing belief; see 'Some Problemsabout Belief', in D. Davidson and J. Hintikka(eds.),
 Wordsand Objections:Essays on the Work of W. V. Quine (D. Reidel Publ. Co.,
Dordrecht, 1969), pp. 186-205. But Sellars'saccount is quite differentfrom that pro-
posed here. Following Frege, he assumes that singularterms within intentionalcon-
texts refer to their senses ratherthan to their ordinarydesignata;thus 'Jones believes
that the tallestman is wise'refersto a relationbetweenJonesand the conceptexpressed
by 'the tallest man' (i.e., to the propertyof being the tallest man). But to whatrelation
betweenJones and the individualconcept? Sellarsconcedes it is not that of believing
the individualconcept to be wise. Evidentlythe best that can be done is to say that it is
a relation very much like that of believing the individualconcept to be wise. Thus
Alonzo Church, defending an analogous account of "Schliemannsought the site of
Troy", said: "The relationholding betweenSchliemannand the concept of the site of
Troy is not quite that of having sought, or at least it is misleadingto call it that - in
view of the way in which the verb to seek is commonly used in English".Introduction
to MathematicalLogic, Vol. I (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1956), p. 8n.
11 For a defense of this latitudinarianaccount of de re belief, compare: Ernest Sosa,
'PropositionalAttitudes De Dicto and De Re', Journalof PhilosophyLXVII (1970),
883-896, and 'Rejoinderto Hintikka',Journalof PhilosophyLXVI (1971), 498-501;
and Mark Pastin, 'About De Re Belief", Philosophyand PhenomenologicalResearch
XXXIV (1974), 569-575.
12 PropositionalAttitudes De Dicto and De Re, p. 890.
13 Axioms for this concept are set forth in 'A Systemof EpistemicLogic', by Roderick

M. Chisholmand Robert Keim, Ratio XV (1973), 99-115.
14 For example: h is beyond reasonabledoubt (for S) if accepting it is preferableto

withholding it; h has some presumptionin its favor if accepting it is preferableto
acceptingnot-h; h is acceptableif withholdingit is not preferableto acceptingit; h is
unacceptableif it is not acceptable;h is gratuitousif acceptingit is not preferableto
withholdingit; and h is counterbalancedif thereis no presumptionin its favor and no
presumptionin favor of not-h.
15 For example, the relations that might be expressedby saying 'makingacceptable',
'makingsuch as to be beyond reasonabledoubt', and 'makingsuch as to have some
presumptionin its favor'.
16 The definiensabove could also be read as 'e is a basis of h being evident for S'. We
could define,in an analogousway, 'e is a basis of h being beyond reasonabledoubt for




      This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                      All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
           KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF: 'DE DICTO' AND 'DE RE'                                19

S', 'e is a basis of h having some presumptionin its favor for S', and similarlyfor our
other epistemiccategories.
17 The following relationsbetweenthe two conceptsjust definedshould also be noted.

If e is a basis of h for S, then e is necessarilysuch that, if it is certainfor S, then h is
evidentfor S. But if e makesh evidentfor S, then it is possible for it to be the case that
e is certainfor S and h is not evidentfor S. The latterpossibilitywill be realizedif e's
contributiontoward h being evident is defeated- if there is some proposition i such
that i is evident for S and the conjunction,e and i, does not make h evident. But if e
is a basis for h, e's contributioncannot be thus defeated;as long as e is certainfor S,
h will be evident for S.
18 AnalysisXXV (1963), 121-23.
19 This term was suggestedby Ernest Sosa.
20 CompareQuine'sdiscussionof Ortcutand the man seen at the beach, in 'Quantifiers

and PropositionalAttitudes',referredto above.
21 But I would say it is no specialepistemicachievementto know propositionsentailing
one's own individualessence or haecceity. (We may define an individualessence or
haecceityas an individualconcept G which is necessarilysuch that, for every x, x has
G if and only if x is necessarilysuch that it has G, and it is not possible that there is
a y other than x such that y has G.) I would say that, when I believe, with respectto
myself, say, that I am walking,then I accept a proposition(which I would express by
saying '1 am walking')and which entails my individualessenceor haecceity(the prop-
erty I would expresswhen I use the word 'I' or 'me').
22 I believethat the analysesof knowledgeto be found in the following writingswould
have a similar result: Ernest Sosa, 'The Analysis of "Knowledgethat P"', Analysis
XXV (1964), 1-8; Keith Lehrerand Thomas Paxon, 'Knowledge:UndefeatedJustified
True Belief', Journalof PhilosophyLXVI (1969), 225-237; Gilbert Harman, 'Knowl-
edge, Inference,and Explanation',AmericanPhilosophicalQuarterlyV (1968),164-173;
PeterD. Klein, 'A ProposedDefinitionof PropositionalKnowledge',Journalof Philos-
ophyLVIII(1971),471-482; R. Hilpinen,'Knowledgeand Justification',AjatusXXXII
(1971), 8-39; Marshal Swain, 'Knowledge, Causality, and Justification',Journalof
Philosophy LXIX (1972), 291-300; Bredo C. Johnsen, 'Knowledge', Philosophical
StudiesXXV (1974), 273-382; Keith Lehrer,Knowledge(The ClarendonPress,Oxford,
 1974), and Ernest Sosa, 'How Do You Know?' AmericanPhilosophicalQuarterlyXI
(1974), 113-122.
 23 Most of the alternativesto this account of de re belief make essentialuse of certain
linguisticconcepts,e.g., 'vividname','singularterm','a descriptionbeingrepresentative
of an individualfor a given person',and the like. CompareDavid Kaplan,'Quantifying
In', in Wordsand Objections:Essayson the Workof W. V. Quine,ed. by D. Davidson
and J. Hintikka (D. Reidel Publ. Co., Dordrecht, 1969), pp. 206-242; Ernest Sosa,
 'PropositionalAttitudes De Dicto and De Re' (referredto above); and Mark Pastin,
op. cit. Hintikkadefendsthe view that a person S has a belief, with respectto a certain
thing x, only if S knows, with respectto x, that x is identicalwith x; but he does not
attemptto explicatethe latterde re epistemiclocution. See J. Hintikka,Knowledgeand
 Belief (CornellUniversityPress,Ithaca, N.Y., 1962), Chapter6; and 'On Attributions
of "Self-Knowledge"',Journalof PhilosophyLXVII (1970), 73-87.
 24 We may say, not only (de dicto)it is intrinsicallygood that thereare people who are
 happy, but also (de re) that John is such that it is intrinsicallygood that he is happy.
(The latter could be explicatedthis way. There is a nonempty set of states of affairs
each of whichoccursand implieswith respectto John that he is happy;the conjunction




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
20                           RODERICK      CHISHOLM


C, of all those states of affairs such that each is implied by every member of S, is
intrinsicallygood.) The presenttype of analysismay also be extendedto the theory of
causation. We may distinguish(a) the de dicto causal situation wherein one state of
affairsis said to contributecausallyto anotherfrom (b) the de re causalsituationwhere-
in we may say, of individualthings, that one of them being in a certainstate or having
a certainpropertycontributescausally to the other being in a certainstate or having
a certain property.I have set forth such an account of de re causation in my Carus
Lectures,Person and Object:A MetaphysicalStudy, to be published in 1976 by The
Open Court PublishingCompanyand Allen and Unwin, Ltd. I there also defend the
view that propositionsconstitutea subspeciesof states of affairsand that the concept
of the truthof a proposition may be defined in terms of the occurrenceof a state of
affairs.




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 09 Feb 2016 18:18:43 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
