1.2 • Language as Information
A lecture delivered in the series “On Language, ” sponsored
by the Bavarian Academy o f Fine Arts, in Munich and
Berlin, 1959. Published in Die Sprache: Jahrbuch Gestalt
und Gedanke, vol. V (Munich, 1959). A preliminary concept
o f information is introduced in order to deal with the
question o f whether language can be rendered unambiguous
in the service o f science (cf. Prefatory Note to Part I). When
quantified, this preliminary concept corresponds to
“information ’’ in the sense o f information theory. The
philosophical status o f the preliminary concept remains
unclear, but a connection is shown with the
Platonic-Aristotelian concept o f form. This topic is taken up
again in III. 5.




  Permit me to introduce a lecture bound to become difficult, because
of its theme, with a remark that lacks the requisite gravity. The old
Goethe, in one of his Maxims, has another person address him with
the following question:
                     “How was it you succeeded so well?
                      ’Tis said you really do excel.”
  His reply is:
                  “My dear, I was clever in what I wrought:
                   On thinking I never wasted a thought.”
   First of all, this is certainly a barb against Hegel. At the same time
it expresses the magnificent intimacy of Goethe’s bond with the world.
Can the organ of thinking, which is given to us for dealing with reality,
emerge unscathed from being employed on itself? Can one know
oneself? The centipede, when asked in what sequence it moves its
legs, started to think—and became unable to walk.
   What situation do we find ourselves in at this symposium? In a free
variation on Goethe’s answer:
                  “My friend, you’ve smelled the rat, I avow,
                   I’ve never talked on language till now.”
  I will lose this innocence tonight. At least I will talk about language
only in a restricted sense. I will talk about a particular aspect, about
language as information. My topic, then, is not language as such, not
all of language. That, perhaps, is the topic of our entire symposium.
Perhaps it is never possible in a lecture to talk of language as such, to
talk of all of language. Language can be made audible by speaking it.
What we speak about could pertain to language. But language as such
is not in this speaking; language itself is still behind the speaker.
   In saying this, I have already indicated the structure of today’s
lecture. But why talk about information at a symposium on lan­
guage? I have just been toying a bit with the term “about,” with
the concept, that is, of talking “about” something. It is perhaps in
the exact sciences that talk about a particular, clearly defined ob­
ject is at its most precise.
   Information is a concept closely related to the exact sciences. The
topic “Language as Information” asks for those features of language
that nurture the growth of the exact sciences. On this point I invoke
Friedrich Georg Jiinger’s lecture on “Language and Calculus,” deliv­
ered here five years ago at the Symposium on the Arts in the Age of
Technology, a lecture which no doubt provided a major impulse for
the present symposium. I will first simply describe language as infor­
mation, and then ask what information really means. This leads to the
question of whether all that can be clearly thought and stated can be
cast into a linguistic form describable in terms of the concept of infor­
mation. In other words: can language be completely transformed into
information? I do not wish to dismiss this question by simply pointing
out linguistic forms that cannot be subsumed under the concept of
information. Rather, I will try to show that the concept of information
itself presupposes a kind of language that is untransformed into infor­
mation. In so doing, I hope to contribute to the theme of our sympo­
sium. I hope to show that, when precise language is used in talking
about something, language itself is still behind the speaker.
   I cannot show this without the help of a certain digree of abstract­
ness in the later parts of the lecture. The lecture will therefore be
difficult and long. Perhaps a short list of the contents will prove help­
ful.
   On several successive levels the lecture will repeatedly ask: what is
information? The talk is in five parts:

  a. Examples of information
  b. Measurement of information
  c. The calculus
  d. Information as form
  e. Can language be reduced to information?
  All this is merely a report, not yet philosophy; for I leave open what
language itself might be. Perhaps this is all one can do in a philosophi­
cal introduction to “language as information.”


a) Examples of Information

   I now ask, for the first time: what is information?
   Information, in current usage, is the communication of facts. Infor­
mation is what an Office of Information puts out, what is contained in
statistical documentation, in diplomatic reports, in the records of se­
cret services. One doesn’t get far in politics or business without good
information. Not that information serves only the egotisms of in­
dividuals or of powerful groups; it serves also the life of the commu­
nity. Take a trite example: what would become of order in railroad
traffic without the information contained in the schedule? Less obvi­
ous: unless the overseas producer and the domestic importer ex­
change information on supply and demand, we might easily lack our
daily bread. When atomic energy started to affect the lives of the
people, we physicists asked ourselves what we owed to our fellow
human beings. The answer in the United States in 1945 was identical
to our answer in Germany ten years later: the first and the least we
owe them is full information. How can they decide questions affecting
their destiny if they are ignorant of the facts?
   The carrier of information is language. Important facts were and are
conveyed from mouth to mouth. The messenger and the traveler were
once all-important as harbingers of “new tidings.” Even today the
quickest source of information is the word spoken and heard—on the
telephone, by our ruling circles; on radio or television, by everybody.
   The written word has an advantage over the uttered word, how­
ever, if language is to serve as information. The sound passes, the
written record stays. Writing, so to speak, “objectifies” information. It
relieves memory, can be surveyed at a glance, and enables one to
check back at any time.
   Writing itself has a peculiar history. The most ancient writing proba­
bly developed from pictures. Hieroglyphics, the Sumerian script, and
the Chinese script until our own day all consist of signs whose meaning
seems no longer to refer directly to the picture form; these scripts are
already the result of a process of abstraction. Nevertheless, each sign
still refers to the meaning of a single word. A big new step in abstrac­
tion was taken when the Akkadians used the Sumerian signs, not in
accordance with their meaning, but in accordance with their spoken
sounds: it was then that syllabic writing started, followed by alphabetic
writing, in which the script sign stands not for the meaning but for the
sound of a word.
   One might ask why I am talking here of progressive abstraction. Is
not the sound of a word something more palpable than its meaning?
Indeed, it is; but the reflection on the word as something which doesn’t
merely signify its referent but which has a body of its own, a sound
pattern of its own entirely divorced from its meaning—this reflection
can rightly be called abstract, and its result is an abstraction.
   Information theory is the name of our contemporary science of
information based on precisely this abstraction. Its origin lies in com­
munication technology. Sending messages by telegram is expensive.
One of the Hasidic rabbis of whom Martin Buber tells us said one could
learn something from all modern inventions; from the telegraph, for
example, that all our words are counted. Information theory does not
deal with the deep meaning of this saying, but the two are related in
an abstract sense. How can one transmit information as economically
as possible; i.e., how can one communicate a given piece of informa­
tion using as few signs as possible; or, conversely, how can one convey
as much information as possible in a message of given length? As much
information as possible—i.e., one has to learn how to measure the
amount of information in a message. What is the quantity of informa­
tion?


b) Measurement of Information

  In asking for the measure of information, we pose the question
“What is information?” a second time, in a more rigorous manner now
because of the quantitative setting.
   Let me begin with a simple example. If I wire: “I am glad to be able
to arrive in Munich at 5 p.m. on Monday, January 19,” then I am being
wasteful of words. It is polite to express pleasure, perhaps I even feel
pleasure, but this is not necessary information. The “I” is superfluous,
since “arriving” by itself establishes the identity of the person travel­
ing and the person arriving. The employment of excess words, such
as “at” in conjunction with “5 p.m.,” is called redundance. Redun­
dance simply means superfluousness. This concept is closely con­
nected with our search for the quantity of information. Redundant
expressions contain the same information several times over. If an
expression is divested of all redundance, i.e., each bit of information
is expressed once and only once, a message will result whose length
is a measure of its information.
   The telegram seeks this goal; it avoids redundant expressions as
much as possible. This makes sense, however, only if the transmission
itself is free of error; if the text is garbled, one is grateful for redun­
dancy because it at least gives one a chance of restoring what has been
lost. A natural language is full of redundance: a lack of superfluousness
would mean poverty here. It often contains redundancy only in the
subtle form of a background context of meaning, or of an appeal to
something that is already familiar. Thus, if I wire to someone in Mu­
nich who is expecting me there, no new information is transmitted by
stating that it is in Munich I will arrive; merely by saying “arriving 5
p.m.” I am implying where. To be sure, a telegram with explicit
mention of the point of arrival is richer in information than one with­
out; but the total information conveyed to my Munich acquaintance,
which the telegram contains only in part anyway, is not thereby aug­
mented. How valuable redundancy can be in speech is shown by our
experience on the telephone, or in listening to a foreign tongue: in
both cases, even if one understands only every second or third word,
one can still follow what is being said.
   Let us now try to formulate the shortest possible wire text. Day of
the week and date are not both required. The date would suffice; even
better, in wiring “Monday,” it is clearly the coming Monday that is
understood. And instead of “5 p.m.” I can say, international style,
“ 1700.” The wire now reads: “Arriving Monday 1700.”
   What I have just described can also be named using the terminology
of literary history: we are dealing with the development of a linguistic
style, the “telegram style.” The origin of this style lies in a reflection
on a feature seemingly extraneous to language, i.e., on the mere num­
ber of words. But in life nothing is purely extraneous. An essential
aspect of language expresses itself in this style. An essential character­
istic of that which can be spoken about at all shows today—more
clearly than in any of the earlier modes of speech—in the language
disciplined for maximum information; and the pure telegram style is,
so to speak, the parade step of this drill. I wonder how many people
are still around who know what a superfluous and baroque piece of art
the parade step was. Is the elimination, in the telegram style, of all that
is superfluous itself a baroque delight, an exorbitance? I am not being
entirely serious. All of us sense the one-sidedness of this style; it is
sometimes felt to be so dangerous as to amount to the destruction of
language. But in what sense is it so? We accuse the language of our era
not of having an excessive concentration of content, but of lacking
content; of lacking form or of having an overabundance of empty
forms, not of being parsimonious. Isn’t the parsimonious language of
science and of factual accounts the most impressive linguistic phenom­
enon of our time? But perhaps it is this absolutization of a one-sided
 aspect that causes the non-informational aspects in language to wilt.
    It is not my task tonight to describe the non-informational aspects
of language. Rather, I must make as plain as possible the extent to
which language can be information; identifying a language clearly
 delineated as information will help us to recognize language that is
more than information.
   I will first make the concept of information in information theory a
bit more precise. We asked: “How can one measure a quantity of
information?” Is it sufficient to eliminate all redundancies and then
 count the words that remain? “Arriving” and “will arrive” convey
exactly the same information, without redundancy, one expression
using one word; the other, two. The word is therefore not a reliable
unit of information. Nor is the letter. The long word “automobile” tells
me no more than “car,” or the German “Auto, ” or the Danish “bil. ”
   But there is something we can learn from the wiring of letters.
When the telegraph was invented, there was only one way of signal­
ing: one could depress the key to close the circuit or release the key
 to break it. How can one represent the twenty-six letters of the alpha­
bet with this simple alternative? Morse used two positive signs: a short
and a long burst of current. To each letter he assigned a sequence of
these dots and dashes. If the individual sign, as in the Morse code, has
only two possible forms, one talks of a yes-no decision. In English-
speaking countries a single yes-no decision is called a “bit” of informa­
tion. “Bit” is meant to be short for “binary digit.” It helps that “bit”
also means “small piece.” Information can be measured if one knows
the smallest number of small pieces needed to transmit it.
   A yes-no decision distinguishes between two possible cases; given
just the dot and the dash as signals, one could telegraph only in a
language containing precisely two letters. Two yes-no decisions in
succession can represent four possible cases; with the four “binary”
signs: “dash-dot,” “dot-dash,” “dot-dot,” “dash-dash,” one can tele­
graph four letters. Three yes-no decisions allow one to distinguish
among eight cases, four among sixteen, five among thirty-two. Thus
one requires at most five elements for an alphabet of twenty-six let­
ters. (Four would suffice, if signs were allowed to differ in length: one
could then take 16@4, 8@3, 4@2, 2@1, altogether thirty different
signs.)
   In the reduction of all information to yes-no decisions we have
the principle according to which modern computers (the “elec­
tronic brains”) operate. Computers represent numbers by means of
sequences and breaks in current flow, just as we described it in the
case of letters. 1, for example, is represented by a current burst
lasting one hundred-thousandth of a second. 2 is a burst and a
break of the same length. 3 is burst-burst. 4 is burst-break-break, 5
is burst-break-burst, 6 is burst-burst-break, 7 is burst-burst-burst, 8
is burst-break-break-break, etc. To add two numbers, one sets up
the two sequences of bursts and breaks in two separate circuits
which then interact electronically to produce a third sequence of
bursts and breaks corresponding to the sum of the two numbers. If
the apparatus is correctly designed, this happens automatically.
Here we have the modern version of a program already realized
by Pascal and Leibniz in the form of the first mechanical comput­
ers, which let a machine instead of the human mind perform cal­
culations that follow a well-defined scheme. One can say today:
every process of thought capable of being translated into a pattern
of operations in accordance with a well-defined scheme of se­
quences of yes-no decisions can be turned over to an automatic de­
vice which will then execute the operations in a manner usually
quicker, more comprehensive, and freer of error than man is capa­
ble of. One can even state numerically how much information such
a device can process per second.
   There are, as far as I know, good physiological reasons for assum­
ing that the neural networks in the brain also work with sequences
of yes-no decisions (response or non-response of the nerve fiber).
The vistas opened up by this idea do not belong to my present
theme, however. The following reflection returns us to the theme
of language.


c) The Calculus

   In transferring to an automatic device all operations of thought
that follow a rigid scheme specifiable by us in advance, we have by
no means transferred all possible operations of thought, nor even
all those that we might be inclined to label “exact.” One can act
according to a scheme, for example, only if someone has previously
designed that scheme. The design of a scheme is an act of thought
that precedes the scheme. We are inclined to think that perfor­
mances in accordance with a particular scheme can be no more
exact than the thought which designed that scheme. However that
may be, the design of a particular scheme is surely not an act of
thought which follows that scheme.
   But could one perhaps invent a scheme that tells us how to design
schemes of operations? A device, in the extreme case, that produces
programs for other devices, or maybe even a device that automatically
performs whatever can be thought exactly?
   This thought is still imprecise; we can make it more precise by
facing the difficulties in the path of its realization.
   A device can process only information given to it unambiguously.
Numbers constitute the best example; that is why the devices actu­
ally built for the automatic execution of thought-analogue processes
are usually computers. But the scheme to be followed by such a
device cannot (or at least cannot to begin with) be communicated
to it in the form of a sequence of numbers. Instead, we must say in
words what is to happen with the numbers. Opaque though it be
to information theory, so-called “natural language,” the language in
which ordinary people communicate, cannot be done without, at
least not at the start. And it would do no good to transform its let­
ters into the yes-no decisions of Morse code. For now it is not a
matter of communicating telegraphically with someone who will
understand us. Now, not the words, but the meanings of the words
are to be put into a form capable of being processed according to a
scheme. Is such a step conceivable, perhaps on the basis of some
preliminary manipulations? It seems to have been Leibniz who first
posed this question with full clarity. Can we find signs to represent,
not the linguistic name, but the clearly understood meaning of
every concept needed by thought? Can we invent operations with
such signs to represent any admissible operation of thought, so that
all correct thinking would be mirrored in such operations and con­
trolled by them, even as the operations in algebra mirror and con­
trol our thinking about numbers? The calculus of modern logic is
the mcdest execution of a small part of Leibniz’s program. It
represents the furthest reduction of language to its unambiguously
manipulable informational content. On a new level of abstraction,
it turns back from natural to formalized writing.
   For an example, let me give you a few formulas taken from the
simplest part of logical calculus, the propositional calculus. This calcu-
lus treats the relations between entire sentences, the so-called “propo­
sitions,” without reference to their internal structure. I write the letter
“a,” for example, and agree with you to regard it as an abbreviated
form of the proposition “the sun shines.” Let “b” stand for “it is
raining.” Fixed signs (which differ, unfortunately, among the logical
schools) are used to represent words that express constantly recurring
logical relations. Thus I write “ a ” for “and” and “v” for “or.” “a a b”
now means: “the sun shines and it is raining”; “a v b” means: “the sun
shines or it is raining.” The arrow “ ->” means “if-then”; for example,
“a -* b” means: “if a, then b,” or “if the sun shines, then it is raining.”
In terms of content, this sentence is usually false. We now introduce
the negation, designated by a bar above the letter: “a” means “not a,”
or “it is not true that a”; thus in our example, “it is not true that the
sun shines,” or, shorter, “the sun does not shine.” Whether the two
interpretations of “a,” i.e., “not a” and “it is not true that a,” are really
as equivalent as I treat them is a deep question which I cannot discuss
here.
   I now say “a -» b” in words: “if the sun shines, then it is not raining.”
In terms of content, this sentence, too, is not necessarily true. It is
always true, however, that “a a b -» a v b”; in words: “if it is not true
that the sun shines and it is raining, then the sun does not shine or it
is not raining.” This is always true, because it is a logical, not a
meteorological fact. In accordance with a very general law already
formally established in the highly developed logic of late scholasticism,
“x a y -» x v y” is true no matter what propositions are substituted for
“x” and “y.” To put it more generally: “if x and y are not both true,
then either x is false or y is false, independently of the propositions x
and y.” As a result, one can always substitute the formula “x v y” for
the formula “x a y” in a “calculation” carried out in the logical calcu­
lus. The universal logical law reappears in the calculus as a universally
valid rule of calculation.
   In today’s lecture the logical calculus serves us neither as working
tool nor as a subject for investigation, but merely as an example. I ask:
Can we expect that all we are capable of thinking may one day turn
out to be thus communicable? Can we, to return to our theme, thus
transform into information all that language can express? I don’t
choose to escape this question by pointing to poetry or to other modes
of language seemingly distant from science as counter-examples (be­
cause that would be a cheap way out). It would already mean a lot if
we could assign an information-theoretical meaning to these challeng­
ing, if not completely clearly formulated sentences of Wittgenstein’s:
“What can be said at all can be said clearly; and whereof one cannot
speak thereof one must be silent.”1 The desire to think clearly is
common to philosophy and the sciences; in literature, too, it can be
salutary. Should we surmise that one can think clearly only what can
be said clearly; that one can say clearly only what can be unambigu­
ously expressed in terms of information; that one can express unam­
biguously as information only what can be written in the form of a
calculus? As the result of this third section, may we interpret clarity
in terms of information, and information in terms of the concept of a
calculus?


d) Information as Form

   We can test the truth of these conjectures only if we can be sure of
having understood their meaning. Do we know with sufficient clarity
what we mean by information? I have used several examples to intro­
duce the concept of information. I said that the telegram is or contains
information and that the logical calculus is or contains information. I
have explained how one measures the quantity of information, namely
by counting the yes-no decisions. I have conjectured that only what
we can write down in terms of a calculus counts as information. But
I have not said what information really is. Socrates would not have
been satisfied with me.
   We will not answer the question as to the essence of information
exhaustively, but we can work on it. And we know from Socrates how
the question as to the essence of a thing can promote our knowledge,
even though we must in the end leave this question unanswered. To
have understood precisely this is after all the mark of the man who
dares not call himself sophos, the wise man, but only philosophos, the
lover of wisdom.
   I just said: “The telegram is or contains information.” Why the “or”?
Evidently I did not know whether the telegram is the information
itself or merely contains it. Children that we are of an age dominated
by Cartesian concepts, we are inclined to ask: “What is designated by
the term ‘information’? A material thing—for example, the printer’s
ink on the actual telegram—or something in our consciousness—i.e.,
whatever it is I think when I read the telegram?” This question both­
ered the information theorists of our day, and they came to a result
  1L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (New York: Harcourt, Brace and
Co., Inc., 1922), p. 27. —Translator.
that perhaps bothers them even more: neither. Information is neither
something material nor something in consciousness. Both interpreta­
tions fail to do justice to the objective character of information, for
whose sake the concept of information was introduced in the first
place.
   Let us assume that the printer’s ink on a piece of paper is the
information. Then what I wrote down in Hamburg when I sent olf the
wire and what the addressee in Munich holds in his hands is not the
same information, since the pieces of paper are not identical; but
information is supposed to designate precisely what these two pieces
of paper do have in common.
   Let us assume that information is the thought process in the mind
of the person thinking the contents of the wire. Then what I thought
when sending the wire and what the addressee thought on receiving
it is not the same information. Information is not one or the other act
of consciousness but what is known by the act of consciousness, some­
thing that is common to these conscious persons who are otherwise so
different.
   Today we are beginning to get used to the idea that information
must be regarded as something different from matter and conscious­
ness. What one has thus discovered is an old truth in a new guise. It
is the Platonic eidos and the Aristotelian form, expressed in such a way
that even twentieth-century man can learn to obtain a glimpse of
them.
   Even the origin of the word “information” gives us this hint. If you
look in a Latin dictionary under the verb informare, you will find that
its original meaning is “to form,” “to fashion,” and that its metaphori­
cal meaning is “to fashion in the mind,” “to represent to oneself,”
whence informatio as “image,” “representation,” “concept.” Our
definition of the word stems from the Middle Ages, when it was used
as meaning “instruction.” Informatio, then, is something like bringing
form into matter, or matter into form. Whatever the several authors
may have thought in particular, informatio can be understood only in
terms of the terminological pair “form and matter”; it is, in its origins,
foreign to the terminological pair “consciousness and matter.” If you
wish to locate information in consciousness, you would have to talk of
the transcendental, not the empirical consciousness. But in our age
most people would regard this recourse to transcendental philosophy
as the explanation of an obscure matter in terms of one even more
obscure; I will therefore not refer to it again. Rather, I will take “infor­
mation” to be “form,” or “pattern,” or “structure,” without further
explanation of the concepts presupposed by these terms. This “form”
can refer to the form of all kinds of objects or events perceptible to
the senses and capable of being shaped by man: the form of printer’s
ink or ink on paper, of chalk on the blackboard, of sound waves in air,
of current flow in a wire, etc. Our “form” is not identical to the
geometric form, since the printed telegram and the acoustic message
of the telephone operator both contain the same information. Infor­
mation belongs to a higher level of formal abstraction; and again, I do
not define what “level of formal abstraction” means. Information is
something that can be perceived by man, can be understood, can be
thought. But it is not the mental act of thinking; rather, it is what this
thinking thinks, it is the thought itself, in the sense in which I can say
that two people think the same thought.
   Not every form or structure, even if of a sufficiently high level of
abstraction, counts as information, however. At least two further at­
tributes are required: language and unambiguousness.
   What do I mean when I say that information is linguistic in nature?
I surely have not defined what language is; that is the very theme of
our symposium. As I use the term in this lecture, I ascribe a linguistic
character even to the abstract form of writing and to the current flow
in computers; but I do not ascribe it to the shapes of plants or stars,
or to such manmade things as the shapes of foodstuffs, like the outline
of a roast or a cake, however subtle the art with which these are
prepared, or to the shapes of technical instruments. I cannot draw the
boundary with precision, but I cannot do without the distinction be­
tween linguistic and non-linguistic form.
   Anyone who always seeks the precise definition of terms may now
feel disappointed. Have we not just tried to clarify the very unclear
concept of language by referring back to the concept of information
—be it at the cost of a one-sided interpretation? But if, conversely, we
now define information by recourse to language, we get into a circle.
At the end of my lecture I will try to show in what sense this circle
is meaningful and unavoidable. This circle seems to me to be the
precondition for precision in thinking. But I must first make myself
clearer.
   One could try to explicate what I have just named the linguistic
character of information by means of another concept that does not
contain the term “language.” “Communication” offers itself, for exam­
ple. One could try this: “Information is a form that serves in communi­
cation.” The “serves” here must be understood as potential; a book no
one has read and the current flow in a computer unperceived by
anyone are not actually someone’s communication, but they are the
sort of structures that can be considered communication. The term
“communication” suggests that language does not relate merely to an
isolated consciousness, to a Cartesian res cogitans, but that it is essen­
tially interlocution, communication between persons. I won’t follow
up on this remark; it is merely the eyelet through which the threads
that connect with the other lectures may be drawn.
   I must, however, deal with a possible objection. Modern biologists
speak perfectly legitimately of information—in genetics, for example.
A set of chromosomes contains in its genes the information that deter­
mines the phenotype of the individual (to the extent that the pheno­
type is in fact genetically determined). The “letters” with which this
script is written have even been discovered. There are merely four
different chemical compounds which, laid end to end in long helixes,
determine through their sequence the entire genetic type. One esti­
mates that the informational content in the nucleus of a single human
cell is comparable to that of a library containing a thousand volumes.
Information-theoretical concepts are clearly applicable here if they
are anywhere. But there is no one here who talks, no one who com­
municates something or understands what is being communicated to
him.
   I cannot think of an apt reply and I suspect that, at least tonight, I
am not meant to be able to think of one. One could of course cut
through the knot by trying to define information without referring to
language or communication. In that case, information—i.e., measur­
able quantities of structure—exists in nature objectively, and we
merely register what is there. One could equally well suspect that it
is the nature of our thought process in its linguistic articulation which
makes us pick these aspects out of the infinite manifold that is nature;
we approach nature with the search for information-like structures in
mind, and thereupon find them. Every attempt to define information
non-linguistically shows how difficult it is to keep these two points of
view apart. We can, for example, call information every form that can
be described by enumerating a finite number of yes-no decisions; but
even this seemingly objective definition refers back to our means of
description (“enumeration,” “decisions”). I suspect that an exact anal­
ysis of any other definition would yield similar results. It is not a matter
of course, on the other hand, that we can find such clear-cut yes-no
decisions in nature, or indeed that we can find an apparatus so obvi­
ously intended for such decisions as are the chromosomes. This is not
merely a case of retrieving Easter eggs hidden by ourselves; we came
upon these Easter eggs totally unexpectedly. Is there a pre-established
harmony between nature and language?
   It may be that, in the present context, the most naive mode of
expression is also the most apt: the mode that assigns linguistic catego­
ries even where no speaking or listening consciousness exists. In the
relation between the chromosomes and the growing individual, it is
as i f the chromosome were talking and the individual listening. The
metaphors on every scientist’s lips are witnesses thereof; e.g., to say
that chromosomes prescribe the manner of growth, or that growth
obeys this prescription. Everywhere else in this lecture I use a concept
of language that presupposes human beings as speakers; that is why
I suspect that I am not really meant to solve this problem with the
conceptual means to which, for the sake of achieving preliminary
clarity, I am today restricting myself. I therefore now turn back from
information beyond human language to language as information.
   Not every linguistic form is information. Information presupposes
unambiguousness. Heraclitus’ saying that war is the father of all things
can be a deep truth for the very reason that it is not information, and
it cannot be information because the terms “father” and “war” are not
unambiguous. In fact, if they meant what they normally mean, the
saying would be nonsensical. But these terms are also not simply
redefined so as to be valid speculative concepts in the philosophy of
Heraclitus. A better explanation is that ambiguity is an essential ingre­
dient in any speculative concept used correctly. Surely the meaning
of the saying in our example, as it slowly dawns on us, forces the terms
into their multiple meanings, thereby hinting at that real relation
among the different meanings of a single term which we must per­
ceive in order to understand the whole saying.
   The interpretation of language that leads to the concept of informa­
tion aims to avoid such arts as these. No one can enumerate the yes-no
decisions that would render precisely each of the many meanings of
Heraclitus’ saying. A formula written in the calculus of logic, on the
other hand, is meant to be information. Each of its signs is supposed
to be unambiguously defined, and its particular composition ought to
signify unambiguously a particular proposition.


e) Can Language Be Reduced to Information?

  In conclusion I now return to the question: Is it possible, in princi­
ple, to reduce language to information understood in this way? Not
that everything expressible in words must necessarily fall under this
concept of language; but is the concept itself at least clear enough to
enable us to define what Wittgenstein termed “saying clearly”? I am
inclined to answer in the negative, or at least with a non liquet.2 My
reason is that every attempt at transmuting a part of language into
unambiguous form already presupposes the use of natural language,
ambiguities included.
   We must first examine the extent to which the term “unambiguous”
is itself unambiguous. We can, for example, define a calculus by listing
the signs that occur in it and stating into what formulas they may be
combined. If we do this with care, no doubt remains that it is unam­
biguously clear what combinations are or are not to count as formulas
in this calculus. But by no means have we thereby decided what these
formulas are to mean; definitions are needed to settle that. As an
example I cited the rudiments of the propositional calculus. I said:
“ a” stands for “and,” “v” for “or,” etc. The calculus can be considered
unambiguous (called an “interpreted calculus”) if these definitions
themselves are unambiguous; i.e., if each definition refers to precisely
one object or concept. But how can I ensure that a definition is unam­
biguous? Most of you probably unhesitatingly accepted my designa­
tion of “v” as “or.” Now I ask you: Is this “or” the same as the mutually
exclusive “either-or”? When I read “a v b” as “the sun shines or it is
raining,” did I mean it in the sense that “either the sun shines or it is
raining, but not both”? It may look as if I meant it in that sense, but
it is not so. You agreed with me that “a a b -> a v b ” is certainly true;
i.e.: “if it is not true that both the sun shines and it is raining, then the
sun does not shine or it is not raining.” If this “or” meant the same as
“either-or,” then the consequent would imply the impossibility of the
sun’s ever not shining when it is not raining. But this can in fact very
well happen, “a v b” must therefore mean “either a or b or both”;
otherwise, our formula would be false.
   This clarification came easily, because the problem has long been
known to logicians. Can we be sure, however, that our interpretations
do not contain ambiguities hidden to us? The definitions make use of
natural language, thus of concepts whose unambiguousness has not yet
been tested. Perhaps these concepts can be rendered unambiguous by
means of further definitions. But will we ever arrive at primary con­
cepts that are unambiguous in themselves? The problem is analogous
to the problem of proof in a deductive science. Theorems are proven
 2Formula used by Roman jurors when unable to reach a verdict for lack of evidence.
—Translator.
from axioms. Do we know of axioms that are certain in themselves?
It was traditionally taught that concepts unambiguous in themselves,
and axioms certain in themselves, do exist. This assumption worked
well in mathematics from Euclid to Gauss. Philosophy became dis­
credited when it couldn’t follow suit, when thefundam entum incon-
cussum of one philosopher was immediately challenged by his succes­
sor. The methodological self-awareness of mathematicians became
more acute, however, with the discovery of non-Euclidean geometry
and the subsequent reconstruction of the foundations of mathematics
on successively deeper levels. Viewed with sharpened methodological
self-awareness, Euclid’s axioms appear not to be self-evident proposi­
tions; rather, they are propositions that cannot be deduced from other
propositions. Some highly self-evident propositions show up in the text
as theorems, because Euclid saw how to deduce them from other
propositions; conversely, a proposition as opaque as the axiom of paral­
lels appears as an axiom because Euclid rightly saw that he could not
deduce it from other axioms. Under Cantor’s influence, mathemati­
cians tried in the nineteenth century to seek absolute certainty in the
concept of the set; since 1900, this attempt has failed because of the
discovery of paradoxes in that concept. Certainty was then sought,
under Hilbert’s influence, in the concept of a calculus; this attempt
failed, at least in its original version, with Godel’s proof of the formal
indecidability of certain meta-mathematically3 true propositions. Lor-
enzen’s resolution, which makes the best sense to me among those
available today, rejects the idea of proceeding from axioms and instead
appeals to our intuitive understanding of schematic operations. Per­
haps the clearest explanation of all this is found in the work Tarski
published in 1933 on the concept of truth in formalized languages. We
constantly talk of true and false propositions. Do we really know what
“true” means in this context? Is this an unambiguous term?
   The classical definition of truth is adaequatio rei et intellectus, the
correspondence between fact and intellect. With regard to formalized
propositions we might say: a proposition is true if the matter of fact
holds which it asserts. Letting “p ” stand for an arbitrary proposition,
this definition amounts to saying: “The proposition ‘p ’ is true if and
only if p.” To use an example often cited by Heinrich Scholz: “The
proposition ‘Mars is inhabited’ is true if and only if Mars is inhabited.”
At first glance, you may feel inclined to say that such a definition is
possible but trivial. In fact, however, it is not trivial—it is not even
   3The author follows German custom in using the common term inhaltlich (“contextu­
ally”) to mean “meta-mathematically.” —Translator.
possible. It is non-trivial. The sentence p (in our example, Mars is
inhabited) occurs twice, with two different meanings. First p appears
in quotation marks, “p ” is a name of the proposition p; its function is
to point to the proposition.4 Certain well-known propositions are
named in a different manner. For example, we refer to the “Law of
the Excluded Middle,” to the “first sentence of the Bible,” etc. But one
cannot assign every possible sentence a name of its own. It is therefore
convenient to point to a proposition by placing it in quotes. A proposi­
tion in quotes is named but not asserted. On the second occasion, p
appears without quotes; here p is being asserted conditionally. We say:
“If p, then something is valid.” The “something” is that the proposi­
tion “p ” is true. The second mention of p thus presupposes that we
already understand the proposition. Tarski’s definition therefore rests
on our prior acquaintance with language. A spoken sentence “p” and
the fact p corresponding to it can indeed be compared only if we can
express the fact linguistically. Only when one has understood this can
one understand the definition; that is why I called it non-trivial.
   But the definition is impossible, for it leads to a self-contradiction.
Let “p” be the proposition: “The sentence I am now saying is false.”
Upon substitution, our definition reads: “The proposition ‘the sen­
tence I am now saying is false’ is true if and only if the sentence I am
now saying is false.” The sentence I am now saying is “p ”; therefore,
what I have said, in short, is that “ ‘p’ is true if and only if ‘p’ is false.”
   This, too, is an old joke, known in antiquity as the paradox of the
lying Cretan. In our usage, the paradox shows that not every proposi­
tion may be substituted for “p.” Thus Tarski’s definition cannot be
valid in full generality. Can we still claim to know what a true proposi­
tion is?
   Tarski has investigated the matter more fully than I can now report
to you. I can only hint at the way he chose out of the dilemma.
   He does not consider truth to be unambiguously definable in the
context of natural language. Provided it is expressed in the language
one uses to talk about the calculus, rather than being part of the
calculus itself, the definition given above can be applied in the case of
a “formalized language,” i.e., a calculus. Tarski calls the language one
uses to talk about a calculus the meta-language. One can then substi­
tute any proposition of the calculus (or a meta-linguistic name desig­
nating that proposition) for the first “p”; for the second p one must
substitute the meta-linguistic proposition that designates precisely the
   4Strictly speaking (see below), I should have written: “ ‘p’ ” is a name of the proposi­
tion ‘p.’
 same fact. In our example from the propositional calculus: “The propo­
sition ‘a a b’ is true if and only if the sun shines and it is raining.” The
 set of propositions whose truth is defined is thereby reduced to the set
of propositions within the calculus; and we can always construct the
calculus so as to exclude self-contradictory propositions of the sort we
discussed.
   One can take a further step and write a calculus for the meta­
language, thereby defining a truth concept for the propositions of the
calculus. To do this, we require a meta-meta-language. No matter how
many steps of this sort are taken, the higher-level truth concepts will
always apply to the calculi, never to the natural language. But the
calculi can be interpreted only by employing natural language, and
only if we presuppose that we can distinguish, for all practical pur­
poses, between true and false propositions in the natural language.
   Here we come face to face with the unavoidable circle mentioned
above. As far as I can see, this circle characterizes all exact thinking.
I have exemplified it in logic; in another, equally long lecture I could
just as well trace it out in physics. Language wholly transmuted into
information represents the hardened tip of a non-hardened mass. No
one discoursing on language ought to forget that language can appear
as information. No one discoursing on information ought to forget the
converse: that language can be information is in turn possible only
against the background of a kind of language which has not been
transmuted into unambiguous information. This insight does not settle
the question of what language really is, but it does cast some light on
one aspect of the question.
