A Resume of Metaphysics (c. 1697)



    1. T h e r e is a reason in N a t u r e why something should
exist rather than nothing. This is a consequence of the great
principle that nothing happens without a reason, and also
 that there must be a reason why this thing exists rather than
another.
   2. This reason must be in some real entity, or cause. For a
cause is simply a real reason, and truths about possibilities
and necessities (that is, where the possibility of the opposite
has been denied) would not produce anything unless those
possibilities were founded on a thing which actually exists.
   3. This entity must be necessary; otherwise a cause must
again be sought outside it for the fact that it exists rather than
does not exist, which is contrary to the hypothesis. This
entity is the ultimate reason for things, and is usually called
by the one word ' G o d ' .
   4. T h e r e is, therefore, a cause for the prevalence of existence
over non-existence; or, the necessary being is existence-creating.a
   5. But the cause which brings it about that something
exists, or that possibility demands existence, also brings it
about that everything possible has an urge to existence; for
a reason for restricting this to certain possible things in the
universe cannot be found.
   6. So it can be said that everything possible demands existence^
inasmuch as it is founded on a necessary being which actually
exists, a n d without which there is no way by which something
possible m a y arrive at actuality.
   7. But it does not follow from this that all possibles exist;
though this would follow if all possibles were compossible.
   8. But since some things are incompatible with others, it
follows that certain possibles do not arrive at existence:
                                 145
146                                          A Resume" of Metaphysics
again, some things are incompatible with others, not only
with respect to the same time, b u t also universally, since
future events are involved in present ones.
   9. Meanwhile, from the conflict of all possibles demanding
existence this at any rate follows, that there exists that series
of things through which the greatest amount exists, or, the
greatest of all possible series.
   10. This series alone is determinate, as among lines the
straight line is determinate, among angles the right angle,
and among figures the most capacious, namely the circle or
sphere. And just as we see liquids spontaneously collect in
spherical drops, so in the nature of the universe the most
capacious series exists.
   11. There exists, therefore, that which is the most perfect,
since perfection is simply quantity of reality.
   12. Further, perfection is not to be located in matter alone,
that is, in something filling time and space, whose quantity
would in any way have been the same; rather, it is to b e
located in form or variety.
   13. So it follows that matter is not everywhere alike, but is
rendered dissimilar by its forms; otherwise it would not ob-
tain as much variety as it can. I pass over what I have shown
elsewhere, that otherwise no diverse phenomena will arise.
   14. It follows also that that series has prevailed through
which there arises the greatest amount of what is distinctly
thinkable.
   15. Distinct cogitability gives order to a thing and beauty
to a thinker. For order is simply a distinctive relation of
several things; confusion is when several things are present,
but there is no way of distinguishing one from another.
   16. This removes atoms, a n d in general those bodies in which
there is no reason for distinguishing one p a r t from another.
   17. It also follows in general that the world is a cosmos, full
of o r n a m e n t ; that is, that it is m a d e in such a way t h a t it
gives the greatest satisfaction to an intelligent being.
   18. An intelligent being's pleasure is simply the perception
of beauty, order a n d perfection. All pain contains something
disordered, though only relative to the percipient; for in the
absolute sense all things are ordered.
A Resume" of Metaphysics                                        147
   19. So when something in the series of things displeases us,
that arises from a defect of our understanding. For it is not
possible that every mind should understand everything
distinctly; and to those who observe only some parts rather
than others, the harmony in the whole cannot appear.
   20. T h e consequence of this is that in the universe, justice
also is observed; tor justice is simply order or perfection with
respect to minds.
   21. And the greatest account is taken of minds, since
through them there arises the greatest variety in the smallest
space.
   22. I t can also be said that minds are the primary unities
of the world and are the closest likenesses of the first Being, for
they distinctly perceive necessary truths, that is, the reasons
which moved the first Being, and must have formed the
universe.
   23. Further, the first cause is of the highest goodness, for
whilst it produces as much perfection as possible in things, at
the same time it bestows on minds as m u c h pleasure as
possible, since pleasure consists in the perception of perfection.
   24. So much so, that evils themselves serve a greater good,
and the fact that pains are found in minds is necessary if they
are to reach greater pleasures.
