On Freedom [c. 1689)




It is a very old doubt of mankind, how freedom and con-
tingency can be reconciled with the series of causes and with
providence. T h e difficulty of the matter has been increased
by the dissertations of Christian authors on God's justice in
procuring the salvation of men.
     For my part, I used to consider that nothing happens by
chance or by accident, except with respect to certain par-
ticular substances; that fortune, as distinct from fate, is a n
empty word; and that nothing exists unless its individual
requisites 81 are given, and that from all these taken together
it follows that the thing exists. So I was not far from the view
of those who think that all things are absolutely necessary;
who think that security from compulsion is enough for free-
dom, 11 even though it is under the rule of necessity, and who
do not distinguish the infallible—that is, a truth which is
certainly known—from the necessary.
     But I was dragged back from this precipice b y a considera-
tion of those possibles which neither do exist, nor will exist,
nor have existed. For if certain possibles never exist, then
existing things are not always necessary; otherwise it would
be impossible for other things to exist instead of them, and so
all things that never exist would be impossible. For it cannot
be denied that m a n y stories, especially those which are called
' r o m a n c e s ' , are possible, even if they do not find any place in
this series of the universe, which God has chosen—unless
someone supposes that in the vast magnitude of space and
time there exist the regions of the poets, where you could see
wandering through the world King Arthur of Britain, Amadis
of Gaul, and Dietrich von Bern, famed in the stories of the
Germans. A certain distinguished philosopher of our century 0
On Freedom                                                      10"

seems to have been close to this opinion, for he says expressl;
somewhere that matter takes on successively all the forms o
which it is capable {Principles of Philosophy, Part I I I , art. 47)
This view is indefensible, for it would remove all the beaut;
of the universe and all choice, to say nothing here of othe;
arguments by which the contrary can be shown.
    Once I had recognised the contingency of things, I ther
began to consider what a clear notion of truth would be; fo:
I hoped, not unreasonably, to derive from this some ligh
on the problem of distinguishing necessary from contingen
truths. However, I saw that it is common to every tru<
affirmative proposition—universal a n d particular, necessar;
or contingent—that the predicate is in the subject, or that th<
 notion of the predicate is in some way involved in the notioi
of the subject, and that this is the principle of infallibilit;
in every kind of truth for him who knows everything a priori
But this seemed to increase the difficulty. For if, at a giver
 time, the notion of the predicate is in the notion of the sub
ject, then how, without contradiction and impossibility, car
 the predicate not be in the subject at that time, without des
 troying the notion of the subject?
    A new and unexpected light finally arose in a quarter when
 I least hoped for it—namely, out of mathematical considera
 tions of the nature of the infinite. T h e r e are two labyrinth:
of the h u m a n m i n d : one concerns the composition of th(
continuum, a n d the other the nature of freedom, and botl
spring from the same source—the infinite. T h a t distinguishec
philosopher whom I mentioned above could not unrave
these knots, or at any rate was unwilling to make his opinior
known, but preferred to cut them with a sword. For he say:
 {Principles of Philosophy, Part I, arts. 40 and 41) that we car
easily involve ourselves in great difficulties if we try to recon
cile God's preordination with the freedom of the will, anc
that we must abstain from discussing them, since God':
nature cannot be comprehended by us. H e also says (Part II
art. 35) that we ought not to doubt that matter is divided at
infinitum, even though we cannot understand this. But t h i
is not enough: for it is one thing for us not to understand c
thing, and another for us to understand its contradictors-
: :-3                                                 On Freedom
So it is at all events necessary to be able to answer those
arguments which seem to imply that freedom or the division
of matter imply a contradiction.
   It must be known, therefore, that all creatures have i m -
pressed on them a certain mark of the divine infinity, a n d
that this is the source of m a n y wonders which amaze the
h u m a n mind.
   For example, there is n o portion of matter so small that
there does not exist in it a world of creatures, infinite i n
number. Again, every individual created substance, how-
ever imperfect, acts on all others and is acted on by all others,
and contains in its complete notion (as this exists in the mind
of God) the whole universe, and whatever is, was or will be.
Further, every truth of fact or of individual things depends
on a series of infinite reasons, and all that is in this series
can be seen by God alone. This is also the reason why God
alone knows contingent truths a priori, a n d sees their in-
fallibility in another way than by experience.
   W h e n I had considered these more attentively, a pro-
found difference between necessary and contingent truths
came to light. Every truth is either original or derivative.
Original truths are those of which a reason cannot be given;
such truths are identical or immediate, and they affirm a term
of itself or deny a contradictory of its contradictory. d Deriva-
tive truths are again of two sorts: some are analysed into
original truths, others admit of an infinite process of analysis.
T h e former are necessary, the latter contingent. A necessary
proposition is one whose contrary implies a contradiction,
such as all identical propositions and all derivative propositions
which are analysable into identical propositions. These are the
 truths which are said to be of metaphysical or geometrical
 necessity. For demonstration consists simply in this: by the
 analysis of the terms of a proposition, and by substituting for
 a defined term a definition or part of a definition, one shows a
 certain equation or coincidence of predicate with subject in a
reciprocal proposition, or in other cases at least the inclusion
 of the predicate in the subject, in such a way that what was
 latent in the proposition and as it were contained in it vir-
 tually is rendered evident and express by the demonstration.
On Freedom                                                    109
               e
For example : if we understand by a ternary, senary or
duodenary (etc.) number one which can be divided by 3, 6
and 12 respectively, we can demonstrate the proposition
' E v e r y duodenary is a senary'. For every duodenary is a
binary-binary ternary (for this is the analysis of a duodenary
into its prime factors, 12 = 2 X 2 X 3 : i.e. the definition of a
duodenary). Now, every binary-binary ternary is a binary
ternary (which is an identical proposition), and every binary
ternary is a senary (this is the definition of a senary: 6 = 2 X
3). Therefore every duodenary is a senary (12 is the same as
2 X 2 X 3 ; 2 X 2 X 3 1S divisible by 2 X 3 ; 2 X 3 is the same as
6 ; therefore 12 is divisible by 6).
    But in the case of contingent truths, even though the pre-
dicate is in the subj'ect, this can never be demonstrated of it,
nor can the proposition ever be reduced to an equation or
identity. Instead, the analysis proceeds to infinity, God alone
seeing—not, indeed, the end of the analysis, since it has no
end—but the connexion of terms or the inclusion of the pre-
dicate in the subject, for he sees whatever is in the series;
indeed, this very same truth has arisen in part from his own
 intellect and in part from his will, and expresses in its own
way his infinite perfection and the harmony of the whole
 series of things.
    However, there have been left to us two ways of knowing
 contingent truths; one is the way of experience a n d the other
 the way of reason. T h e way of experience is when we per-
 ceive a thing clearly enough by our senses; the way of reason
 is derived from the general principle that nothing happens
 without a reason, or, that the predicate is always in some way
 in the subject. So we can regard it as certain that everything
 is done by God in the most perfect way, that he does nothing
 which is contrary to reason, a n d that nothing ever happens
 without the m a n who understands it understanding its
 reason—why, that is, the state of things is as it is rather than
 otherwise. So reasons can be given for the actions of minds no
 less than for the actions of bodies, although in the case of the
 choices that minds make there is no necessity. Sins arise from
  the original limitation of things; but God does not so much
 decree sins as admit to existence certain possible substances,
no                                                  On Freedom
already involving in their complete notion, under the aspect
of possibility, a free sin, and so involving the whole series of
things which they will be in. For there can be no doubt that
there are hidden reasons, transcending the understanding of
every creature, why one series of things (although it includes
sin) is preferred by God to another. However, God decrees
only perfection, or what is positive; but limitation, and the
sin which arises from it, is permitted by him, since given
certain positive decrees it cannot absolutely be rejected, and
reasons known to wisdom require that it should be redeemed
by a greater good which cannot otherwise be obtained. But
this cannot be considered here.
   But to fix our attention better, so that the mind does not
wander through vague difficulties, there occurs to me an
analogy that holds between truth and proportions that seems
to clarify the whole issue splendidly and put it in a clear
light. Just as, in every proposition, the smaller number is
contained in the larger, or an equal in an equal, so in every
truth the predicate is in the subject. Further, in every pro-
portion between homogeneous quantities one can carry out a
kind of analysis of equal or congruent terms and subtract the
smaller from the larger, by removing from the larger a part
equal to the smaller; and similarly a residue can be sub-
tracted from what has been subtracted, and so on either to a
given point, or to infinity. So also, in the analysis of truths,
one always substitutes for a term its equivalent, so that the
predicate may be analysed into the terms which are contained
in the subject. Now, in the case of proportions the analysis is
sometimes completed and one arrives at a common measure,
which is contained in each term of the proportion an in-
tegral number of times. Sometimes, however, the analysis
can be continued to infinity, which occurs in the comparison
of a rational number and a surd, or of a side and the diagonal
in a square. Similarly, truths are sometimes demonstrable
or necessary, and sometimes they are free or contingent; the
latter cannot be reduced by any analysis to an identity, as to
a common measure. This is the essential distinction both be-
tween proportionals and between truths.
   However, incommensurable proportions have been mas-
On Freedom                                                    111
tered by the science of geometry, a n d we even have demon-
strations about infinite series. M u c h more are contingent or
infinite truths subject to the knowledge of G o d ; they are
known by him, not by a demonstration indeed (for that would
imply a contradiction) but by an infallible vision. But this
vision that God has must not be conceived as a kind of experi-
ential knowledge, as if he saw something in things which are
distinct from himself, but rather as a priori knowledge (through
the reasons for truths). For he sees things which are possible
in themselves by a consideration of his own nature, but he
sees existent things by the consideration of his own free will
and his own decrees, of which the first is to do everything in
the best way and with supreme reason. W h a t is termed
' m e d i a t e knowledge' is simply the knowledge of contingent
possibles.
   W h e n these matters have been properly considered, I do
not believe that any difficulty can arise in this topic whose
solution cannot be derived from what has been said above. If
one admits this concept of necessity—which all do admit—
namely, that those propositions are necessary whose contrary
implies a contradiction, it is readily apparent that the nature
of demonstration and analysis can be explained, and also
that there must be truths which are not reduced by any
analysis to identical truths or to the principle of contradiction,
but which furnish an infinite series of reasons, which God
alone can see through. This is the nature of everything which
is called free and contingent, and in particular that which
involves space and time. It has been shown adequately above
that this follows from the infinity of the parts of the universe
and the mutual penetration a n d connexion of things.
