VloL. 11, 1925               PHYSICS: G. N. LEWIS                       179
                   A NEW PRINCIPLE OF EQ UILIBRI UMI
                          By GILBERT N. LEwIs
                 DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
                           Communicated January 21, 1925
   The Non-Existence of Cyclic Equilibrium.-At a given temperature a
system is said to be in a state of physical and chemical equilibrium if none
of the describable properties of the system change, on the average, with
the time. Any given substance may be regarded as made up of groups,
each group being defined by certain macroscopic or microscopic properties.
Thus a heterogeneous substance such as a mixture of ice and water nat-
urally divides itself into the two groups ice and water, but each of these
may be divided into sub-groups. Thus the liquid water may contain
several molecular species, such as H20, (H120)3, Hi., H30+, OH- and each
of these species may be taken as a group. The molecules of each such
species may be further divided. One group may consist of all the mole-
cules of the species H20 located within a certain cubic centimeter, and
having such motion of translation that the component in an X direction
lies between certain specified limits, that in the Y direction between other
specified limits, and so on. (By taking these limits as close together as
we please, we may diminish the average content of any one group without
limit.) Every group so defined would be still further sub-divided if we
should specify the positions and the motions of the several particles of
which the molecule itself is composed.
   When once we have specified the characteristics of a group, no matter
how closely it may be delimited, the average number of molecules which
it contains must remain constant when equilibrium is attained. In other
words, the average number of molecules which in unit time cease to belong
to a given group must be equal to the average number of new molecules
entering that group.
   In some cases thermodynamics gives more information than this con-
cerning equilibrium. Let us consider a system of ice, water and water
vapor, and indicate by swi, sjw9 svw, swv, svi, siv the average number of
molecules changing per second from water to ice, from ice to water, from
vapor to water, and so on. The definition of equilibrium which we have
stated requires only that the average amount of each group remain con-
stant. The condition that the amount of ice be constant is
                               siv + siw = svi + swi
It does not prohibit a condition of cyclic equilibrium such that
                          SSW > swi; swv > svw; svs > siv
.180                      PHYSICS: G. N. LEWIS                  PROC. N. A. S.

Nevertheless we know that such a condition is impossible, for the ice may
be removed from the system in such a manner as neither to change the
relative rates of vaporization of the liquid and of liquefaction of the vapor,
nor to disturb the equilibrium between these two groups. But after the
ice is removed we must have s,,, equal to s,w, and therefore this must
have been the condition before the removal of the ice.
   Let us suppose that an equilibrium exists between two chemical sub-
stances A = B, and that there are two paths by which A can be con-
verted into B and two corresponding reverse paths. The four rates of
reaction may be expressed by SAB, SBA, S AB and S'BA. Often we know
that we cannot have a cyclic equilibrium such that
                         SAB > SBA;    S'AB < S'BA,
but rather must write
                         SAB = SBA; S AB = S BA-

For if this were not the case we could add a minute amount of some catalyst
which would increase the rate of the reaction and its inverse along one of
-the paths, without affecting the two rates in the other path. This would
disturb the existing equilibrium, contrary to the results of observation
and of thermodynamics.
   In the absence of catalytic phenomena we are still led to similar con-
clusions. Let us consider Wegscheider's paradox.' He writes, for exam-
ple, the simultaneous reactions,
                  A=B; B + C=A +D; D=C,
and points out that if we impose the sole condition that the amount of
each substance is constant, the ordinary laWs of chemical kinetics lead to
a different equation for the equilibrium concentrations than the one ob-
tained from thermo-dynamics; it reduces to the latter only when certain
further conditions are imposed. The assumption that the rate in each
individual reaction is equal to the inverse rate removes the paradox. This
is not the only way of avoiding the paradox in this particular example,
but if we were to consider a great many different types of simultaneous
reactions we should probably find that the only general way of avoiding
the paradox, that is applicable to all cases, would be to assume that in
every case of equilibrium, involving a number of simultaneous reactions,
a state of equilibrium also exists for each separate reaction and its inverse.
   In the more purely physical types of equilibrium, such as are dealt with
in statistical mechanics, we know in certain simple cases not only that the
number of molecules in a certain limited group remains constant, but that,
for example, the number of molecules in a certain group L colliding. with
those in a group M to give mnolecules in groups L' and M' is equal to the
VOL. 11, 1925            PHYSICS: G. N. LEWIS1                           181
number of molecules in groups L' and M' colliding to give molecules
in groups L and M.2 Here again we are tempted to generalize and assume
that the same principle holds for all cases.
   Finally let us turn to the phenomenon of absorption and emission of
light. If it be assumed that the emission of a certain spectral line indicates
that some molecules have undergone a process by which they have passed
from one group to another, and if we assume that when the same line is
absorbed the molecules undergo the reverse process and are transferred
from the second group to the first, it seems inevitable that in a state of
thermal equilibrium the two processes must occur at the same average
rate. Otherwise it would be hard to see how such a substance could be
introduced into an isothermal Hohlraum without permanently changing
the character of the radiation therein.
   These diverse examples suggest very strongly that cyclic equilibrium
does not exist, and we have seen that this supposition could be proved
correct if an independent catalyst could be found for each individual re-
action or process. There are, however, numerous cases in which it would
be difficult, if not impossible, to find such catalysts. In applying thermo-
dynamics to solutions, some of the more important results have been ob-
tained by the use of a semi-permeable membrane. Now there are solutions
in which it would be difficult, if not impossible, to find such a membrane,
but we do not hesitate to apply to them the same laws which can be demon-
strated to be true for cases where semi-permeable membranes can be em-
ployed. So in our present case we should hesitate to believe that there are
different laws for reactions which are subject to catalysis and for those
which are not.
   The Law of Entire Equilibrium.-Thus I am led to propose a law which
in its general form is not deducible from thermodynamics, but proves to
be compatible with the laws of thermodynamics in all cases where a com-
parison is possible. It may be called the law of entire equilibrium, and
may be stated as follows. Corresponding to every individual process there
is a reverse process, and in a state of equilibrium the average rate of every
process is equal to the average rate of its reverse process. The rate at which
one group or set of groups L goes over into another group or set of groups
L' is the same as the rate at which the groups L' go over into the groups
L. Moreover if there are various paths by which the first process occurs,
there is an equal number of paths by which the second process occurs, and
the rate is the same in both directions along every path. This will be true
no matter how detailed are the specifications which define the several
 groups and the several paths..
    In cases to which pure quantum theory may be applied there is a number
 of discrete paths by which molecules of one group may change to another.
 Thus in Bohr's theory of the hydrogen atom, the atom may pass from a
 1;82                     PHYSICS: G. N. LEWIS                   Pitoc. N. A. S.
 higher to a. lower quantum state, either immediately or through a finite
 number of -intervening states. The meaning of the principle is here ob-
 vious; in a condition of thermal equilibrium the rate of change for each step
 is equal to the rate for the reverse step.
    In -other cases we must assume, not a discrete number, but an infinite
 continuum of paths. Then we must employ the term "path" to mean
 some. specified zone of paths more or less arbitrarily demarked from the
continuum. Yet however narrow or however arbitrary this path, or zone
of paths, is, our principle asserts that the rate along this path is the same
in both directions. For example, in discussing statistical mechanics it is
often convenient to plot the position of each particle in a "phase space"
 of as many.dimensions as there are numbers required to specify the position
 and the momentum of one particle. As a particle changes its position and
 momentum, it. describes a curve in this space, and we may segregate for dis-
 cussion all of these curves which lie within a certain "tube." L. Let us sup-
pose that two molecules collide in such manner that the molecule A goes from
the group L to the group L', and the molecule B from the group M to the
group M', and further that each molecule traces a curve lying within a speci-
fied tube, one from L to L' and one from M to M'. Then our law states that
in equilibrium the average rate (or chance) of a molecule A going, within the
prescribed -tube, from L to L'. while a molecule B goes through its prescribed
tube from M to M' is the same as the average rate (or chance) of mole-
cules A and- B going through the same tubes from L' to L and from M' to M.
    Perhaps the significance of this law may be made a little more evident
by means of a crude analogy. Suppose that during a period in which there
are no births or deaths the population of the several cities of the United
States remains constant, the number leaving each city.being balanced by
the number entering it. This stationary condition would not correspond
to our case of thermal equilibrium., We should require further, to complete
the analogy, that as many people go from New York to Philadelphia as
from Philadelphia to New York. If there were three railway lines between
these two cities we should require that the number of passengers going by
each line be equal in both directions. If some of the-travel were not by
railway or roads but across country, then, if we should draw on the map
two non-intersecting lines from New York to Philadelphia, we should re-
quire that the number of persons passing through any. such zone in one
direction be equal to the number, passing through the same zone in the
opposite direction. By such illustrations we. may appreciate. how ex-
tremely far-reaching are the consequences -of the proposed law.
   The law of entire equilibrium might haye. been. called the law of re-
versibility to the last detail. If we should consider any one of the.ele-
-me-ntary processes which. are occurring. in a system at equilibrium,. and
could, let us say, obtain a moving-pigture film.for such a process, then this
VOL. 11, 1925           GENETICS: J. C. WALKER                          103

film reeled backward would present an equally accurate picture of a re-
verse process which is also occurring in the system and with equal fre-
quency. Therefore in any system at equilibrium, time must lose the uni-
directional character which plays so important a part in the development
of the time concept. In a state of equilibrium there is no essential dif-
ference between backward and forward direction in time, or, in other
words, there is complete symmetry with respect to past and future.
   I believe that some of the ideas contained in this paper have been sug-
gested by the work of Einstein, but he has not proposed this law of equil-
ibrium. Indeed one of the first applications which I shall make, in a
subsequent paper, will be to the interaction between matter and light,
where I shall attempt to demonstrate the invalidity of Einstein's derivation
of Planck's radiation formula. Another application will shortly appear
in a paper by Dr. D. F. Smith and myself on the mechanism of chemical
reactions.
     1 Wegscheider, Z. physik. Chem., 39, 273 (1901).
     2 See Lewis and Adams, Physic. Rev. 5, 10 (1915).




       STUDIES ON DISEASE RESISTANCE IN THE ONION
                             BY J. C. WALKZR
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN AND OFFICE OF COTTON, TRUCK AND FORAGE CROP DISEASE
INVESTIGATIONs, BUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF
                                AGRICULTURE
                  Read before the Academy, April 30, 1924
   The nature of resistance to disease in plants is a subject which has been
of increasing interest to botanists in general and to plant pathologists in
particular for several years past.' Earlier there was a tendency to assume
that in various instances of disease resistance the causes were sufficientiy
similar to justify some single type or comparatively few types of explana-
tion, as appears to be the case in certain cases of immunity in animals.
Investigations indicate, however, that the causes of resistance in plants
are widely varied and relatively complex, and that sound progress is de-
pendent, for the present at least, upon critical study of specific examples
wherever practicable. Some years ago it came to the writer's attention
that the bulbs of the common onion show a wide range in susceptibility
or resistance to certain fungous parasites and that this apparently is cor-
related with the occurrence of scale pigments. The studies summarized
here are therefore presented as a contribution to the general subject of
disease resistance in plants.
   Horticultural varieties of the common onion (Allium cepa) are grouped
