              DON HOWARD*
 EINSTEIN ON LOCALITY AND SEPARABILITY
          . . . all things which are different must be distinguished in some way,
          and in the case of real things position alone is not a sufficient means
          of distinction. This overthrows the whole of purely corpuscularian
          philosophy.
                            Leibniz, 'On the Principle of Indiscernibles' (1696)


                                          Introduction

EINSTEIN is famous for his enduring doubts about the quantum theory's claim
to be a complete theory of nature. The 1935 Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen (EPR)
paper, 'Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered
Complete?', is a landmark in the history of twentieth-century physics.1 The
puzzle first posed there about a Gedankenexperiment involving previously
interacting systems, the puzzle ever since referred to as the 'EPR paradox', has
been the focus of intense and sustained philosophical debate about the relation
between theory and reality.2 The Gedankenexperiment itself has recently been
turned into an actual experiment, the results of which appear to refute the
possibility of local hidden-variable theories, which is an ironic turn of events,
since local hidden-variable theories have been regarded by many as an attractive
   Received 23.3.84.
   •Present address: Department of Philosophy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506,
U.S.A. 1 wish to thank the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which holds the copyright, for permission
to quote from Einstein's unpublished correspondence, and the University of Kentucky Research
Foundation for generous and timely financial support, which enabled me to study the
Einstein - Schrodinger correspondence in the duplicate Einstein Archive housed at the Mudd
Manuscript Library, Princeton University. An earlier version of the paper was read in February
of 1984 to a session of the Boston Colloquium for the Philosophy of Science. I would like to thank
my commentator, Jon Jarrett, and the chair of that session, Abner Shimony, for several helpful
comments on the paper. Many thanks are also owed to my colleague, Ed Madden, who had a number
of good suggestions for improving the exposition of my argument, and to my wife, Margo Shearman-
Howard, for her invaluable editorial assistance. Additional thanks are owed, finally, to the two
anonymous referees who drew my attention to a couple of remaining obscurities in the argument.
   'Physical Review 47 (1935), 777-80.
   2
     Bohr is, of course, the most famous respondent. See both his immediate reply, 'Can Quantum-
Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?' Physical Review 48 (1935),
696 - 702, and his later summary of his years-long controversy with Einstein, 'Discussion with Einstein
on Epistemological Problems in Atomic Physics' in Albert Einstein: Philosopher - Scientist, P. A.
Schilpp (ed.) (Evanston, Illinois: The Library of Living Philosophers, 1949), pp. 199-241. A helpful,
thorough discussion of the Bohr - Einstein controversy can be found in C. A. Hooker's 'The Nature
of Quantum Mechanical Reality: Einstein Versus Bohr', in Paradigms and Paradoxes: The
Philosophical Challenge of the Quantum Domain, R. G. Colodny (ed.) (Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1972), pp. 6 7 - 3 0 2 .

Stud. Hist. Phil. Set., Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 171-201, 1985.             0039-3681/85 S3.00+ 0.00
Printed in Great Britain.                                             © 1985 Pergamon Press Ltd.

                                                 171
172                                            Si tidies in History and Philosophy of Science

way to repair the defect in quantum mechanics which so troubled Einstein.3
   However, Einstein's doubts about quantum mechanics were never enough
to shake the faith of the defenders of quantum mechanical orthodoxy. Indeed,
too many physicists and philosophers have been inclined to dismiss Einstein's
misgivings as being a result of the naive but forgivable failures of understanding
of an old man still clinging to an outmoded, deterministic metaphysics. I do
not share Einstein's doubts about quantum mechanics, but I think it a mistake
so easily to dismiss his arguments. In fact, I believe that his views on
incompleteness have never been understood properly, precisely because we have
not taken them seriously enough to study them with the care they deserve. And
I believe that the loss to our understanding of physics is considerable. In what
follows, I will argue that Einstein's real reasons for believing quantum mechanics
incomplete were quite different from those attributed to him on the basis of
casual readings of the EPR paper. And I will argue that his reflections on the
quantum mechanical challenge to classical ways of thinking are far more
insightful than we have taken them to be. Should we be surprised to learn that
Einstein was a profound, not a superficial critic of the quantum theory?
   More specifically, I will defend four claims:
   (1) Einstein did not write the Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen pa           and he
was unhappy with the way it turned out, arguing that the 'main point' was
'buried by the erudition'. 4
   (2) Shortly after the appearance of the EPR paper, Einstein set forth his own
incompleteness argument, which over the course of the next fifteen years he
presented at least three times in print and at least twice in his correspondence.
The paradoxical behavior of previously interacting systems is still the key, but
Einstein's argument differs from the EPR argument in both its logical form
and the assumptions upon which it rests. In brief, what Einstein argues is that
the incompleteness of quantum mechanics follows from the conjunction of two
   3
     For a survey of all of the experimental results through 1978, as well as an analysis of Bell's
theorem, which was the starting point for this line of investigation, see J. F. Clauser and A. Shimony,
'Bell's Theorem: Experimental Tests and Implications', Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (1978),
 1881 - 1927. Bell first presented his theorem in 'On the Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen Paradox',
Physics 1 (1964), 195 — 200. The most recent experimental results, which provide the strongest evidence
to date against local hidden-variable theories, are reported in A. Aspect, P. Grangier and G. Roger,
'Experimental Realization of Einstein - Podolsky - Rosen- Bohm Gedankenexperiment: A New-
Violation of Bell's Inequalities', Physical Review Letters 49 (1982), 9 1 - 9 4 , and A. Aspect, J.
Dalibard and G. Roger, 'Experimental Test of Bell's Inequalities Using Time-Varying Analyzers',
Physical Review Letters 49 (1982), 1804-7. In what follows, I refer to the various experimental
tests of local hidden-variable theories, collectively, as the 'Bell experiments'.
   •"Einstein, letter to Schrodinger, 19 June 1935. The contents of this letter are discussed in some
detail below; see sections 1 and 2. Arthur Fine first drew attention to the importance of this letter
in his 'Einstein's Critique of Quantum Theory: The Roots and Significance of EPR', in After Einstein:
Proceedings of the Einstein Centennial Celebration at Memphis State University, 14- 16 March
1979, P. Barker and C. G. Shugart (eds.) (Memphis, Tennessee: Memphis State University Press,
 1981), pp. 147 - 5S. However, I disagree in important ways with Fine's analysis of the incompleteness
argument found in the letter. In particular, Fine denies that one can find in the letter a distinction
of the kind 1 want to draw between separability and locality. See notes, 23 and 41.
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                          173

assumptions. The first, which I call the 'separability principle', asserts that any
two spatially separated systems possess their own separate real states. The
second, the 'locality principle' asserts that all physical effects are propagated
with finite, subluminal velocities, so that no effects can be communicated
between systems separated by a space-like interval.
   (3) Far better than the EPR argument, Einstein's incompleteness argument
points up the issues at stake in the choice between quantum and classical theories
of nature. In particular, the difference is seen to rest on the quantum theory's
denial of the separability principle, which Einstein regards as the essential
foundation of all classical, realistic theories. Einstein's incompleteness argument
also thus clarifies the link between his doubts about quantum mechanics and
his commitment to realism by making clear the physical assumptions upon which
his realism is grounded.
   (4) Einstein's own approach to incompleteness suggests a new way of
understanding Bell's theorem and the physical implications of the experimental
tests of local hidden-variable theories. For it can be argued that the Bell
inequality is itself a consequence of the separability and locality principles, and
thus it can be claimed that the Bell experiments demonstrate not the existence
of a peculiar kind of 'quantum non-locality', but instead the existence of
quantum non-separability. And Einstein's analysis implies that therein lie the
seeds of a conflict not with special-relativistic locality constraints, but with
assumptions fundamental to general relativity and any other field theory.
   Given their importance in what follows, the separability and locality principles
should be clearly distinguished. To repeat: separability says that spatially
separated systems possess separate real states; locality adds that the state of a
system can be changed only by local effects, effects propagated with finite,
subluminal velocities. There is no necessary connection between the two
principles, though they are frequently stated as if they were one. Some theories
conform to both principles, general relativity being an example of such a
separable, local theory. Other theories conform to just one or the other.
Quantum mechanics is, on my interpretation, a non-separable, local theory.
Examples of the opposite sort, namely, of separable, non-local theories, are
to be found among the non-local hidden-variable theories. Most importantly,
it should be understood that the separability of two systems is not the same
thing as the absence of an interaction between them, nor is the presence of an
interaction the mark of their non-separability. The separability principle operates
on a more basic level as, in effect, a principle of individuation for physical
systems, a principle whereby we determine whether in a given situation we have
 only one system or two. If two systems are not separable, then there can be
 no interaction between them, because they are not really two systems at all.
174                                           Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

                  1. Einstein's Attitude Toward the EPR Argument

   The argument developed in the Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen paper is what
I call a direct argument for incompleteness. It proceeds by first establishing a
'condition of completeness' and then seeking to show that in at least one special
case quantum mechanics fails to satisfy this necessary condition. The
completeness condition is straightforward: 'every element of the physical reality
must have a counterpart in the physical theory'. 5 But for the completeness
condition to be applied, at least a sufficient condition for the existence of
elements of physical reality is required. Thus, the EPR paper presents the famous
criterion of physical reality:

      If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e. with
      probability equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element
      of physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.6

The remainder of the EPR argument consists of a detailed examination of a
special case wherein the value of either of two conjugate parameters of one
system can be predicted with certainty on the basis of a measurement of the
corresponding parameter of a second system which had previously interacted
with the first, the interaction having established correlations between the
parameters of the two systems. If the two systems are far enough apart, the
measurement on the second system entails no physical disturbance of the first
system, and so, the conditions in the reality criterion being satisfied, it is claimed
that elements of physical reality exist corresponding to each of the two conjugate
parameters of the first system. But quantum mechanics prohibits the
simultaneous definiteness of conjugate parameters. Thus, the EPR argument
concludes, quantum mechanics is incomplete.
   Many commentators have been troubled by gaps in the EPR argument. The
most significant lacuna is encountered at the place where the simultaneous reality
of two conjugate parameters of the first system is inferred from the possibility
of measuring either of the corresponding parameters of the second system. In
general, the relevant parameters of the second system are themselves conjugate
and so cannot be measured simultaneously. Additional assumptions are therefore
required to license the inference from the possibility of measuring either
parameter of the second system, to the actual simultaneous reality of both
conjugate parameters of the first.
   One way to repair the defect is just to assume that all physical systems at
all times possess definite, observer-independent properties which are revealed
to us by observation, including the kind of indirect observations which lie at
  5
   Op. cit., note 1, p. 777.
  "Ibid.
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                             175

the heart of the EPR Gedankenexperiment.1 But this common maneuver is
objectionable on two counts. First, it reduces the EPR argument to a petitio
principii. The aim of the EPR argument is to prove, via the reality criterion,
the existence of elements of physical reality not represented in quantum
mechanics, and thereby to prove quantum mechanics incomplete. However, the
suggestion under consideration is that we simply assume the existence of these
(and many other) elements of physical reality. Second, and more importantly,
this proposal naively and tacitly presupposes that we know what counts as a
physical system, and that we know what is meant by talk of the 'independence'
of a system's properties. Thus the proposal obscures what I will argue is the
most important issue at stake in the debate over the completeness of quantum
mechanics. For the genius of Einstein's own argument lies precisely in its
demonstration that the incompleteness of quantum mechanics can be inferred
only if one posits an explicit principle of individuation for physical systems,
thereby grounding the independence of systems in a prior assumption of the
existence of distinct real states of affairs. This principle of individuation turns
out to be the aforementioned principle of separability.
   What was Einstein's opinion of the EPR argument? The surprising answer
is found in his correspondence with Erwin Schrodinger from the summer of
1935. The EPR paper appeared in the 15 May 1935 issue of Physical Review.
Shortly thereafter, on 7 June, Schrodinger wrote Einstein a long letter which
begins thus:

      I was very pleased that in the work which just appeared in Phys. Rev. you openly
   seized dogmatic quantum mechanics by the scruff of the neck, something we had
   already discussed so much in Berlin.8

Einstein replied on 19 June, and the beginning of his letter is interesting:

       I was very pleased with your detailed letter, which speaks about the little essay.
   For reasons of language, this was written by Podolsky after many discussions. But
   still it has not come out as well as I really wanted; on the contrary, the main point
   was, so to speak, buried by the erudition. 9


   'Essentially the same prosthesis is recommended in Clauser and Shimony, 'Bell's Theorem',
p. 1885; their survey opens with a discussion of EPR.
   'Schrodinger to Einstein, 7 June 1935: 'ich hab mich sehr gefreut, dass Du in der eben erschienenen
Arbeit in Phys. Rev. die dogmatische Quantenmechanik auch offentlich bei dem Schlafittchen
erwischt hast, iiber das wir in Berlin schon so viel discutiert hatten.' Schrodinger and Einstein had
been colleagues in Berlin from 1927 through 1932, Schrodinger as Planck's successor in the Chair
of Theoretical Physics at the University of Berlin, Einstein as the Director of the Kaiser Wilhelm
Institute.
   'Einstein to Schrodinger, 19 June 1935: 'Ich habe mich sehr gefreut mit Deinem ausfuhrlichen
Briefe, der iiber die kleine Abhandlung handelt. Diese ist aus Sprachgriinden von Podolsky
geschrieben nach vielen Diskussionen. Es ist aber doch nicht so gut herausgekommen, was ich
eigentlich wollte; sondern die Hauptsache ist sozusagen durch Gelehrsamkeit verschiittet.'
176                                             Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

Einstein proceeds immediately to sketch his own incompleteness argument, which
I will examine shortly. But first we should savor the import of the just quoted
remark. Einstein says that he did not write the EPR paper, and that he was
unhappy with the way it turned out! It is thus a mistake to read the EPR
argument as if it accurately represented Einstein's views. It is even more of a
mistake to read between the lines of the EPR argument for evidence of Einstein's
deeper philosophical assumptions. There are gaps in the EPR argument, and
they can be filled by additional assumptions, as we have just seen. But the gaps
are not Einstein's gaps, and so neither are the assumptions with which we fill
them.
   In particular, we should not attribute to Einstein the kind of uncritical or
unreflective realism which was considered two paragraphs back as a remedy
for the defects in the EPR argument. Einstein did believe that all physical systems
at all times possess definite, observer-independent properties which are revealed
to us by observation. But he did not just assume this. Instead, Einstein grounded
his realism about physical systems and their properties in the deeper assumption
of separability, which is important, because the latter assumption is susceptible
to revealing kinds of physical and philosophical scrutiny that cannot touch an
unanalyzed postulate of physical realism.


                     2. Einstein's Own Incompleteness Argument

   What then was Einstein's own argument for the incompleteness of quantum
mechanics? It was presented first in the just-mentioned letter to Schrodinger
of 19 June 1935. It was set before the public for the first time in 1936 in Einstein's
essay, 'Physik und Realitat', 10 and it was given a more careful statement when,
in 1946 or 1947, Einstein drafted the 'Autobiographical Notes' section for the
volume, Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist."            The most detailed and
thoughtful discussion of the argument is found in a paper Einstein wrote in
1948 for the journal, Dialectica, a paper entitled 'Quanten-Mechanik und
Wirklichkeit'. 12 There is one final presentation of it in a letter Einstein wrote
to Max Born on 18 March 1948.13 Essentially the same argument was given on
   '"Journal of the Franklin Institute 221 (1936), 3 1 3 - 4 7 . An English translation of this essay,
under the title 'Physics and Reality', was published immediately following the German original
in the same issue of the Journal of the Franklin Institute, pp. 349 - 82. A different English translation
was later published in Einstein's Ideas and Opinions (New York: Bonanza Books, 1954),
pp. 2 9 0 - 323. Unfortunately, both translations are flawed, often in serious ways. 1 have therefore
retranslated all of the passages quoted here.
   "'Autobiographisches', in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist,        pp. 2 - 9 4 . The volume as
a whole was published only in 1949; however, Einstein begins his 'Autobiographical Notes' by writing,
'Here I sit in order to write, at the age of 67, something like my own obituary'; this dates his
composition of the 'Notes' between 14 March 1946 and 14 March 1947.
   "Dialectica 2 (1948), 320-24.
   ,]
      M. Born (ed.), Albert Einstein — Hedwig und Max Born: Briefwechsel, 1916- 1955 (Munich:
Nymphenburger, 1969), pp. 2 2 3 - 2 4 .
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                            177

each occasion, but there is a development in the direction of greater clarity about
the two basic assumptions which I claim underlie the argument. Each of these
statements of the argument will be considered below, beginning with that in
the 19 June 1935 letter to Schrodinger.
   Most of Schrodinger's letter to Einstein of 7 June 1935 is a critical discussion
of the mathematics involved in the quantum theoretical treatment of interacting
systems, Schrodinger being concerned that the special case treated in the EPR
paper is so special that the incompleteness argument fails of complete generality.
But near the end of Schrodinger's letter one finds the following remark:

      Until now, the 'story' which I just made up about the whole matter was this. We
   possess no quantum mechanics which takes relativity theory into account, that is,
   which takes into account the finite velocity with which all effects are propagated.
   In the whole scheme of things, we possess only the analogue of the old, absolute
   mechanics. At best, that can apply to infinitely small systems, in which the light
   intervals which come into consideration are to be neglected. If we want to separate
   two systems, then indeed long before their interaction disappears it will cease to be
   approximable through absolute Coulomb laws and the like. And that's the end of
   the 'story'. The process of separation is not at all to be conceived according to the
   orthodox schema.' 4


The orthodox schema mentioned by Schrodinger is simply standard, non-
relativistic quantum mechanics. The problem to which he is pointing is that this
orthodox schema permits us to represent interactions only by the device of an
interaction potential, such as a Coulomb potential. And any such representation
tacitly assumes that aH-effects are propagated instantaneously, whereas relativity
theory teaches us that all effects are propagated with a finite velocity. Moreover,
as the EPR Gedankenexperiment makes clear, at least in theory, the correlations
established by an interaction persist long after the interaction potential becomes
negligible. The ultimate issue of Schrodinger's worry was his development of
the now standard quantum mechanical interaction formalism.15 But in the
   '•"Schrodinger to Einstein, 7 June 1935: 'Der Vers, den ich nur auf die ganze Sache bisher machte,
war dieser. Wir besitzen keine Quantenmechanik, welche der Relativitatstheorie d.h. unter anderem,
welche der endlichen Ausbreitungsgeschwindigkeit aller Wirkung Rechnung tragt. Wir besitzen in
dem ganzen Schema nur das Analogon der alten absoluten Mechanik. Das kann bestenfalls fur
unendlichkleine Systeme gelten, in denen die in Betracht kommenden Lichtzeiten zu vernachlassigen
sind. Wenn wir zwei Systeme trennen wollen, so wird ihre Wechselwirkung schon lange bevor sie
verschwindet, aufhoren durch absolute Coulomb -u. dgl. Gesetze approximierbar zu sein. Und da
endet unser Latein. Der Trennungsvorgang ist gar nicht nach dem orthodoxen Schema zu erfassen.'
Schrodinger goes on in this letter to register his doubts about Dirac's relativistic quantum mechanics.
One year later, Einstein echoes Schrodinger's worries about the 'orthodox schema' when he writes:
'In the Schrodinger equation absolute time, or potential energy, plays a decisive role though these
concepts have been recognized through the relativity theory to be inadmissabie in principle. If one
wants to escape this problem, then he must take fields and field laws as basic, instead of interaction
forces.' See Einstein's 'Physik und Realitat' (note 10, above), pp. 342-43. (My translation — D.H.)
   IS
     E. Schrodinger, 'Discussion of Probability Relations Between Separated Systems', Proceedings
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 31 (1935), 555-62; and 'Probability Relations Between
Separated Systems', Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 32 (1936), 446-52.
178                                            Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

meantime, his concerns about our failure to understand the process of separation
elicited from Einstein a very interesting reaction.
   Einstein opens his 19 June letter to Schrodinger with the above-quoted
disclaimer to the effect that Podolsky wrote the EPR paper and that he, Einstein,
was unhappy with how it turned out. He then proceeds immediately to set out
his own thoughts on incompleteness, starting with a simple, non-quantum
illustration of 'incompleteness'. He asks Schrodinger to consider two boxes and
a single ball which is always found in one or the other of the boxes. We make
an 'observation' on a box simply by lifting the lid and looking inside. Einstein
then asks whether a certain state description — 'The probability that the ball
is in the first box is W — is a complete description. He says that an adherent
of the 'Born' interpretation would answer, 'No', on the grounds that a complete
description would have to take the form of a categorical assertion to the effect
that the ball is in the first box (or not). However, a follower of the 'Schrodinger'
interpretation, says Einstein, would answer, 'Yes', arguing that before an
observation is made the ball is not really in either box, and that this 'being in
a definite box' only comes about through an observation. According to the
'Schrodinger' interpretation, the state of the first box before an observation
is performed is completely described by the probability Vi. There is one
additional alternative, according to Einstein. He says:


      The talmudic philosopher doesn't give a hoot for 'reality', which he regards as a
      hobgoblin of the naive, and he declares that the two points of view differ only as
      to their m o d e of_expression. 1 6



The 'talmudist', we learn from a later letter, is Bohr17
  What is Einstein's own opinion? He explains:


      My way of thinking is now this: properly considered, one cannot get at the talmudist
      if one does not make use of a supplementary principle: the 'separation principle'.
      That is to say: 'the second box, along with everything having to do with its contents,
      is independent of what happens with regard to the first box (separated partial systems).'
      If one adheres to the separation principle, then one thereby excludes the second

   ''Einstein to Schrodinger, 19 June 1935: 'Der talmudistische Philosoph aber pfeift auf die
"Wirklichkeit" als auf einen Popanz der Naivitat und erklart beide Auffassungen als nur der
Ausdruckweise nach verschieden.'
   "That the 'talmudist' is supposed to be Bohr is made clear in a letter from Einstein to Schrodinger
of 9 August 1939, where the question of incompleteness is again under discussion. After distinguishing
the 'Born' and 'Schrodinger' interpretations of the yj-function, Einstein says: 'Es gibt auch noch
den Mystiker, der ein Fragen nach etwas unabhangiges vom BeobachtenExistierenden, . . . iiberhaupt
als unwissenschaftlich verbietet (Bohr). Dann fliessen beide Auffassungen in einen weichen Nebel
zusammen, in dem ich mich aber auch nicht besser fuhle als in einer der vorgenannten Auffassungen,
die zum Realitatsbegriff Stellung nehmen.'
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                           179

   ('Schrodinger') point of view, and only the Born point of view remains, according
   to which the above state description is an incomplete description of reality, or of
   the real states."

The crucial point here is Einstein's claim that one cannot refute the 'talmudist'
without invoking the 'separation principle', according to which the contents
of the two boxes are independent of one another. This is the principle upon
which Einstein's incompleteness argument turns.
   For the sake of clarity, I should note right away that what Einstein here calls
the 'separation principle' is not exactly the same as what I call the principle
of separability. The separability principle is implicit in Einstein's similarly named
'separation principle'; but Einstein has yet to distinguish as clearly as he will
between separability, which is the claim that spatially separated systems always
possess separate real states, and locality, which is the claim that the separate
real states of such separate systems can be changed only by physical effects which
are propagated with finite, subluminal velocities. However, what is already clear,
indeed, what the 'ball-in-the-box' example is obviously intended to suggest, is
that spatially separated systems are characterized by separate real states of
affairs. This is the heart of the separability principle.
   Let us return to Einstein's argument. After explaining through the 'ball-in-
the-box' example what he means in general by 'incompleteness', Einstein turns
his attention to the special case of the quantum theory. He first explains what
'completeness' would mean in this context:

   In the quantum theory, one describes a real state of a system through a normalized
   function, UJ, of the coordinates (of the configuration-space). . . . Now one would
   like to say the following: u; is correlated one-to-one with the real state of the real
   system. . . . If this works, then I speak of a complete description of reality by the
   theory. But if such an interpretation is not feasible, I call the theoretical description
   'incomplete'.19

Next, Einstein briefly sketches the EPR Gedankenexpehment, stressing as its
only important feature the fact that by choosing to measure different observables

  '"Einstein to Schrodinger, 19 June 1935: 'Meine Denkweise ist nun so: An sich kann man dem
Talmudiker nicht beikommen, wenn man kein zusatzliches Prinzip zu Hilfe nimmt:
"Trennungsprinzip". Namlich: "die zweite Schachtel nebst allem, was ihren Inhalt betrifft, ist
unabhangig davon, was beziiglich der ersten Schachtel passiert (getrennte Teilsysteme)". Halt man
an dem Trennungsprinzip fest, so schliesst man dadurch die zweite ("Schrodinger'sche") Auffassung
aus und es bleibt nur die Born'sche, nach welcher aber die obige Beschreibung des Zustandes eine
unvollstandige Beschreibung der Wirklichkeit, bezw. der wirklichen Zustande ist.'
  "Einstein to Schrodinger, 19 June 1935: 'Man beschreibt in der Quantentheorie einen wirklichen
Zustand eines Systems durch eine normierte Funktion \p der Koordinaten (des Konfigurations-
raumes). . . . Man mochte nun gerne folgendes sagen: tf/ ist dem wirklichen Zustand des wirklichen
Systems ein-eindeutig zugeordnet. . . . Wenn dies geht rede ich von einer vollstandigen Beschreibung
der Wirklichkeit durch die Theorie. Wenn aber eine solche Interpretation nicht durchfiihrbar ist,
nenne ich die theoretische Beschreibung "unvollstandig".'
180                                           Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

of one system, A, we can attribute different t^-functions, UJB or t^9, to the
other system, B. (He says that it does not even matter whether ipa and ipB_ are
eigenfunctions of observables, as long as they are different.) It is then just a
short step to the conclusion that quantum mechanics is incomplete:

   Now what is essential is exclusively that i^a and tpa are in general different from one
   another. I assert that this difference is incompatible with the hypothesis that the \p
   description is correlated one-to-one with the physical reality (the real state). After
   the collision, the real state of (AB) consists precisely of the real state of A and the
   real state of B, which two states have nothing to do with one another. The real state
   of B thus cannot depend upon the kind of measurement I carry out on A. ('Separation
   hypothesis' from above.) But then for the same state of B there are two (in general
   arbitrarily many) equally justified ipB, which contradicts the hypothesis of a one-to-
   one or complete description of the real states.20

This argument is quite straightforward and strikingly different from the original
EPR argument.
   There is, first, a difference in logical structure. The EPR argument seeks to
prove quantum mechanics incomplete by proving the existence of elements of
physical reality having no counterpart in the theory; it is thus an attempt at
a direct proof of incompleteness. By contrast, Einstein's own argument does
not require the identification of specific elements of physical reality not mirrored
in the theory. Einstein's argument seeks, instead, to exhibit a contradiction
between the completeness assumption and the consequences of the 'separation
principle', which makes it an indirect proof of incompleteness. The contradiction
is easily derived. TTTe 'separation principle' implies that system B has its own
real state which is unaffected by anything we do to the distant system, A. Thus,
the different ^-functions which we assign to B on the basis of different
measurements on A must be correlated with one and the same real state of B.
But if the uj-function were to provide a complete description of the real state
of B, it would have to be correlated one-to-one with B's real state, and there
we have our contradiction with the 'separation principle'.
  Behind the difference in logical structure is a significant difference in the
necessary conditions for completeness assumed in the two arguments. The EPR
argument stipulates that 'every element of the physical reality must have a
counterpart in the physical theory'. Einstein demands something sharper and
   "Einstein to Schrodinger, 19 June 1935: 'Wesentlich ist nun ausschliesslich, dass ips and ipB
iiberhaupt voneinander verschieden sind. Ich behaupte, dass diese Verschiedenheit mit der Hypothese,
dass die tf-Beschreibung ein-eindeutig der physikalischen Wirklichkeit (dem wirklichen Zustande)
zugeordnet sei, unvereinbar ist. Nach dem Zusammenstoss besteht der wirkliche Zustand von (AB)
namlich aus dem wirklichen Zustand von A und dem wirklichen Zustand von B, welche beiden
Zustande nichts miteinander zu schaffen haben. Der wirkliche Zustand von B kann nun nichi davon
abhangen, was fur eine Messung ich an A vornehme. ("Trennungshypothese" von oben.) Dann
aber gibt es zu demselben Zustande von B zwei (iiberhaupt bel. viele) gleichberechtigte tpB, was
der Hypothese einer ein-eindeutigen bezw. vollstandigen Beschreibung der wirklichen Zustande
widerspricht.'
Einstein   on Locality    and Separability                                                            181


stronger, which is that in a complete theory there must be a one-to-one
correlation between the ^-function and the real state. In effect, the EPR
completeness condition amounts to one half of Einstein's completeness
condition, for the EPR version already entails that different real states be
described by different ^-functions, since otherwise the 'elements of reality',
with respect to which the real states differ, would lack theoretical counterparts
— there would be a real difference without a corresponding theoretical
distinction. What Einstein adds is the converse requirement, that different ip-
functions must be correlated with different real states, that there must be no
theoretical distinction in the absence of a real difference.21
   Another remarkable difference between Einstein's argument and the EPR
argument is that Einstein nowhere makes reference to incompatible observables
or to the Heisenberg indeterminacy relations, whereas the EPR argument relies
essentially upon quantum mechanical prohibitions on the simultaneous
definiteness of incompatible observables. Indeed, as noted just above, Einstein
even says that it makes no difference whether the tp-functions assigned to system
B can be regarded as eigenfunctions of observables at all. What is important
is simply that these xp-functions be different.22 This fact should be savored and
its import appreciated, for it suggests that in Einstein's estimation the truly
puzzling feature of quantum mechanics, its most objectionable departure from
the classical world view, is not its way of treating conjugate parameters, but
its way of treating spatially separated, previously interacting systems.
   In the end, therefore, the most important thing to notice about Einstein's
   2l
      This addition is needecTfor Einstein's incompleteness argument to work: quantum mechanics
is held to be 'incomplete' because in the situation exhibited in the Gedankenexperiment it assigns
different ^/-functions to what counts, on the basis of the 'separation principle', as one and the
same real state. Yet one might object that Einstein's 'completeness' condition is, nevertheless, too
strong. 'Completeness' surely requires of the ^-function that it describe all of the properties of
a system in a given real state, so that different real states must be described by different i^-functions
(which is all that the weaker EPR completeness condition demands). But why require, conversely,
that different i^-functions always be correlated with different real states? Might there not be situations
in which the differences between two ^-functions (phase differences, for example) are inessential
from the point of view of the system whose real state they aim to describe? Einstein's completeness
condition would, indeed, be too strong if it required that literally every difference between i^-functions
mirror a difference in the real state of the system in question; but such was not Einstein's intention.
The kind of difference with which Einstein was concerned is clear from his argument: v B and i^fi
differ in the predictions they yield for the results of certain objective, local measurements on system
B. This is not an inessential difference, and Einstein was right in holding that it is excluded by
the demand for completeness, for the only way to account for such a difference (assuming that
both ifi-functions provide 'correct' descriptions) is by assuming that at least one of the two \y-
functions, or perhaps each of them, gives an incomplete description. (For example, if i^>B attributed
a definite position to B, but not a definite momentum, it would be incomplete in its description
of B's momentum; but, of course, Einstein's argument does not require any such reference to specific
parameters or 'elements of reality'.) Two different ^-functions can give correct descriptions of
one and the same real state only if one of them, at least, tells less than the whole truth about that
real state.
   "Einstein to Schrodinger, 19 June 1935: 'Bemerkung: Ob die tf/B und \fjB als Eigenfunktionen
von Observabeln B, B aufgefasst werden konnen ist mir wurst.' The emphasis is Einstein's, which
suggests that he himself saw this as an important contrast with the EPR argument.
182                                            Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

incompleteness argument is that for the crucial contradiction to be derived one
must assume that spatially separated systems possess their own separate real
states. This is what Einstein asserts when he says, 'After the collision, the real
state of (AB) consists precisely of the real state of A and the real state of B,
which two states have nothing to do with one another.' Of course, one must
also assume locality, in order to exclude the possibility of instantaneous changes
in B's real state as a result of manipulations performed on A. But separability
is an even more basic assumption, for if the two systems partake, somehow,
of the same joint reality, then an interference with one of them is automatically
an interference with its Siamese twin. And thus the assignment of different \p-
functions to system B as a result of different measurements on A would not
contradict the claim that the i^-function is a complete description in the sense
of being correlated one-to-one with the real state of B, for different real states
of B could have been engendered by the measurements carried out on its
companion." However, such changes in B's real state are ruled out if we assume
that B and A possess separate real states.24

   "It is here that my reconstruction of Einstein's incompleteness argument most differs from the
reconstruction offered by Fine in his 'Einstein's Critique of Quantum Theory' (note 4, above) and
in his more recent essay, 'What is Einstein's Statistical Interpretation, or Is It Einstein for Whom
Bell's Theorem Tolls?', Topoi (fall 1984). Fine characterizes the 'separation principle' as referring
to separate real properties of the interacting systems, whereas I take it to refer to the underlying
separate real states of the systems. The difference might seem inconsequential, especially if one
regards the real state as simply the set of a system's real properties (Fine reports that this is his
understanding of the relation between states and properties — personal communication). But I
believe that Fine's approach contributes to a blurring of the distinction between separability and
locality, a distinction which Fine does not draw in his analysis of Einstein's argument. (Of course,
Einstein himself had not yet clearly distinguished separability and locality in his 1935 correspondence
with Schrodinger, but I claim that the distinction is implicit even there, and Einstein does make
it explicit later on.) The problem is that we too easily fall into thinking of properties, more so than
states, as inherently local, perhaps because the manifestations of properties are paradigmatically
local — when we measure, say, the spin of an electron, the measurement is performed at a specific
place, so we tend to think that the property thereby revealed also resides, at least for the moment,
at that place. If we think of properties in this way, then the 'independence' of these properties
appears to consist solely in their immunity to influence from events separated from them by a space-
like interval. 'Independence' thus seems to be a matter of locality alone. What we overlook is the
possibility that locally manifested properties might belong to a physical system that is itself not
decomposable into separate, local chunks, a system whose 'parts' do not possess separate real states.
Thus the role of the separability assumption can be obscured if we focus our attention on the
independence of properties, rather than on the more basic independence of systems and their states.
   "It might be argued that there is yet another hidden premise even in Einstein's own incompleteness
argument, namely, the premise that counterfactual conditionals have truth values; for it seems that
Einstein is at least implicitly asserting that ipB, for example, is the i^-function which we 'would'
assign to B if we 'were' to measure the appropriate observable on A (and likewise for i^ a ). I have
no settled opinion on whether it is reasonable to impute such an assumption to Einstein, nor about
whether his realism should, in consequence, be taken to include a commitment to the existence
of real universals of the dispositional variety. Quite apart from the historical question of Einstein's
actual beliefs, does his argument require this additional assumption? I think not. All one need assume
is that the experiment can be repeated twice, with the same kinds of particles (same states), and
with a different observable being measured on system A on each occasion. The real state of system
B is the same on both occasions, but different ^-functions are assigned to it, so the ifj-function
is not correlated one-to-one with the real state. One must now assume that it makes sense to talk
of the 'same kind' of particle being present on different occasions, and this talk of 'kinds' entails
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                            183

   It is in his recognizing the need for an explicit separability assumption that
Einstein's originality and insight are made manifest. On my reading, the need
for this assumption is the 'main point' which Einstein said was 'buried by the
erudition' in the EPR argument, where it is simply asserted that:

   . . . since at the time of measurement the two systems no longer interact, no real
   change can take place in the second system in consequence of anything that may be
   done to the first system. This is, of course, merely a statement of what is meant by
   the absence of an interaction between the two systems."

One could claim that the separability principle is implicit even here in the EPR
argument, for it is assumed that there are two systems, each with its own real
state, instead of just one. But by failing to make an explicit assumption of
separability, the EPR argument leaves the door open to the very kind of reply
which Bohr in fact made:

   Of course there is in a case like that just considered no question of a mechanical
   disturbance of the system under investigation during the last critical stage of the
   measuring procedure. But even at this stage there is essentially the question of an
   influence on the very conditions which define the possible types of predictions
   regarding the future behavior of the system. Since these conditions constitute an
   inherent element of the description of any phenomenon to which the term 'physical
   reality' can be properly attached, we see that the argumentation of the mentioned
   authors does not justify their conclusion that quantum-mechanical description is
   essentially incomplete.26

Bohr concedes that there is no physical disturbance of the second system, but
he claims that there is, nevertheless, an influence on certain conditions (i.e.,
the total experimental arrangement) which are part of the reality we aim to
describe. In effect, Bohr denies that the system with which we are concerned
(system B in Einstein's example) has its own separate reality. Einstein's strategy
of making separability an explicit assumption forces the issue with Bohr in a
way which the EPR argument does not, for it compels anyone who seeks Bohr's
way out explicitly to deny separability, which is something Einstein thought
no one would be willing to do.
a commitment to real universals of a set-theoretic variety, but these universals are a far more modest
addition to one's ontology than the non-extensional universals lurking behind counterfactual
conditionals.
   "Op. cit., note 1, p. 779.
   "Bohr, 'Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?',
p. 700. Curiously, there is no comment on Bohr's paper in the Einstein - Schrodinger correspondence
from the summer of 1935. However, in a letter of 13 July 1935 Schrodinger complains about the
obscurity of Bohr's brief earlier reply, published that same day, 13 July, as a letter to the editor
of Nature (Bohr, 'Quantum Mechanics and Physical Reality', Nature, Lond. 136 (1935), 65). And
in a letter of 23 March 1936 Schrodinger reports on a conversation he had recently had in London
with Bohr in which Bohr said he regarded it as 'high treason' for men like von Laue, Schrodinger
and Einstein to try to ensnare quantum mechanics with the EPR paradox.
184                                         Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

   That Einstein himself understood the role of the 'separation principle' in just
this way — namely, as forcing the issue with Bohr — is clear from his reply
to Henry M a r g e n a u ' s contribution to the collection, Albert      Einstein:
Philosopher - Scientist. Margenau sought to save quantum mechanics from the
E P R critique by rejecting the projection postulate, which he termed an
'inadvertancy'. 2 7 But Einstein believed that Margenau had missed the point;
he explains:



      Of the 'orthodox' quantum theoreticians whose position I know, Niels Bohr's seems
      to me to come nearest to doing justice to the problem. Translated into my own way
      of putting it, he argues as follows:
         If the partial systems A and B form a total system which is described by its y-
      function ifi(AB), there is no reason why any mutually independent existence (state
      of reality) should be ascribed to the partial systems A and B viewed separately, not
      even if the partial systems are spatially separated from each other at the particular
      time under consideration. The assertion that, in this latter case, the real situation
      of B could not be (directly) influenced by any measurement taken on A is, therefore,
      within the framework of quantum theory, unfounded and (as the paradox shows)
      unacceptable.
         By this way of looking at the matter it becomes evident that the paradox forces
      us to relinquish one of the following two assertions:
          (1) the description by means of the ip-function is complete.
          (2) the real states of spatially separated objects are independent of each other.
         On the other hand, it is possible to adhere to (2), if one regards the tp-function
      as the description of a (statistical) ensemble of systems (and therefore relinquishes
      (1)). However, tfriTview blasts the framework of the 'orthodox quantum theory'. 28



By Einstein's own account, the central issue in his dispute with Bohr concerns
the separability principle. Bohr defends the completeness thesis by repudiating
the separability principle; Einstein defends separability by denying completeness.
As Einstein himself says, you cannot 'get at the talmudist' unless you assume
the 'separation principle'.
   Einstein first published his own incompleteness argument in March of 1936,
in the Journal of the Franklin Institute, where it forms a small part of his long
and interesting essay, 'Physik und Realitat'. I quote the argument in full:


   "H. Margenau, 'Einstein's Conception of Reality', in Albert Einstein: Philosopher - Scientist,
p. 265.
   "Einstein, 'Remarks Concerning the Essays Brought Together in this Co-operative Volume',
in Albert Einstein: Philosopher - Scientist, pp. 681 - 82. Ironically, many students of Einstein take
this passage to be a reaffirmation of the EPR point of view. Typical is the comment of Max Jammer:
'In his "Reply to Criticisms,". . . Einstein explicitly reaffirmed, notwithstanding the objections
advanced by Bohr and others, the view expressed in the 1935 paper.' See Jammer's The Philosophy
of Quantum Mechanics: The Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics in Historical Perspective (New-
York: John Wiley, 1974), p. 187.
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                           185

      Consider a mechanical system consisting of two partial systems A and B which
   interact with each other only during a limited time. Let the y function before their
   interaction be given. Then the Schrodinger equation will furnish the \p function after
   the interaction has taken place. Let us now determine the physical state of the partial
   system A through a measurement which is as complete as possible. Then quantum
   mechanics allows us to determine the UJ function of the partial system B from the
   measurements made, and from the y function of the total system. This determination,
   however, gives a result which depends upon which of the state variables of A have
   been measured (for instance, coordinates or momenta). Since there can be only one
   physical state of B after the interaction, which state cannot reasonably be considered
   to depend upon the kinds of measurements I carry out on the system A separated
   from B, it is thus shown that the y function is not unambiguously correlated with
   the physical state. This correlation of several \p functions to the same physical state
   of system B shows again that the \p function cannot be interpreted as a (complete)
   description of a physical state (of an individual system). Here also the correlation
   of the ifj function to an ensemble of systems eliminates every difficulty."

The brevity of this argument alone should have suggested to careful readers
how it differs from the EPR argument. It should also have been noticed that,
as in the letter to Schrodinger, Einstein here makes no reference to incompatible
observables or the Heisenberg indeterminacy principle. Without doubt, the
differences would have been more noticeable had Einstein emphasized in this
essay the role of his 'separation principle', whose consequences are asserted,
but not highlighted, when he says, '. . . there can be only one physical state
of B after the interaction, which state cannot reasonably be considered to depend
upon the kinds of measurements I carry out on the system A separated from
B.' But even though the 'separation principle' is not explicitly distinguished,
Einstein has here presented for the second time an argument fundamentally
different from that in the EPR paper. 30
   It was ten or eleven years later, in 1946 or 1947, when Einstein next drafted
a written statement of his views on incompleteness for the public eye. The
occasion was his preparation of an intellectual autobiography for the Library
of Living Philosophers volume, Albert Einstein: Philosopher- Scientist. The
discussion of incompleteness which is found here represents an important stage
in the development of Einstein's thinking, because it contains the first clear
statement of the distinction between separability and locality.
   "Op. cil., note 10, p. 341. (My translation — D.H.)
  30
    Einstein is himself partly responsible for confusion about the differences between his
incompleteness argument and the EPR argument. The paragraph just quoted from 'Physik und
Realitat' is preceded by the following remark: 'Such an interpretation [the statistical ensemble
interpretation] also overcomes a paradox recently presented by myself, together with two co-workers,
a paradox which refers to the following situation:'. Op. cit., note 10. p. 341. (My translation —
D.H.) On a quick reading, this comment suggests that Einstein's argument and the EPR argument
are the same. But Einstein has chosen his words here with care. All that he really says is that his
argument makes use of the Gedankenexperiment developed in the EPR paper. One can easily
understand that Einstein would not want to hurt Podolsky by airing in public the misgivings about
the EPR paper which he was willing to share in his private correspondence with Schrodinger.
186                                       Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

  Einstein begins his argument again by distinguishing two positions which
physicists might take on the completeness question. Physicist A defends what
in 1935 Einstein called the 'Born' interpretation, according to which the \p-
function provides an incomplete description of the always-definite properties
of an individual system. Physicist B defends the view Einstein earlier labelled
the 'Schrodinger' interpretation, according to which the ^-function gives a
complete description of the objectively indefinite (pre-measurement) properties
of an individual system. Einstein next sketches the Gedankenexperiment
involving two previously interacting systems, this time labelled S, and 5 : . Then
he presents the heart of the incompleteness argument:

     Now it appears to me that one may speak of the real state of the partial system
  S,. To begin with, before performing the measurement on S,, we know even less of
  this real state than we know of a system described by the ^-function. But on one
  assumption we should, in my opinion, unconditionally hold fast: The real situation
  (state) of system S, is independent of what is done with system S,, which is spatially
  separated from the former. According to the type of measurement I perform on S,,
  I get, however, a very different \p2 for the second partial system. (ip2, ip':, . . .) But
  now the real state of S, must be independent of what happens to S,. Thus, different
  ^-functions can be found (depending on the choice of the measurement on S,) for
  the same real state of S2. (One can only avoid this conclusion either by assuming that
  the measurement on S, changes (telepathically) the real state of 5,, or by generally
  denying independent real states to things which are spatially separated from one
  another. Both alternatives appear to me entirely unacceptable.)
     If now the physicists A and B accept this reasoning as sound, then B will have
  to give up his position that the ijj-function is a complete description of a real situation.
  For in this case it would be impossible that two different types of ^-functions could
  be correlated with the same situation (of S,).3'

This is, for the most part, a straightforward restatement of the argument we
have seen twice before. But one piece of it warrants careful scrutiny.
   Look at the parenthetical statement at the end of the first paragraph, where
Einstein specifies the only two ways to avoid the conclusion that leads to the
claim of incompleteness:

   (One can only avoid this conclusion either by assuming that the measurement on S,
   changes (telepathically) the real state of S;, or by generally denying independent real
   states to things which are spatially separated from one another. Both alternatives
   appear to me entirely unacceptable.)

In effect, these are the only two ways one can deny the 'separation principle',
and they correspond, respectively, to the denials of what I call locality and
separability: either the separate real state of S2 is changed by what happens in

 "Op. cit., note 11, p. 84 and p. 86. (My translation — D.H.)
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                         187

a region separated from S2 by a space-like interval, or spatially separated
systems do not possess separate states.
   It is almost as if Einstein stumbled, in this negative way, upon the clear
distinction between separability and locality. But the insight thus won was not
to be lost, and when in 1948 Einstein published his most thorough discussion
of the incompleteness argument, the distinction between separability and locality
is presented at the outset in direct, lucid terms. The context was a special double
issue of the Swiss journal, Dialectica, devoted to essays on Bohr's
'complementarity' interpretation of quantum mechanics. Einstein's paper,
'Quanten-Mechanik und Wirklichkeit', is of major historical significance, but
it is far less well known than many of his other writings, no doubt because it
has never been made widely available in an English translation and is not
included in any of the standard collections of his works.32
   As had become his custom, Einstein begins his essay with the distinction
between the two positions one might take on the relation between the ip-function
and some real state of affairs of an individual system. The point of view now
labelled 'la' holds that the system possesses determinate values of all of its
observables, even if these values cannot be determined simultaneously by
measurement, from which it follows that the i^-function gives an incomplete
description of the real situation. The other point of view, 'lb', holds that
determinate values of observables do not really exist until they are brought into
being by measurements. On this point of view, the if-function provides, in
principle, a complete description.
   The promised distinction between separability and locality is then developed
in the course of two pregnant paragraphs, which I quote in their entirety (they
form the whole of section II in Einstein's essay):

      If one asks what is characteristic of the realm of physical ideas independently of
   the quantum-theory, then above all the following attracts our attention: the concepts
   of physics refer to a real external world, i.e., ideas are posited of things that claim
   a 'real existence' independent of the perceiving subject (bodies, fields, etc.), and these
   ideas are, on the other hand, brought into as secure a relationship as possible with
   sense impressions. Moreover, it is characteristic of these physical things that they
   are conceived of as being arranged in a space-time continuum. Further, it appears
   to be essential for this arrangement of 'he things introduced in physics that, at a specific
   time, these things claim an existence independent of one another, insofar as these
   things 'lie in different parts of space'. Without such an assumption of the mutually
   independent existence (the 'being-thus') of spatially distant things, an assumption
   which originates in everyday thought, physical thought in the sense familiar to us
   would not be possible. Nor does one see how physical laws could be formulated and

   "Op. cit., note 12. An English version of this essay is contained in the English edition of the
Born-Einstein correspondence: M. Born(ed.), The Born - Einstein Letters, I. Born (trans.) (London:
Macmillan, 1971), pp. 168-73. But this volume is now out of print, and in any case the translation
is badly flawed.
188                                           Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

      tested without such a clean separation. Field theory has carried out this principle to
      the extreme, in that it localizes within infinitely small (four-dimensional) space-elements
      the elementary things existing independently of one another that it takes as basic,
      as well as the elementary laws it postulates for them.
         For the relative independence of spatially distant things (A and B), this idea is
      characteristic: an external influence on A has no immediate effect on B; this is known
      as the 'principle of local action', which is applied consistently only in field theory.
      The complete suspension of this basic principle would make impossible the idea of
      the existence of (quasi-) closed systems and, thereby, the establishment of empirically
      testable laws in the sense familiar to us."

As I read these paragraphs, I find Einstein making two basic claims. First, if
we are to maintain a realistic attitude toward the 'things' we posit in physics,
it is 'essential' that we assume 'the mutually independent existence . . . of
spatially distant things'. Indeed, Einstein says, we could neither test nor even
formulate physical laws 'without such a clean separation'. Second, it is
 'characteristic' of the independence of any two such spatially separated things
(but not essential) that an external influence on one has no immediate effect
on the other. But now these two claims are simply Einstein's formulations of
what I call separability and locality.
   The remainder of 'Quanten-Mechanik und Wirklichkeit' consists of what we
now recognize as Einstein's standard argument for incompleteness. He outlines
the EPR Gedankenexperiment, showing that different uj-functions are assigned
to S2 depending upon the kind of measurement we perform on S,. He observes
that this circumstance is compatible with the completeness assumption
(interpretation Ib)~taken alone. But then he adds:

         Matters are different, however, if one seeks to hold on to principle II — the
      autonomous existence of the real states of affairs present in two separated parts of
      space, /?, and R2 — simultaneously with the principles of quantum mechanics. In
      our example the complete measurement on S, of course implies a physical
      interference which only affects the portion of space /?,. But such an interference
      cannot immediately influence the physically real in a distant portion of space R2.
      From that it would follow that every statement regarding S2 which we are able to
      make on the basis of a complete measurement on S, must also hold for the system
      S2 if, after all, no measurement whatsoever ensued on S,. That would mean that for
      S2 all statements that can be derived from the postulation of ip2 or iy2, etc. must
      hold simultaneously. This is naturally impossible, if xp2, \p2, are supposed to signify
      mutually distinct real states of affairs of S2, i.e. one comes into conflict with
      interpretation'lb'of the tfj-function.34

Once again, the argument is that the incompleteness of quantum mechanics
follows only if one assumes both locality and separability; there are distinct
  "Op. cit., note 12, pp. 3 2 1 - 2 2 . (My translation — D.H.)
  "Ibid., p. 323. (My translation — D.H.)
Einstein   on Locality   and Separability                                                       189


real states of affairs in the parts of space R, and Rlt and an event in /?, can
exert no immediate influence on the state of affairs in /?, (the term, 'principle
II', alludes to section II of the paper).
   'Quanten-Mechanik und Wirklichkeit' is Einstein's last statement of this
incompleteness argument. Over the years he several times discussed a still
different incompleteness argument, one similar in character to the Schrodinger
cat paradox, in that it focuses on an alleged incompleteness in the quantum
mechanical description of macroscopic observables.35 But this latter argument
is not as profound as the one based on the separability and locality principles,
and so will not be analyzed here.
   I have examined Einstein's incompleteness argument at length and in detail
partly because it is important to set aright in the historical record. But there
are other dividends as well. For one thing, we are now better prepared to
understand the way assumptions of physics work in grounding Einstein's realism.
For another thing, we are also better prepared to understand the physical
implications of the experiments recently conducted to test local hidden-variable
theories, experiments which probe the kinds of correlations between previously
interacting systems that were at the heart of the EPR Gedankenexperiment. I
want briefly to consider both issues.


                     3. The Physical Roots of Einstein's Realism

  That Einstein was a realist, nearly everyone will agree. The question is: 'What
kind of realist?' What Einstein's incompleteness argument shows is that his
realism was no mere philosophical prejudice. On the contrary, it is securely
anchored in quite definite assumptions not only about the nature of theories,
but also about the physical world itself. And foremost among these physical
assumptions is what I call separability or what Einstein calls the 'mutually
   "An especially clear statement of one version of this 'macroscopic' incompleteness argument
is contained in Einstein's late essay, 'Elementare Uberlegungen zur Interpretation der Grundlagen
der Quanten-Mechanik', in Scientific Papers Presented to Max Born (New York: Hafner, 1953),
pp. 3 3 - 4 0 . A somewhat different version is developed much earlier, in a letter from Einstein to
Schrodinger of 8 August 1935, where Einstein considers a 'quantum mechanical' description of
a chemically unstable pile of gunpowder. However precise the initial description of the state of
the gunpowder might be, the quantum state evolves after a sufficient length of time into a
superposition of exploded and unexploded states. But the gunpowder itself is by that time either
definitely exploded or definitely unexploded. Thus, Einstein concludes, the quantum mechanical
description is incomplete. (The correspondence gives evidence that Einstein's gunpowder argument
was the inspiration for Schrodinger's more refined 'cat paradox'; on 19 August 1935, Schrodinger
wrote to Einstein: 'In einem langeren Aufsatz, den ich eben geschrieben, bringe ich ein Beispiel,
dass Deinem explodierenden Pulverfass sehr ahnlich ist.' The 'cat paradox' was first presented in
Schrodinger's 'Die gegenwartige Situation in der Quantenmechanik', Die Naturwissenschaften 23
(1935), 807-12, 8 2 4 - 2 8 , 844-49.) Though not as profound as the argument based on the
'separation principle', the 'macroscopic' incompleteness argument was evidently regarded by Einstein
as the more persuasive of the two because of our strong intuitions about the definiteness of
macroscopic properties.
190                                         Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

independent existence of spatially distant things'.
  Look again at the first of the paragraphs quoted from his 1948 essay,
'Quanten-Mechanik und Wirklichkeit'. His commitment to realism is
unambiguous:

   . . . the concepts of physics refer to a real external world, i.e. ideas are posited of
   things that claim a 'real existence' independent of the perceiving subject (bodies, fields,
   etc.) . . .

Equally unambiguous, however, is his commitment to separability as a necessary
physical condition for this realism:

   Further, it appears to be essential for this arrangement of the things introduced in
   physics that, at a specific time, these things claim an existence independent of one
   another, insofar as these things 'lie in different parts of space'.

What is less clear is why Einstein believed separability to be a necessary condition
for realism. There is one important clue in the quoted passage, where Einstein
asserts that separability is a necessary condition for testability:

   Without such an assumption of the mutually independent existence . . . of spatially
   distant things, an assumption which originates in everyday thought, physical thought
   in the sense familiar to us would not be possible. Nor does one see how physical laws
   could be formulated and tested without such a clean separation.


There is another clue in the next paragraph, where Einstein says that locality
is an additional necessary condition for testability:


   The complete suspension of this basic principle would make impossible the idea of
   the existence of (quasi-)closed systems and, thereby, the establishment of empirically
   testable laws in the sense familiar to us.


So the argument is that both separability and locality are necessary conditions
for testability, the latter in particular because it grounds the existence of closed
systems. But still one asks, 'Why?'
   Little light is shed on this question by any of Einstein's published writings;
one remark not intended for publication, however, might point us toward an
answer. This remark is found in Max Born's commentary on his correspondence
with Einstein. In his Waynflete Lectures, Natural Philosophy of Cause and
Chance, Born tried to illustrate Einstein's attitude toward quantum mechanics
with quotations from two of Einstein's letters, and as a courtesy he solicited
Einstein's reaction to the manuscript, only to find that Einstein felt himself
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                               191

misunderstood. 36 In March of 1948, around the time when he was at work on
the essay for Dialectica, Einstein returned Born's manuscript with a number
of marginal comments and one long summary comment about his commitment
to realism:

   I just want to explain what I mean when I say that we should try to hold on to physical
   reality. We are, to be sure, all of us aware of the situation regarding what will turn
   out to be the basic foundational concepts in physics: the point-mass or the particle
   is surely not among them; the field, in the Faraday - Maxwell sense, might be, but
   not with certainty. But that which we conceive as existing ('actual') should somehow
   be localized in time and space. That is, the real in one part of space, A, should (in
   theory) somehow 'exist' independently of that which is thought of as real in another
   part of space, B. If a physical system stretches over the parts of space A and B, then
   what is present in B should somehow have an existence independent of what is present
   in A. What is actually present in B should thus not depend upon the type of
   measurement carried out in the part of space, A; it should also be independent of
   whether or not, after all, a measurement is made in A.
      If one adheres to this program, then one can hardly view the quantum-theoretical
   description as a complete representation of the physically real. If one attempts,
   nevertheless, so to view it, then one must assume that the physically real in B undergoes
   a sudden change because of a measurement in A. My physical instincts bristle at that
   suggestion.
      However, if one renounces the assumption that what is present in different parts
   of space has an independent, real existence, then I do not at all see what physics is
   supposed to describe. For what is thought to be a 'system' is, after all, just
   conventional, and I do not see how one is supposed to divide up the world objectively
   so that one can make statements about the parts.3'

The first of these three paragraphs just restates the ideas of separability and
locality. The second points out that the assumption of the completeness of
quantum mechanics can only be reconciled with the separability principle if one
denies locality. The third is the most interesting, for what Einstein suggests here
is that the separability principle is necessary because it provides the only
imaginable objective principle for the individuation of physical systems. Needless
to say, this is an important and provocative claim, because quantum mechanics,
interpreted as a theory about individual systems, denies the separability
principle.38 Moreover, I will argue in the next section that the Bell experiments

   "See Born's Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1949),
pp. 1 2 2 - 2 3 .
   "Op. cit., note 13. (My translation — D.H.)
  •"In the quantum mechanical interaction formalism, which was developed by Schrodinger in
response both to EPR and his correspondence with Einstein (see the references in note 15, above),
the joint state of two previously interacting systems is represented as a non-factorizable superposition
of products of separate states. For example, the joint state of a correlated pair of spin-'/: particles
of the kind studied in the modern versions of the EPR Gedankenexperiment could be written thus:
y(AB) = 2-' A (^*(A)^(B) — y;tA)y*(B)), where if*(A) and ^r(A) represent the + Vi and - Vi z-
spin eigenstates of particle A (and similarly for particle B). What is important for our purposes
192                                            Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

can be held to refute separability. Does that mean we are left with no objective
basis for physics?
   Einstein does not say why he believes separability to be the only objective
principle of individuation for physical systems. He just says that he can see no
alternative. Without forcing an interpretation on him, can we guess what his
reasons might have been? Separability works as an objective principle of
individuation by providing at least a sufficient condition for distinguishing any
two physical systems, namely, spatial separation. Thus, implicitly, it counts even
every infinitesimal region of space-time as a separate physical system. Were we
not to individuate systems in this fashion, the only alternative would be to
provide an objective criterion whereby some, but of course not all, otherwise
distinct regions of space-time would be, as it were, knit together, blended or
united to form larger, non-decomposable, but still individual physical systems.
Such, presumably, is the kind of alternative Einstein could not imagine. From
his point of view, it must have appeared as though any such criterion would
be arbitrary, on the assumption that there are no intrinsic connections between
different regions of space-time.
   But again, quantum mechanics denies the separability principle, assigning non-
decomposable, joint states even to widely separated previously interacting
systems, at least until one of the systems subsequently interacts with another
system. So was Einstein wrong about the impossibility of alternative criteria
of individuation? Or is the quantum theory's assignment of non-decomposable
joint states to previously interacting systems based upon a non-objective criterion
of 'connection' between systems? One might indeed follow Einstein and argue
that quantum mechanics establishes these links in a non-objective way. After
all, from one point of view every system is in continuous interaction with every
other system if only through gravitational interactions. So it would seem
arbitrary to pick out only certain interactions as establishing the special quantum
links between systems. But I think quantum mechanics does individuate systems
objectively, which is to say that there is an alternative which Einstein did not
envisage. What that alternative is I will explain in the next section.
   Earlier I claimed that physical realism is not simply assumed by Einstein, but
is grounded in the deeper assumption of separability. And now I have argued
that Einstein regarded separability as at least a necessary condition for realism.
One further link between realism and separability needs still to be exhibited in
order to show just how firm the grounding was in Einstein's view.
   Like so many realists before him, Einstein speaks of the real world which
physics aims to describe as the real 'external' world, and he does so in such
a way as to suggest that the independence of the real — its not being dependent
is that such a state description cannot be re-expressed as a simple product of separate state functions
for A and B. That is, for all v(A) and iy(B), if(AB) # if(A)^(B). The non-separability implicit
in this manner of description is broken only when one of the systems interacts with yet another system.
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                            193

in any significant way upon ourselves as observers — is grounded in this
'externality'. For most other realists this talk of 'externality' is at best a suggestive
metaphor. But for Einstein it is no metaphor. 'Externality' is a relation of spatial
separation, and the separability principle, the principle of 'the mutually
independent existence of spatially distant things', asserts that any two systems
separated by so much as an infinitesimal spatial interval always possess separate
states. Once we realize that observer and observed are themselves just previously
interacting physical systems, we see that their independence is grounded by the
separability principle, along with the independence of all other physical systems.
Certain properties of the observed object can be changed by the observation
interaction, but the locality principle guarantees that such changes cannot take
place if the separation between observer and observed is space-like, as in the
EPR Gedankenexperiment, and in any case the separability principle guarantees
that the observed object always possesses its own cluster of properties, even
if these might be changed by the observation. The independence of the real
consists not in any immunity to change, but in autonomy even through
observation induced changes.
   It should now be clear why Einstein found it so hard to entertain the possibility
of denying the separability principle, and thus why he insisted that quantum
mechanics is not the final word about the microworld; for quantum mechanics,
at least when interpreted as a theory about individual systems, denies the
separability principle and, with it, the very foundation of Einstein's realism.39


      4. Separability, Locality and the Physical Implications of the Bell
                                  Experiments

   For my purposes, the most valuable dividend yielded by this investigation
of Einstein's views on incompleteness is that it suggests a new way of
understanding Bell's theorem and the Bell experiments, themselves the offspring
of the original EPR Gedankenexperiment. Specifically, I claim that these
experiments should be interpreted as refuting the separability principle. I want
briefly to explain why and to indicate some of the larger physical and
philosophical implications of such an interpretation.
   Would it be unfair to say that the recent striking progress in the experimental
tests of local hidden-variable theories by Aspect and his co-workers has not


  "On an ensemble interpretation, the non-separability of the description of previously interacting
systems would be preserved, but since the i^-function would be interpreted as referring to an ensemble
of pairs of systems, it would not follow that the real states of individual pairs of systems in the
ensemble are similarly non-separable. The statistics could be 'entangled' in the peculiar quantum
mechanical way without the individual systems being likewise 'entangled'. Schrodinger first introduced
the concept of 'entanglement' ['Verschrankung'] in his 'cat paradox' paper (see note 35, above).
194                                             Studies   in History   and Philosophy      of   Science


been matched by progress of a theoretical sort? 40 Consensus exists on only one
point, which is that the experimentally determined correlations between
previously interacting systems consistently violate the Bell inequality. Bell
claimed that the predictions of any local hidden-variable theory must satisfy
the inequality, which would imply that local hidden-variable theories have
therefore been refuted. But even this has been denied.41
   Still, even if it were agreed that local hidden-variable theories have been
refuted, confusion would remain, for it is not clear what is implied by the
repudiation of local hidden-variable theories. Should we opt for non-local
hidden-variable theories? Most physicists decline this alternative since it requires
the sacrifice of special relativity. Are we then to accept some peculiar kind of
'quantum non-locality'? If this alternative is more palatable, it is only because
it is so poorly understood that we are not sure what sacrifices it might entail.
Is quantum mechanics incompatible with special relativity? We think not, but
then what is this 'non-locality' which experiment seems to be forcing upon us?
   I am convinced that most of this confusion is to be traced back to the way
   "See the references in note 3. By employing time-varying analyzers, Aspect's group has succeeded
in ruling out the possibility of subluminal physical effects being transmitted between the two wings
of the apparatus.
   •"Fine is the principal hold-out. He proposes what he calls 'prism' models for the Bell-type
correlation experiments, the key innovation in these models being that one allows for the possibility
that one or both of the two previously interacting systems are not detected by their respective
analyzers. If the non-detection occurs in just the right cases, the inherently weak correlations implied
by local hidden-variable theories can be masked in such a way as to make them appear stronger
than they 'really' are. See Fine's 'Correlations and Physical Locality', in PSA 1980, Volume 2,
P. D. Asquith and R.N. Giere (eds.) (East Lansing, Michigan: Philosophy of Science Association,
 1981), pp. 535-62, and his 'Antinomies of Entanglement: The Puzzling Case of the Tangled
Statistics', Journal o/PTulosophy 19 (1982), 733 - 4 7 . Fine suggests that his prism models are more
'realistic' than other models, inasmuch as actual particle detection apparatus falls short of perfect
efficiency. But the prism models require far more than just random non-detection in order for the
correlations to come out in line with the correlations predicted by quantum mechanics; failures
of detection must occur in quite specific cases, and it can be objected that Fine has provided no
physically plausible mechanism whereby to guarantee just the right failures. An experiment has
been designed which could be used to test the prism models, but it has not been carried out. See
T. K. Lo and A. Shimony, 'Proposed Molecular Test of Local Hidden-Variables Theories', Physical
Review A 23 (1981), 3003 - 12. For a critical discussion of Fine's prism models, see A. Shimony,
'Critique of the Papers of Fine and Suppes', in PSA 1980, Vol. 2, pp. 572-80. In another paper,
'What is Einstein's Statistical Interpretation?' (note 23, above), Fine argues that the concept of
a prism model provides the best interpretation of Einstein's ideas on the interpretation of quantum
mechanics. On at least a casual reading, Einstein seems to have endorsed explicitly an ensemble
interpretation of the ^-function, rather than anything like a prism model (see, for example, the
last sentence in the passage quoted from his 'Physik und Realitat', note 29, above). But Fine argues
that Einstein's specific remarks about ensembles are not compatible with an ensemble interpretation,
because, among other things, a traditional ensemble interpretation would imply a measurement
induced transition to a subensemble only after a specific measurement result is obtained, whereas
according to Fine, Einstein allows for such transitions as soon as the kind of measurement is
determined, and before a specific result is obtained. In my opinion, this is just a misreading of
Einstein. Consider, for example, this comment of Einstein's: 'Then quantum mechanics allows us
to determine the uj-function of the partial system B from the measurements made, and from the
\p function of the total system' ('Physik und Realitat', p. 341). Clearly, by the phrase 'the
measurements made', Einstein means 'the measurement results'. The prism interpretation saves
Einstein from refutation by the results of the Bell experiments, but I do not think Einstein's words
will bear such an interpretation.
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                 195

in which the Bell inequality was originally derived. There is something peculiar
about the derivation, something that is common to all of the more recent and
otherwise more elegant derivations. Our newly won understanding of Einstein's
incompleteness argument will help us to make sense of the matter.
   The problem is that when one writes down the hypothetical hidden state of
the joint system (the pair of previously interacting systems), one writes down
a single state for the joint system, not a product of separate states. This is peculiar
because a shocking feature of the quantum mechanical description of previously
interacting systems, indeed, one of the quantum theory's greatest affronts to
our classical intuitions, is precisely its requiring the employment of such a single,
non-factorized joint state. One would think that if there were any interesting
difference between quantum mechanics and hidden-variable theories, it would
lie here. Certainly Einstein saw non-separability to be a surprising, non-classical
feature of the quantum theory under its 'orthodox' (Bohrian) interpretation.
So why not ask under what circumstances a hidden-variable theory could
accommodate a separable description of previously interacting systems?
   It is not that the possibility of a separable hidden-variable theory has been
ignored in the investigations inspired by Bell's theorem. In fact, Bell mentions
the possibility at the start of his original paper, but he dismisses the need for
explicit consideration of separable hidden-variable theories:

      Some might prefer a formulation in which the hidden variables fall into two sets,
   with A dependent on one and B on the other; this possibility is contained in the above,
   since A stands for any number of variables and the dependences thereon of A and
   B are unrestricted.*'

Bell is correct; the possibility of a separable description is 'contained' in the
use of just a single, non-factorized hidden state. The question is, how is it so
'contained'? Bell's approach makes it appear as though some kind of locality
condition were the only prerequisite for the derivation of the inequality, and
thus makes it appear as though the negative results of the subsequent experiments
refute both separable and non-separable hidden-variable theories alike, as long
as they are local. What Bell did not consider is the possibility that the separability
of the hidden state is implicit in the derivation of the inequality, in the sense
that any hidden-variable theory whose predictions conform to the Bell inequality
would be a separable theory. Though we have not realized it, we might therefore
all along have been testing not simply local hidden-variable theories, but
separable, local hidden-variable theories.
   I suspect that most of our trouble in understanding so-called 'quantum non-
locality' is a result of this more basic confusion. We focus our attention on
the apparent demonstration of non-local effects mysteriously communicated
 " J . S. Bell, 'On the Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen Paradox' (see note 3), p. 196.
196                                              Studies   in History   and Philosophy      of   Science


between two systems separated by a space-like interval, without pausing to ask
the deeper question of whether there really are two systems, or just one. We
can and should clear up this confusion.
   In another paper I show that we can derive the Bell inequality from two
independent assumptions — the separability principle and the locality principle.
Separability is there formulated as an assumption about the existence of separate
probability measures for the two systems, measures defined over pairs of
measurement outcomes and measurement contexts, together with an assumption
about the manner in which a joint measure is to be constructed out of separate
measures. Locality is formulated as an assumption about the invariance of such
a separate probability measure under conditionalization on the state of the
distant apparatus. I also show that any hidden-variable theory whose predictions
satisfy the Bell inequality is separable, at least with regard to those aspects of
the hidden state which are at issue in the Bell experiments.43
   We should not be surprised that the Bell inequality can be derived in this
fashion. Reflect for a moment on my reconstruction of Einstein's incompleteness
argument. I present Einstein as claiming that the incompleteness of quantum
mechanics is a consequence of two assumptions — separability -1            reality.
Now I claim that the Bell inequality is a consequence of the               le two
assumptions. But what would have been shown if the Bell experiments had
turned out the opposite of the way they did? That is, what if the correlations
between previously interacting systems had turned out to satisfy the Bell
  4J
     Howard, 'Non-Separability or Non-Locality? On the Physical Implications of the Bell
Experiments' (in preparation). In my argument 1 draw heavily upon an important theorem recently
proved by Jon Jarrett in his 'On the Physical Significance of the Locality Conditions in the Bell
Arguments', Nous (forthcoming). Jarrett shows that the factorizability condition (of joint
measurement probabilities, not states) from which the Bell inequality is standardly derived, a condition
which Jarrett labels 'strong locality', can be decomposed into two independent conditions which
he terms 'completeness' and 'weak locality'. Jarrett proves that the conjunction of 'completeness'
and 'weak locality' implies 'strong locality', which, conversely, implies both 'completeness' and
'weak locality'. 'Weak locality' is shown to correspond to the relativistic locality constraint. In
my paper I show how Jarrett's 'completeness' condition can be reformulated as a condition on
the factorizability of the hidden state, which is to say that I replace his condition by my 'separability'
condition. 'Strong locality' is then seen to be a consequence of 'separability' and 'weak locality',
and to imply both of them in turn. Since, as Fine has shown, 'strong locality' is not only a sufficient
but also a necessary condition for the satisfaction of the Bell inequality, it follows that all hidden-
variable theories whose predictions conform to the Bell inequality are both separable and local.
See Fine's 'Hidden Variables, Joint Probability, and the Bell Inequalities', Physical Review Letters
48 (1982), 291 - 9 5 . For another point of view on the interpretation of Jarrett's two conditions,
see A. Shimonv, 'Controllable and Uncontrollable Non-Locality', Proceedings of International
Symposium on Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Tokyo: Physical Society of Japan, 1984),
pp. 225 - 30. A distinction similar to that between separability and locality is drawn by P. Heywood
and M. L. G. Redhead, in their 'Nonlocality and the Kochen — Specker Paradox', Foundations
of Physics 13 (1983), 481 - 9 9 ; they use the terminology 'ontological locality' and 'environmental
locality'. They also prove a theorem which is remarkably similar in structure and conclusion to
Einstein's incompleteness argument. Where Einstein exhibits a contradiction between separability,
iocality, and the completeness condition, they demonstrate a contradiction between ontological
locality, environmental locality and a pair of constraints on the assignment of values to physical
magnitudes, constraints which they argue must be accepted on any realistic interpretation of quantum
mechanics.
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                     197

inequality, thus confirming the predictions of local hidden-variable theories?
We would have concluded that quantum mechanics is incomplete, that it needs
supplementation by additional variables more fully to describe reality. And so
Einstein would have been vindicated on precisely the grounds he expected. He
believed that physical reality is separable and that all effects are local effects;
and he believed quantum mechanics incomplete because it does not
accommodate all the reality there must be in a separable, local universe.
   If my derivation of the Bell inequality is sound, then the interpretation of
the results of the Bell experiments is simple. We must give up either separability
or locality. And those two alternatives correspond, respectively, to accepting
either non-separable quantum mechanics or non-local hidden-variable theories.
But if these are our only alternatives, then most of us would likely prefer the
former alternative, on the grounds that special relativistic locality constraints
are too much a part of our physics to be sacrificed to the cause of saving
separability, all the more so because we have ready at hand a highly successful
non-separable quantum mechanics, but no well-developed non-local hidden-
variable theory. In fact, I believe that Einstein himself would have followed
us in this choice had he been forced to choose between these two alternatives,
because the locality principle has the flavor of those high-level constraints, like
the conservation of mass-energy and the second law of thermodynamics, which
Einstein said should guide the development of our theories, whereas the
separability principle has more of the flavor of those 'constructive' principles,
like the atomic hypothesis, which Einstein thought were too often an impediment
to scientific progress/ 4
   But to say that we accept the non-separable quantum theory is not to say
that we yet understand all that such acceptance entails. Einstein's conception
of separability points to one major but still largely unappreciated consequence
of quantum non-separability. Let me quote again just one sentence from
Einstein's Dialectica paper (the 'principle' referred to here is the principle of
'the mutually independent existence of spatially distant things' — the separability
principle):

   Field theory has carried out this principle to the extreme, in that it localizes within
   infinitely small (four-dimensional) space-elements the elementary things existing
   independently of one another that it takes as basic, as well as the elementary laws
   it postulates for them.43

The point is that field theories are, by their very nature, separable theories. Thus,
the acceptance of the quantum theory's non-separability entails the repudiation
  "See Einstein's 'My Theory', The Times (London), 28 November 1919, p. 13. This essay is
reprinted, but with the wrong bibliographical information, as 'Time, Space and Gravitation' in
Einstein's Out of My Later Years (New York: Philosophical Library, 1950), pp. 5 4 - 5 8 .
  "Op. cit., note 12, p. 321.
198                                            Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

of this most basic feature of field theories, including general relativity, inasmuch
as it is standardly formulated as a field theory. To be more specific, as soon
as we assume that the metric tensor is well defined at every point in the space-
time manifold, we implicate ourselves in the now questionable assumption of
separability.46
   It is not the point of this paper to attempt a reconciliation of quantum
mechanics and general relativity, but I would like to suggest a direction in which
a reconciliation might be sought, and my doing so will bring us back to an issue
left unresolved at the end of the previous section, namely, can quantum
mechanics provide an objective criterion for the individuation of physical
systems?
   At a minimum, acceptance of quantum non-separability requires that we
replace the concept of a metric tensor well-defined at every point of the space-
time manifold with a different kind of structure which is well defined only for
certain non-separable regions of space-time. I have no clear idea what form
such a structure might take. Perhaps some structure from which we could derive
an average curvature for the region would work. Whatever structure we settle
upon, one other problem must be solved, however, and that is the prior problem
of determining what should count as a non-separable region of space-time. Here
I have a simple proposal. We should make the existence of quantum correlations
a criterion of non-separability. After all, if it were not for the existence of these
peculiar correlations which violate the Bell inequality, the separability principle
would not be threatened. In other words, what I suggest is that instead of taking
the quantum correlations as a puzzle needing explanation, we should make these
correlations themselves the explanation, or at least the criterion for the existence
of the kind of non-separability of space-time regions which I claim quantum
mechanics entails.
  This proposal should assuage the fears of those who share Einstein's worry
that there is no objective criterion for the individuation of physical systems other
than spatial separation. The experimentally determinable quantum correlations
are as objective as spatial separation. For practical reasons they may not actually
be determinable in all cases, but the quantum theory tells us where to look for
them.
   "Was Einstein right in arguing that field theories are by their very nature separable theories?
It might be objected that he was wrong, since under certain circumstances the value of the metric
at a point is not 'locally' determined, being, for example, a function of the boundary conditions
on some neighborhood of the point. But this objection is based on a misunderstanding. The question
is not how the value of the metric is determined, but whether it is presumed to be always well-
defined at every point of the manifold. In this sense, general relativity, like any other field theory,
is radically separable in the sense indicated. It would also not do to object that general relativity
employs other structures in addition to the metric tensor, such as the stress-energy tensor. In a
field theory, some structure must be fundamental, and as 1 understand Einstein, he took the metric
tensor to be the fundamental field structure. Be that as it may, the question is not which structure
is fundamental. The question is whether the fundamental structure, whatever it is taken to be, is
assumed always to be well-defined at every point of the manifold.
Einstein   on Locality   and Separability                                                      199


   There are two potential misunderstandings which I want definitely to avoid.
First, I am not proposing the abandonment of the continuum in favor of a
discrete manifold. It makes no difference how large the chunks of space-time
are, whether finite or infinitesimal. What matters is whether we regard spatial
separation, by itself, as a sufficient condition for the individuation of physical
systems. A separable theory based on a discrete manifold is just as much
threatened by the Bell experiments, on my interpretation, as a separable theory
based on the continuum. Second, I am not proposing the abandonment of either
the equivalence principle or the principle of general covariance. What I am
suggesting is that we cannot seek to satisfy these principles with field equations
governing structures well-defined at every point in the manifold. Some other
structure must be sought. The set of heuristic principles guiding this search will
still contain the locality principle, the equivalence principle and the principle of
general covariance. But it must now be enlarged by the addition of one new
heuristic — the principle of quantum non-separability.
   Earlier I ventured the opinion that if he were forced to choose between
separability and locality, Einstein too would have chosen to give up separability
in order to save locality. Would he have been prepared to accept the
consequences of such a choice for general relativity? Einstein's commitment
to the concept of the field as a framework for a unified theory is well known,
but there is evidence which shows that this was not his most basic commitment,
and that, indeed, he could consider abandoning the field concept. What he would
not give up under any circumstances is the principle of general relativity. This
emerges in a letter Einstein wrote on 2 May 1948 to Pauli, who had edited the
special issue of Dialectica in which Einstein's 'Quanten-Mechanik und
Wirklichkeit' appeared. After reading the essay, Pauli sent Einstein his
comments, to which Einstein replied in a letter that concludes with this
paragraph:

      Indeed, I have often said to you that I am not bent on having differential equations,
   but that I am intent on keeping the general relativity principle, whose heuristic power
   cannot be dispensed with. In spite of much searching, I have not succeeded in doing
   justice to the general relativity principle otherwise than through differential equations;
   perhaps one will discover such a possibility if he searches stubbornly enough for it.47

Remarks such as these suggest considerable flexibility, in principle, about the
way one might develop a physics which 'does justice' to the general relativity
principle. Einstein says that he has found no way other than through differential
field equations; but he does not rule out alternatives.
   •"Einstein to Pauli, 2 May 1948: 'Ich habe Ihnen ja schon ofter gesagt, dass ich nicht auf
Differentialgleichungen versessen bin, wohl aber auf das allgemeine Relativitats-prinzip, dessen
heuristische Kraft nicht entbehrt werden kann. Es ist mir eben trotz vielen Suchens nicht gelungen,
dem allgemeinen Relativitats-prinzip anders als durch Differentialgleichungen gerecht zu werden;
vielleicht entdeckt einer eine derartige Moglichkeit, wenn er hartnackig genug danach sucht.'
200                                              Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

   In fact, Einstein was willing to consider alternatives even more radical than
what I have suggested here, including the abandonment of the continuum. In
a letter to David Bohm of 28 October 1954, Einstein writes:

      In the last years several attempts have been made to complete quantum theory as
   you have also attempted. But it seems to me that we are still quite remote from a
   satisfactory solution of the problem. 1 myself have tried to approach this goal by
   generalizing the law of gravitation. But I must confess that 1 was not able to find
   a way to explain the atomistic character of nature. My opinion is that if an objective
   description through the field as elementary concept is not possible, then one has to
   find a possibility to avoid the continuum (together with space and time) altogether.
   But I have not the slightest idea what kind of elementary concepts could be used in
   such a theory.48

And in a famous remark in an appendix to the last edition of The Meaning
of Relativity, a remark which must have been penned at about the same time
as Einstein's letter to Bohm, in late 1954, Einstein says:

      One can give good reasons why reality cannot at all be represented by a continuous
   field. From the quantum phenomena it appears to follow with certainty that a finite
   system of finite energy can be completely described by a finite set of numbers (quantum
   numbers). This does not seem to be in accordance with a continuum theory, and must
   lead to an attempt to find a purely algebraic theory for the description of reality.
   But nobody knows how to obtain the basis of such a theory.49

It is not entirely clear what Einstein meant by this allusion to a 'purely algebraic
theory', but what is clear is that Einstein was willing to entertain alternatives
to field theories. Would his openness to alternatives have extended all the way
to non-separable theories? We will never know.


   "Einstein to Bohm, 28 October 1954. Bohm's efforts to 'complete' quantum mechanics, to which
 Einstein here refers, took the form of his proposed hidden variables interpretation. See D. Bohm,
 'A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of "Hidden" Variables. I & 11',
Physical Review 85 (1952), 166-79, 1 8 0 - 9 3 .
   "Einstein, 'Relativistic Theory of the Non-Symmetric Field', Appendix 11 in The Meaning of
Relativity, 5th edn. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1956), pp. 165-66. Einstein's 'Note
on the Fifth Edition' is dated 'December 1954'. This passage, which has puzzled many students
of Einstein because it seems unconnected with any of Einstein's earlier reflections on field theories
and quantum mechanics, should be compared to the following passage from Einstein's 1936 essay,
'Physik und Realitat': '. . . it has been pointed out that the introduction of a spatio-temporal
continuum may already be regarded as contrary to nature in view of the molecular structure of
everything which happens in the small. Perhaps the success of Heisenberg's method points to a
purely algebraic method for the description of nature, and to the elimination of continuous functions
from physics. But then, in principle, the employment of the space-time continuum must also be
given up. It is not unthinkable that human ingenuity will some day find methods which make it
possible to follow this path. But in the meantime, this project appears similar to the attempt to
breathe in a space devoid of air.' Op. cit., note 10, p. 343. (My translation — D.H.) What this
passage suggests is that Einstein's later remark about a 'purely algebraic theory' is meant as a reference
to a theory like Heisenberg's matrix mechanics.
Einstein on Locality and Separability                                                 201

                                   5. Conclusion

   Enough of speculation. What I have tried to demonstrate in this paper is that
Einstein's own argument for the incompleteness of quantum mechanics differs
significantly from the Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen incompleteness argument,
and differs in such a way that it helps us better to understand both the
foundations of Einstein's realism and the physical implications of the
experimental tests of local hidden-variable theories. If any other conclusion is
to be drawn, it is that careful and sympathetic reading of the considered opinions
of a thinker like Einstein is an imperative for the historian and philosopher of
science, and for the physicist as well.
   Let me close by quoting one final time from Einstein. This is the conclusion
of his 1948 Dialectica paper, and his remarks now appear both ironic and
edifying:

     As it appears to me, there can be no doubt that the physicists who hold the quantum-
  mechanical manner of description to be, in principle, definitive, will react to these
  considerations as follows: They will drop requirement II of the independent existence
  of the physical realities which are present in different portions of space; they can
  rightly appeal to the fact that the quantum-theory nowhere makes explicit use of this
  requirement.
     I grant this, but note: if I consider the physical phenomena with which I am
  acquainted, and especially those which are so successfully comprehended by means
  of quantum-mechanics, then, nevertheless, I nowhere find a fact which makes it appear
  to me probable that one has to give up requirement II. For that reason I am inclined
  to believe that the description afforded by quantum-mechanics is to be viewed . . .
  as an incomplete and indirect description of reality, that will again be replaced later
  by a complete and direct description.
     In any case, one should be on guard, in my opinion, against committing oneself
  dogmatically to the schema of current theory in the search for a unified basis for
  the whole of physics.50




  "Op. cit., note 12, p. 323. (My translation — D.H.)
