8. The Mental Problems of the Many
      Peter Unger



Many years ago, I blush to recall, I published some arguments against
the existence of all sorts of commonly supposed entities—against rocks
and desks, plants and planets, stars and salt shakers, human brains and
bodies, and, perish the thought, against us human thinking experien-
cers, including even the one who’s me.1 By contrast, now I’m trying to
develop, in a book I’ve been long writing, a humanly realistic philoso-
phy, wherein my existence, and yours, has the status of a quite undeni-
able philosophic datum.2
   As it seems to me now, certain trying ideas then deployed in such
nihilistic reasoning may bear importantly on the question of what sort
of a humanly realistic view we should adopt. These are ideas to the effect
that, where I’m apt ﬁrst to think that there’s just this one human body,
   1
     In chronological order, the most directly nihilistic of these papers are: ‘‘There Are No
Ordinary Things’’, Synthese, 41 (1979): 117–54; ‘‘I Do Not Exist’’, pp. 235–51 in Percep-
tion and Identity, ed. G. F. MacDonald, London: Macmillan, 1979; and ‘‘Why There Are
No People’’, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 4 (1979): 177–222. The main thrust of these
papers is the articulation of a nihilistic approach to various sorites arguments. Typically,
these arguments trade on the (for all I really know perfectly correct) idea that an extremely
minute difference between two ordinary entities—minute as regards propensities as well
as all sorts of other things—will never mean the difference between one of them being a
rock, for example, and the other not being a rock, or the difference between one being
a thinking being and the other not being a thinking being. Less directly nihilistic are a few
other papers, including ‘‘The Problem of the Many’’, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 5
(1980): 411–67. In this paper none of the key ideas has anything much to do with any
sorites arguments, or with ‘‘discriminative vagueness’’, though a casual glance at these key
ideas may often give such an erroneous impression. Right now, I’ll warn you against
conﬂating these two very different sorts of nihilistic reasoning. And, in the bargain, I’ll
warn against mistaking, for any sorites argument, or any reasoning at all concerning
discriminative vagueness, the trying thoughts I’m about to supply in this present essay.
Finally, I signal that, while several of this essay’s key ideas do arise from issues central to
‘‘The Problem of the Many’’, some of these presently central ideas go, in various important
respects, far beyond anything considered in that old paper. (While there are great differ-
ences between the thoughts of this new essay and the ideas of the older one, an attempt to
detail the differences looks to be more distracting than instructive.)
   2
     Still in progress, the book is entitled All the Power in the World, to be published by
Oxford University Press.
196 | Peter Unger

‘‘my body’’, seated in just this one chair, ‘‘my desk chair’’, there are,
more accurately, many billions of human bodies, each seated in many
billions of chairs. And, where I’m ﬁrst given to believe that there’s just
one healthy active brain, ‘‘my brain’’, promoting someone’s mentality,
there may be many billions of brains, each of them largely overlapping
so many of the others, and each serving, quite equally, to promote a
thinking, experiencing and choosing human being, or human self.
Maybe each brain promotes the very same mind, or self, as do each of
the others, in which case there’s just one self promoted (rather redun-
dantly?) by them all; or maybe each promotes a numerically distinct
conscious individual, in which case many billions of experiencers may
be, in my situation, simultaneously promoted. Right now, these
remarks should seem no better than cryptic comments; but, in the
course of this essay their import should become clearer.
   These trying ideas might provide, I’ll be suggesting, much force
against the Scientiphical View that each of us is a highly complex
wholly physical thing, with each of our powers just some sort of
(physically derivative) physical power; or, on a less popular version of
Scientiphicalism, each of us is epiphenomenal on, or supervenient on, a
highly complex wholly physical thing.3 And they might also provide
much force against a related Emergentist View, on which each of us is a
physical-and-mental complex.4 Without further ado, let’s encounter
these trying ideas.



recalling the problem of the many
In a paper called ‘‘The Problem of the Many’’, I introduced a problem
for our everyday thinking, distinct from all sorites problems and,
indeed, quite different from problems of ‘‘discriminative vagueness’’.

  3
     Spelling it differently, as ‘‘Scientiﬁcalism’’, I ﬁrst sketched this View, which is our
dominant metaphysic, in ‘‘The Mystery of the Physical and the Matter of Qualities’’,
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 23 (1999): 75–99. Using philosophically more suggestive
spelling, I discussed it further in ‘‘Free Will and Scientiphicalism’’, Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 65 (2002): 1–25. One of the main aims of All the Power in
the World is to explore, very critically, this Scientiphical Metaphysics that, for several
decades at least, has been the dominant worldview among prominent mainstream philoso-
phers, as well as many others.
  4
     There’s a discussion of this Emergentism in my ‘‘Free Will and Scientiphicalism’’. The
excellent suggestion that I treat this view very seriously I owe to Dean Zimmerman.
                                The Mental Problems of the Many | 197

Much as I found it useful to do then, let us start by considering certain
cases of ordinary clouds, clouds like those we sometimes seem to see in
the sky.
   As often viewed by us from here on the ground, sometimes puffy
‘‘picture-postcard’’ clouds give the appearance of having a nice enough
boundary, each white entity sharply surrounded by blue sky. (In
marked contrast, there are other times when it’s a wonder that we
don’t simply speak singularly of ‘‘the cloud in the sky’’, where each
visible cloudy region runs so messily together with many other cloudy
‘‘parts of the sky’’.) But upon closer scrutiny, as may happen sometimes
when you’re in an airplane, even the pufﬁest, cleanest clouds don’t seem
to be so nicely bounded. And this closer look seems a more revealing
one. For, as science seems clearly to say, our clouds are almost wholly
composed of tiny water droplets, and the dispersion of these droplets, in
the sky or the atmosphere, is always, in fact, a gradual matter. With
pretty much any route out of even a comparatively clean cloud’s center,
there is no stark stopping place to be encountered. Rather, anywhere
near anything presumed a boundary, there’s only a gradual decrease in
the density of droplets ﬁt, more or less, to be constituents of a cloud
that’s there.
   With that being so, we might see that there are enormously many
complexes of droplets, each as ﬁt as any other for being a constituted
cloud. Each of the many will be a cloud, we must suppose, if there are
even as many as just one constituted cloud where, at ﬁrst, it surely
seemed there was exactly one. For example, consider the two candidates
I’ll now describe. Except for two ‘‘widely opposing’’ droplets, one on one
side of two overlapping cloudy complexes, way over on the left, say, and
another way over on the right, two candidate clouds may wholly overlap
each other, so far as droplets goes. The cited droplet that’s on the left is a
constituent of just one of the two candidates, not a component of the
other; and the one on the right is a component of the other candidate,
not the one ﬁrst mentioned. So each of these two candidate clouds
has exactly the same number of constituent droplets. And each might
have exactly the same mass, and volume, as the other.
   Now, all around the outer portion(s) of a supposedly single cloud,
what obtains is a gradual change of droplet density, along ever so many
paths, from the considered cloud’s central portion(s) to what is merely
its droplet-infested environment. In actuality, there’s not just one
‘‘problematic pair of opposing droplets’’. Rather, there are very many
198 | Peter Unger

such distinct pairs, that is, many pairs of peripheral droplets each of
which has no droplet in common with any of the other pairs. So there’s
certainly nothing special about the opposing pair that, above, fueled
some peculiar thinking. Indeed, any droplet from any one of the many
opposing pairs might be coupled equally well, instead, with at least one
of the two droplets from (almost) any other one of these very many
pairs. This being so, the mathematics of combinations will have it that,
in the situation where one ﬁrst supposes a single concrete cloud, there
are very many millions of clouds present. Each of these many millions
of cloud candidates has precisely as many droplets as does each of the
others. And, in every way plausibly deemed relevant for cloudhood
here, each is the exact equal of all the others. By contrast with consider-
ations central to sorites arguments, here there is no difference at all
between any one of these complexes’ current cloud credentials and the
credentials of any of the millions of others.
   Though it’s not needed to generate our problem, it’s sometimes fun
to combine what’s just been offered above with some considerations
concerning vagueness. So, in the case we’ve been considering, the
extremely good cloud candidates are not limited, of course, to the
exactly equally good ones that differ only as regards two such opposing
peripheral constituent droplets. In addition, there’s a candidate that’s
plenty good enough for current cloudhood that lacks not just one but
both of the peripheral ‘‘opposing’’ droplets ﬁrst considered. If there are
any real clouds here at all, this will be a cloud that’s just one ‘‘droplet’s
worth’’ less massive than either of our ﬁrst two candidates, and just
slightly smaller in volume, too. And, there’s another perfectly good
candidate that has not just one but both of those peripheral droplets as
constituents. As regards both mass and volume, it will be just two
droplets’ worth larger than the candidate considered a moment ago,
and just one droplet larger than each of the two complexes we ﬁrst
considered above. With even just this much thrown into our cloudily
explosive mix of considerations, our situation’s recognized cloud popu-
lation rises enormously.
   While there should be limits to how far such ‘‘numerically differen-
tial shuttling’’ can be taken, lest sorites arguments here lead to nihilistic
ideas, we won’t be anywhere close to approaching those limits with
differences of just two peripheral droplets in the cloudy complexes we’re
considering. Indeed, even with differentials of ﬁve such peripheral
droplets, even ﬁve on either side of our initially chosen ‘‘tied clearest
                              The Mental Problems of the Many | 199

current cloud case’’, we won’t be anywhere close to threatening any such
limits. Now, these matters concerning vagueness have been, as I pre-
dicted, some fun to consider. But, they themselves are peripheral to
what are here the main issues, to which we now return.
   Even as concerns the main issues, there’s not an absolutely perfect
parallel between a common cloud and its constituting droplets on one
hand, and a water droplet and (at least some of) its constituting
molecules, or atoms, or elementary particles on the other. But there’s
no important difference between the two. We may grant, if needs be,
that there are routes from a drop’s center into its mere environs with
breaks that are quite clean. Even so, there’ll be many others that are
very much messier, quite messy enough to allow for ‘‘opposing’’ pairs of
plausible enough constituents. With these opposing pairs of ‘‘particles’’,
we may reason, in a relevantly parallel fashion, that there are many
millions of water droplets where at ﬁrst there would seem to be just one.
And, as it is with water droplets, so it is also with rocks and desks,
planets and plants, and human brains and bodies.
   Where at ﬁrst there seems to be just a single human body, here,
which is just ‘‘my body’’, there may really be vastly many human
bodies. And where I take your single brain to be ensconced in your
one head, there may be very many human brains (each equally
‘‘yours’’), all similarly ensconced in vastly many human heads (each
‘‘yours’’).
   All this sounds very strange. But, maybe there isn’t anything in it
that should be very disturbing. So long as we’re clear as to what are the
relations among which brains, and which bodies, maybe there needn’t
be any serious problem. For instance, we can be clear enough about what
we may correctly express when saying that none of your brains is in,
nor are any of your brains a part of, any of my many bodies. And, we
may be similarly clear about saying that each of my brains is in, and is a
part of, all of my bodies. And, even as many of your brains each overlap
with many other brains that are yours, none of your brains overlap with
any of mine, of course. At the same time, it’s also clear that none of my
many bodies ever nest in, nor do any ever greatly overlap with, any one
of your many bodies.
   Now, even on the face of things, the problems of the many just
canvassed, or rehearsed, concern nothing of much greater moment, or
depth, than what’s commonly found with many merely semantic issues.
There seems nothing of much metaphysical moment in these problems
200 | Peter Unger

with common thoughts about quite grossly complex physical entities.
(Nor does there seem any perplexing problems of moral moment, or
any deep difﬁculty concerning rational concern.) Should every ‘‘prob-
lem of the many’’ be no worse than these noted problems—about many
overlapping clouds, and brains, and human bodies—there may be no
very serious philosophical problem to be found along these lines. Is
there, perhaps, such a relatively untroubling situation happily in the
cards for us here?



the experiential problem of the many
Maybe so; but maybe not. Indeed, matters may start to get much worse,
I’ll suggest, should we be unable to quash the thought that, in what I
take to be just my own situation, there are really very many experi-
encing thinkers, each promoted by a different one of the very many
brains that, above, I bid us recognize as ‘‘my brains’’.
   But, can anything much like that be right? In addition to me myself,
whose conscious metaphysical struggles are, apparently, producing
these awkward sentences, are there many other thinkers, too, each
similarly responsible, and maybe each of us then just barely responsible,
for producing these strangely disquieting philosophical utterances?
Right here and now, ‘‘in my situation’’, are there vastly many experi-
encing thinkers, each with a protracted illusion of being, in this very
present situation, quite singular and unique? While anything’s possible,
as we say, the idea that there are, along with me, so many distinct like-
minded experiencing thinkers is incredible.
   Am I being, perhaps, overly self-centered here? I don’t think so. In
fact, when I consider a similar ‘‘experientially explosive’’ suggestion
about you, and about the many bodies and brains ‘‘in your situation’’,
I ﬁnd the thought of billions of like-minded experiencers just as incred-
ible as in my own case. Whether it’s for my own case or for yours, with
our Experiential Problem of the Many there’s a very serious issue of
credibility.
   Just a few sentences make clear how very much such an experientially
explosive supposition ﬂies in the face of our commonsense thinking
about ourselves. Possibly excepting what happens when certain rariﬁed
metaphysics is done, each one of these many supposed billions thinks
that, at least among all the people on earth right now, he alone is
                              The Mental Problems of the Many | 201

experiencing—immediately, complexly, and totally—in the precise
way or fashion that, at the moment, he manifests, or exempliﬁes. As
I take it, you’re not experiencing in a way that’s precisely like the
way I’m experiencing right now, even though we may be near each
other in the same room. For one thing, I have a tingling condition ‘‘in
my left foot’’ that, I believe, is quite different from any felt condition
you now suffer. For another, my perspective is different from yours,
which almost certainly means a notable difference in our visual experi-
encing. Obviously we could go on and on; but, just as obviously,
that’s enough.
   Matters quickly go from bad to worse; incredible thoughts compound
incredibly. Am I to think that, with vastly many experiencers promoted
by vastly many brains ‘‘in my situation’’, each may be communicating
his innermost thoughts to all of the enormously many other experi-
encing thinkers, across the vastly many tables between us, promoted by
the vastly many brains ‘‘in your situation’’? Such an idea is, I think,
patently absurd.
   Something has gone badly wrong here. And, as we are now dealing
with human thinking experiencers, with the likes of you and me, what’s
gone wrong concerns what’s central for any humanly realistic philo-
sophy.
   Indeed, whatever philosophical projects one may ﬁnd interesting, this
present matter presents an issue that one should recognize as philo-
sophically puzzling and disturbing. Part of what makes the matter so
puzzling may be that it concerns what has been called, in recent years,
the ‘‘subjectivity of experience’’. This so-called subjectivity is closely
related to—and it may even be the same thing as—what was called, in
earlier years, the ‘‘privacy of experience’’. Very sketchily put, that is
indeed my partial diagnosis. In a way that may resonate intuitively, I’ll
try to amplify on this diagnostic idea.
   The thought that there are, ‘‘in my situation’’, vastly many individ-
uals each similarly experiencing the sweet taste of chocolate is, to my
mind, a very disturbing suggestion. It is far more disturbing than the
thought that, in this situation, there are vastly many complex entities
each of whom is chewing a sweet piece of chocolate, or digesting a
sweet piece of chocolate. A digesting of the sweet chocolate that’s
very much like my (body’s) digesting it may as well be ascribed—
quite indifferently, tolerably, and readily—to each of however many
human beings (or human bodies) may very largely overlap me (or
202 | Peter Unger

mine). This contrasting thought concerning digesting is far less deeply
puzzling, and far less disturbing, than the thought concerned with
experiencing.
   With the digesting of the chocolate, the situation seems far more
relaxed than with the experiential tasting of anything. With so much
more relaxed a matter, it seems little more than a matter of choosing
what forms of words to use. Following common sense, even if perhaps
speaking loosely, we may say that there’s just one process of digesting
now going on ‘‘in my situation’’. Or, paying less attention to common
thought, and maybe more to certain principles of differential consti-
tution, we may instead say that, with many similar overlapping entities
each engaged in a very similar digestive process, there are many similar
overlapping digestive happenings. As it seems, this latter description is
only somewhat less intuitively palatable.
   Not so, it seems, with my experiencing as I do. Rather, it seems, my
power to experience will be radically different from my power to digest
(or, perhaps better, from my very many bodies’ powers to digest.) The
latter is just a highly derivative physical propensity; it’s a metaphysic-
ally superﬁcial power ascribed, perhaps properly enough, to many such
ontologically superﬁcial complexes as are typical human bodies, or
entirely physical human organisms. By contrast, a power to experience
may be a radically emergent mental propensity, in no wise any mere
physical power, neither derivative nor non-derivative. For some, this
contrast will be both evident and even profound. But, for others, further
discussion may be useful.
   For the sake of the argument, or the diagnostic exposition, just
suppose, for the moment, that a Substantial Dualism holds. And, fur-
ther, suppose that I causally interact, quite equally, with each of very
many overlapping complex physical bodies, each of which thus may be
called, properly enough, one of my bodies. Must there be very many
other Cartesian thinkers, in addition to myself, who also causally inter-
act, quite equally, with (so many of) these same physical complexes—so
that (many of) my bodies are also their bodies? Certainly not. Indeed, it
may be a great advantage of this Dualism that its most plausible
versions won’t have things turn out this way. As a matter of metaphys-
ical fact, all the bodies ‘‘in my situation’’ serve to promote only myself,
and not any other sentient self. On such a Substantial Dualistic View,
there may be much reason to take each of these many bodies to be one of
my bodies, but not to take any of them to be anyone else’s.
                               The Mental Problems of the Many | 203

   Even as I may have so many human bodies, none of which are anyone
else’s bodies, so I may then also have very many digestive systems,
many of them greatly overlapping many of the others, while each such
system has a slightly different group of basic physical constituents from
all the rest—perhaps an ‘‘extra’’ electron here, or one less hydrogen
atom there. To be sure, this sounds like it’s squarely against common-
sense thinking, and ordinary biological thinking. And, very possibly, it
is. Still, there’s nothing that is all that disturbing in any of it. Indeed,
there’s nothing very disturbing, either, in going on to think many
further thoughts, elaborations on these materially explosive ideas. For
instance, without very much disturbance, we may think that each of my
many digestive systems may undergo, or be engaged in, a process of
digestion—a digesting—that’s ever so similar to the digestive processes
undergone, simultaneously, by ever so many overlapping digestive
systems. Readily enough, I trust, we may accept the idea that all these
systems are mine, and mine alone, and all these digestings are mine, and
mine alone. Though it’s somewhat unnatural for us to say such proﬂi-
gate things, there’s no grave philosophical error, I’ll suggest, in being so
liberal about these metaphysically material matters.
   For the same reasons that I might be said to have billions of digestive
systems, I may also be said to have vastly many nervous systems, each
largely overlapping very many others, and each having slightly differ-
ent physical constituents from all the rest. Indeed, it seems established
that my causal interaction with all these systems is much more direct
than my interaction with any of my digestive systems. Anyhow, much
as we might readily tolerate the thought that my many overlapping
digestive systems may be engaged in many overlapping digestive pro-
cesses, so we might also easily tolerate the thought that my many
overlapping nervous systems may be engaged in many overlapping
neural processes.
   But, may we similarly tolerate the idea that each of these many
nervous systems may undergo, or may be engaged in, a process of
experiencing that’s quite simultaneous with, and ever so similar to,
the experiencings undergone by ever so many other largely overlapping
nervous systems? I certainly don’t think so. More cautiously, may we
fairly happily think that, even as each of very many particular experi-
encings may occur during exactly the same time as ever so many others,
each may occur in very much the same place as so many others? May we
think this nearly as happily, at least, as we may think parallel thoughts
204 | Peter Unger

about my digestings? Again, it certainly doesn’t seem so to me. By
contrast, this following seems a much more intuitively congenial ex-
pression of what’s apparently happening experientially. More directly
than any other comparable part of my body, or parts of my bodies, each
of the many nervous systems now in ‘‘my situation’’ physically pro-
motes just a single (total) process of (total) experiencing, which is just
my experiencing, even as I myself am the single experiencer that’s
physically promoted by (any of) the nervous systems now in this
particular situation. Brieﬂy put, here’s a reasonably plausible way for
how all that may be so, even if it is also a rather nicely amazing way. In
whatever serves to constitute my nervous systems, there’s a propensity
to the effect that there will be a limit placed—(almost always) a limit of
just one—on how many experiencing particulars may be promoted by
the optimally arranged basic physical constituents—optimally ar-
ranged, that is, for the promoting of any experiencing individuals. In
the same way, we may hypothesize that each of my simple physical
constituents—every single one of them—has a marvelous propensity
with regards to how it may interact with very many others, so that, in
optimal arrangements for promoting consciousness, there’s an effective
singular resolution as to what experiencer they promote. And so also is
there a singular resolution of what experience, or what experiencing, is
then promoted by them.
   In the last several paragraphs, we’ve been supposing that the correct
metaphysical view is a Substantial Dualism, not terribly different from
the classical view of Descartes. Now, let’s drop that supposition and, to
the contrary, suppose that a more materialistic view of mentality is
correct—maybe some form of materialism itself, maybe some more
relaxed version of our Scientiphical Metaphysic, as with a suitable
Scientiphical Epiphenomenalism. Or maybe what’s correct is something
as moderately different from Dualism as the Emergentism that, in this
is paper’s preamble, I mentioned so brieﬂy. Now, on this Emergentist
View, there are radically emergent mental powers, all right, but they all
inhere in physical complexes, in the very same complex objects that also
have so many physically derivative physical powers.5 Insofar as we may
maintain one of these more materialistic views, quite comfortably and
intuitively, we may not ﬁnd it disturbing, at all, to think that, in my
situation right now, there are billions of experiencing thinkers. But,

  5
      As noted earlier, I discuss this Emergentism in my ‘‘Free Will and Scientiphicalism’’.
                               The Mental Problems of the Many | 205

then, how far is it that, all the while doing it quite comfortably and
intuitively, I actually can sustain the thought that, in my situation right
now, there are billions of experiencing individuals, each enjoying his
very own experiencing, numerically distinct from the similar experience
of all the others? Not very far at all, that’s for sure. And, as I suspect,
pretty much the same is true of you.
   For most of us, all this should be fairly intuitive, maybe even highly
intuitive. For that reason, all this should be, for most of us, a point in
favor of Substantial Dualism—as against the Scientiphical Metaphysic
and, as well, as against the Emergentism lately noted.



the experiencing of split-brain patients
underscores this disturbing problem
The previous section offered a fairly succinct presentation of the Experi-
ential Problem of the Many. Now, I aim to amplify on that. With the
further considerations I’ll discuss in this ampliﬁcation, we may see that
this problem provides a more clearly forceful point in favor of Dualism,
even if, perhaps, not yet any point that’s enormously forceful.
   At all events, it’s extremely interesting to think about human ‘‘split-
brain’’ patients—epileptics whose main neural connection between their
two cerebral hemispheres, their corpus callosum, was severed so that
they might gain relief from frequent severe seizures. When these
patients are placed in certain specially designed experimental setups,
as some of them actually were, in many cases their behavior almost cries
out for exotic psychological interpretation.
   Here’s a simple case, contrived for illustrative purposes, that’s rele-
vantly similar to striking actual cases. Our psychological subject, a
cooperative split-brain patient, is asked to handle some regularly shaped
solid ﬁgures, each object being either a cylinder, or a cube, or a pyramid,
or a sphere. And, right after handling a solid object, our subject is to
write down the sort of object she just handled, inscribing just one of
these four common words for shapes, the one that seems suitable to her:
‘‘cylinder’’, ‘‘cube’’, ‘‘pyramid’’, and ‘‘sphere’’. Now, none of these
objects is ever seen by the subject; the solids are all behind an opaque
screen that obscures even the surface of the table on which they rest.
Usefully, the screen has two holes in it, while each hole has an easily
movable but always visually obscuring ﬂap. At all events, our subject
206 | Peter Unger

places her left arm through the hole on her left, and her right arm
through the one on her right. So her left hand can handle objects on the
table’s left side, from her perspective; but, it can’t handle any on the
table’s right side. Why not? Well, protruding upward from center of the
table’s surface, there’s a large solid barrier, which precludes any left–
right, or right–left, crossover. In this way the right hand is conversely
limited; with her right hand she can handle only the objects to the right
of the barrier.
   That’s our experimental setup. Now, we suppose that, within about a
minute of putting her arms through the appropriate holes, her right
hand grasps a cube, and no other regular solid object, while the sole
object her left hand grasps is a sphere. For a few seconds, she holds the
two objects like that. Then, she withdraws her hands from the holes, as
instructed. And, then, on the near side of the screen, she places her
hands on two pieces of paper and is given two pencils, one placed in her
left hand and one in her right. Then our ambidextrous subject, who can
readily employ both hands at once, is asked to write, on each of the pads,
just one of the four words: ‘‘cylinder’’, ‘‘cube’’, ‘‘pyramid’’, ‘‘sphere’’.
Something quite amazing now happens. With her right hand, she writes
‘‘cube’’, while with her left hand, she writes ‘‘sphere’’. In this strangely
diverse writing activity, our subject evinces no hesitation, conﬂict, or
ambiguity. Rather, as far as her behavior seems to indicate, (it’s as
though) ‘‘a part of her’’ experienced a cube tactiley, and not any sphere,
while at the very same time ‘‘another part of her’’ experienced tactiley
only a sphere, and no cube at all.
   Many actual cases are, as I said, very like this contrived example.6
They strongly suggest that, in many actual experimental setups with
split-brain patients, the subjects become involved, at once, in two quite
separate experiencings, or ‘‘streams of experience’’. Of course, these
split-brain episodes are very unlike what we imagined above for our
very many ‘‘largely overlapping experiencers’’. With those very many
overlappers, each of very many millions of experiential streams was
supposed to be qualitatively extremely like each of the others; with our


   6
     For a nice presentation of some of these actual cases, along with an interesting
discussion of what might be much of their philosophic import, see Thomas Nagel,
‘‘Brain Bisection and the Unity of Consciousness’’, Synthese, 22 (1971). This essay is
widely reprinted, notably in Nagel’s Mortal Questions (Cambridge University Press,
1979), pp. 147–64.
                               The Mental Problems of the Many | 207

split-brain subjects, by contrast, each of just two presumed experiential
streams is qualitatively very unlike the only other.
   What’s going on here, with a split-brain patient in a dually productive
setup? To provide a sensible answer to this question, we ﬁrst put to one
side all our problems of the many. That done, what’s going on seems to
be this: along with a good deal of the subject’s nervous system that’s not
cerebral—her brain-stem, for example—one of her hemispheres serves
(most directly) to promote one sort of experiencing that the subject’s
written answer indicated she enjoyed—say, her tactile experiencing as
of a cube. And, in a relevantly complementary way, the other hemi-
sphere serves (most directly) to promote another sort of experiencing, a
tactile experiencing as of a sphere, and not as of a cube. Now, except as
regards cerebral hemispheres, a big exception here, what’s promoting
the one experiencing, is the same entity—presumably the same physical
complex—as is promoting the other; or, at the very least, the one
precisely coincides with the other. In exactly the same way, the physical
complex (most directly) promoting one of these experiences has a
promotionally important part that is the same as, or that coincides
with, the physical complex that’s (most directly) promoting the other
experience. And at the same time, of course, each complex lacks a
promotionally important part, a whole hemisphere, that is a crucial
part of the other.
   Far be it from me to think that in these cases everything is readily
amenable to our customary ways of thinking about human experiencers
and our experiencings. On the contrary, the apparent simultaneous
‘‘contrary’’ experience is very puzzling. Here’s just some of what’s so
puzzling. With each numerically different total momentary experien-
cing, there is a numerically different experiencer—or so we’re strongly
inclined to believe. So, in the case that’s in focus, we have a certain
inclination to think that there is one experiencer who writes only ‘‘cube’’
when reporting her experiencing, and another who doesn’t write
‘‘cube’’, but writes only ‘‘sphere’’, when reporting her tactiley very
different simultaneous experiencing. So, intuitively, there’s a certain
difﬁculty here for our thinking that in this experimental situation
there’s just one single experiencer.
   But, that inclination isn’t our only proclivity here. Can there really be
two human people in this situation? Can there really be, in this experi-
mental setup, an experiencing writer who is not a human person? As it
certainly seems, there’s also a difﬁculty for our thinking that in this
208 | Peter Unger

setup there’s not always just one experiencer. Indeed, there might be an
even greater difﬁculty here.
   For the moment, though, suppose there’s not just one, but two
experiencers here, each tactilely experiencing quite differently from
the other. Well, what happens when these two experiencers are removed
from the artiﬁcial setup, when each hemisphere again gets very much
the same stimulation as the other? Do we have only one experiencer
once again, the same single person who went into the experiment (say,
about a year after she had her split-brain operation)? That suggestion
seems strangely implausible. Where was she in the intervening period,
this one experiencer, when (as we’re supposing) there were the two
simultaneous different experiencers? Was she just a certain one of these
two? That seems quite absurd. Did she go out of existence altogether,
just when the experimental setup was introduced, and then come to
exist again, just when the differentially stimulating setup was removed?
This suggestion also seems unsatisfactory.
   As a still further alternative, there’s the conjecture that, not just
during the experimental setup, but ever since her operation ﬁrst affected
how she experienced, our split-brain patient was engaged in not one, but
two experiencings. Quite dramatically, during the differentially stimu-
lating setup of the experimental situation, her experiencings were
qualitatively very different, and not just numerically distinct. Less
dramatically, before the post-operative patient was introduced to this
setup, her two (streams of) experiencings were qualitatively very alike.
(But, for all their qualitative similarity, these experiencings were nu-
merically different from each other.)
   What are we to make of these conjectures? And what are we to make
of various further proposals, which may also be, at once, both somewhat
attractive and somewhat problematic? I do not know. It is all very
puzzling; and, it seems, quite deeply puzzling. But even in our deeply
puzzled ignorance we might make, I think, some useful comments.
   Let us meanwhile continue to suppose that, during the puzzling
middle period of the experimental setup, a certain apparently exclusion-
ary diversity of experiencing is all at once promoted. And let’s suppose,
just a little explosively perhaps, that then there is not just one sentient
being, but two experiencers. Though that thought is somewhat uncom-
fortable, it’s not nearly as disturbing as the thought that there are many
billions of human thinkers experiencing as of a cube; nor is it nearly as
unsettling as the thought that billions are each tactiley experiencing
                              The Mental Problems of the Many | 209

only spherically. (Far more disturbing yet is the thought that there are
billions experiencing tactiley only in the ﬁrst way, and billions only in
the second way.)
   However, unless we believe in a naturally resolving limit on the
experiencers promoted, how are we rationally to reject the thought
that, with so very many exceptionally similar complexes of matter,
there are, right then and there and all at once, so very many experi-
encers as that?
   Recall the speculation that, before and after the experimental setup
with our patient—or with our two ‘‘neighboring’’ patients—there may
be two quite parallel experiencings promoted. Supposing that’s really
so, a somewhat plausible explanation will run rather like this. One of
these parallel experiencings is promoted by a neuronal system featuring
only the left hemisphere as its distinctively highest region or part, and
the other by a nervous system that, lacking the left, similarly features
just the right hemisphere. Whatever one thinks of this speculation—I
myself don’t think it’s all that plausible—there’s nobody, I trust, who
thinks there are many billions of experiencings physically promoted
largely by the left hemisphere, and billions more promoted largely by
the right. But, to avoid such a numerically explosive idea, in a properly
principled fashion, we must accept, again, that there is a resolving limit
on what, by way of experiencers and their experiencings, is physically
promoted by various mentally productive arrangements of physical
constituents.
   Almost everything we’ve been discussing in this section strikes me as
not only puzzling, but deeply puzzling. Far from being concerned only
with semantics, or with the application conditions of some concepts,
these puzzles seem to concern, beyond all that, metaphysically deep
considerations. And, if that’s right, they may point to some matters of
much metaphysical import. Below, I’ll try to make these points more
clearly vivid.
   Recall our remarks as to how we might take it upon ourselves to say
that, ‘‘in my situation’’, there are many different digestive systems,
each involved with a different simultaneous digesting. While that’s a
rather unnatural thing to say, and while the motivation supplied for
saying it may be somewhat puzzling, there is nothing in it that’s deeply
puzzling. Nor is there any deep puzzle concerning whether we should
continue always to think that, ‘‘in my situation’’, there’s always just
one digester, presumably a certain human organism, or whether there
210 | Peter Unger

are very many digesters, most of them largely overlapping many others.
So, here again, we ﬁnd an intuitively striking difference between our
experiencing and, on the other side, such evidently physical processes
as our digesting. This difference may indicate something deep meta-
physically.


might the singularity of common
experiencing favor substantial dualism?
To deal effectively with our deep puzzles about our experiencing, per-
haps we might accept, if only very tentatively and somewhat skeptic-
ally, a certain Substantial Dualism. Central to this Cartesian doctrine is
the thought that each of us is a non-physical experiencer, though an
experiencer who (causally) interacts with certain physical things.
   With such a suitable Dualistic doctrine, there may be a singular
resolution for our Experiential Problem—featuring just a single experi-
encer ‘‘in my situation’’ that isn’t so horribly arbitrary as to be terribly
incredible. Well in line with this Dualism, we can conjecture that ‘‘in my
situation’’ very many overlapping physical complexes—physical brains,
perhaps—may altogether serve to promote, causally or quasi-causally, a
single non-physical experiencer, or a singular mind, or exactly one
individual soul, even while each of the complexes may do its promoting
in what is really a quite derivative sense or way. In the case of each
mentally promoting physical complex, the derivation will proceed, of
course, from the basic (enough) physical components of the very com-
plex in question, and from the physical relations obtaining among its
particular components, to the complex’s being a (derivative) promoter
of just a single sentient self. And so, in each of very many worldly
derivations, it may be the very same sentient self, or experiencing mind,
that the complexes in question each serve (derivatively) to promote. In a
happy enough sense, then, the (physically derivative) promoting of this
single mind, by any one of these physical complexes, will be a causally
redundant promoting. Of course, there won’t be any complex that’s
doing any of this (derivative) promoting without there being, all at once,
a great many each doing it rather redundantly.
   In any very direct sense or way, it will be this promoted single non-
physical mind itself—just me myself—that has a power to experience.
So, it will be only in a very attenuated sense or way that an experiential
                               The Mental Problems of the Many | 211

power will be possessed by any of the concrete physical complexes that
serve to promote the experientially powerful non-physical being.
   Nowadays, it’s very hard for respectable philosophers to believe in
mentally powerful non-physical beings. But, even for us now, this may
be less incredible than the thought that just a single one of our con-
sidered physical complexes itself has this power—with all those other
slightly overlapping complexes being quite powerless experientially,
even all of those others that, in mass, in volume, and in number of
basic constituents, are each precisely the same as the supposedly sole
experiencing physical complex. And it’s also less incredible than the
thought that just a single one of the basic (enough) physical entities
here—say, a certain particular quark—has the power to experience
richly—with all the other quarks ‘‘in my situation’’ being quite power-
less in such a mentally rich regard. And it’s certainly less incredible than
the thought that some mere abstraction from what’s physical, and
nothing concrete at all, should be the sole entity, ‘‘in my situation’’,
with the power to experience, a power that’s manifested, this very
minute, in my presently experiencing precisely as I now do.
   As easy as it is for us to think, quite rightly, that each of us is a
concrete being, not a mere abstraction, or abstractum, it’s equally hard
for us, in this present day and age, to believe that we are not spatially
extended beings. Indeed, it’s enormously hard to believe anything about
ourselves that’s very different from how our Scientiphicalism has us be.
What’s more, it’s hardly ever that I manage to get further from the
Scientiphical Metaphysic than the nearby Emergentism that I’ve been
trying to take very seriously. Yet, as this essay has been suggesting, this
Emergentism is deeply embroiled with the Experiential Problem of the
Many, as deeply as Scientiphicalism itself.
   Among the metaphysical options not so embroiled with this appar-
ently deep problem, Substantial Dualism is, so far as I can tell, the
available view that departs least radically from our dominant Scienti-
phical Metaphysic. It’s a much less radical departure, certainly, than is
any fundamentally mentalistic metaphysic, whether such an exhaust-
ively mental view be called ‘‘idealism’’, or ‘‘phenomenalism’’, or, as
seems more fashionable nowadays, ‘‘panpsychism’’. Wishing not to be
radical metaphysically, I’ll suggest that, in the face of the Experiential
Problem of the Many, we take Substantial Dualism, in its most coherent
and tenable forms, rather seriously; or, if that is not yet psychologically
possible for us, at least we should take it rather more seriously than
212 | Peter Unger

almost all prominent professional philosophers have done in recent
decades.
   Professionally socialized as I am, even this much is very hard for me
now to do. Apparently, I need a good deal more help, psychologically,
than what’s afforded by the Experiential Problem, to give any very
substantial departure from our dominant Scientiphicalism, even so
much as just a very moderately serious run for the money. So in the
following section I’ll try to provide some potentially liberating
thoughts, perhaps novel enough to help us get beyond the circumscribed
bounds dictated by our unquestioning allegiance to Scientiphical
thinking.



the problem of too many real choosers
For the Scientiphical view of ourselves, and for our noted Emergentism,
too, there’s a mental problem of the many that’s yet more disturbing,
and far more bafﬂing, than the disturbingly bafﬂing Experiential Prob-
lem of the Many. It’s the Problem of Too Many Real Choosers.
   In order that our metaphysical meditations could begin most man-
ageably, we haven’t yet addressed issues concerning the choosing of our
thinking experiencers. But now it’s high time to explore them. When
exploring these issues persistently, we may ﬁnd it absolutely incredible
that there should be, ‘‘in my situation’’, very many experiencing
choosers, rather than just me choosing all alone.
   As with everyone else, there are some sorts of things I’m far more
prone to imagine than things of some other sorts. For example, I’m far
more prone to imagine a pretty woman than an ugly plant. But, with
regards to many (other) things, there’s no great difference in my
imaginative proclivities. For example, this may happen with my im-
agining a horse, or else a cat, or else a dog, where each of the options is to
exclude each of the others. Equally, it may occur with my imagining
something wholly red, or else something wholly blue. With many
groups of real alternatives for imagining, then, I have no enormous
disposition toward just one of the mutually exclusive options for me.
   What’s more, even with something I’m strongly prone not to im-
agine, (not always but) often I can choose to imagine it experientially
nonetheless. I have just done some demonstrative imagining. Counter
to my proclivities, I chose to imagine an ugly plant. And because I chose
                               The Mental Problems of the Many | 213

that option for my imagining, I actually imagined a pathetic weed, very
dry and brown. What’s the moral of this little exercise? Dramatically
put, the point is this: the domain of my power to choose encompasses a
very great deal of the domain of my power to imagine experientially.
Often enough, I can choose to imagine experientially even counter to
my quite strong imaginative proclivities.
   Having taken note of my power to choose even contrary to my strong
proclivities, we turn to an easier case. Here, I’m to choose among
roughly equal options for my imaginative activity, where my procliv-
ities for each option are about equally strong. And so, just for the sake of
it, I’ll choose to imagine experientially either a horse, or else a cat, or
else a dog. And, just for the sake of some potentially instructive
reasoning, let’s now suppose that the experiential imagining I’m about
to perform will be a purely mental act of mine, entirely isolated from
the world’s physical realm. Not only will this imagining not be any-
thing physical, but we suppose it to lack any real physical cause. And,
both concurrently and in the future, it will have no physical effect or
manifestation. (Later we’ll drop this pretense of mental purity; but not
just yet.)
   All right, I’m now imagining just one of the three mentioned sorts of
very common domesticated animal. Make a guess, please, as to which of
the three I’m imagining. You might guess, I suppose, that I’m imagin-
ing a cat. Or you might guess that it’s a dog I’m imagining. Or you
might guess it’s a horse. Whatever you may have guessed, I’m now
done with that bit of imagining. Now, as you’ll recall, I said that my
chosen imagining won’t have any physical manifestation, not even in its
future. Sticking with that supposition, I won’t ever communicate to you,
in (physical) writing, what sort of animal it was that I actually did just
imagine.
   For the sake of instructive reasoning, let’s make the supposition that
it was a cat I just imagined. And let’s proceed to reason from that
supposition.
   When I put the question of this three-way choice as a little exercise
for myself just now, did billions of very similar people, all of them ‘‘in
my situation’’, each similarly put the question to himself? And, when I
made a choice among my three speciﬁed options for imagining, each an
alternative excluding the others, did each of them also effectively
choose? How many of them effectively chose to imagine a cat experien-
tially, the alternative we’re supposing that I effectively chose?
214 | Peter Unger

   If there really are vastly many people in my situation, then the only
plausible thing to suppose about them is that, like myself, each of them
has his own power to choose. And, since this is a real power to choose
fully, and freely, each of these thinker’s powers to choose is relevantly
independent of the power of each of the others, including, of course, my
own power to choose. So it’s only plausible to suppose, further, that,
when I made my effective choice to imagine a cat experientially, each of
them made an equally effective choice to imagine that was independent
of my choice, and also independent, of course, of the choice of each of
the others.
   That being so, it would be an astounding coincidence, and not a
credible occurrence, if all these billions of people should also imagine a
cat, each freely choosing to imagine the very sort of animal that, of the
three exclusive options, I freely chose to imagine. (After all, we’ve been
properly supposing that, just as with me, none of these billions of
‘‘overlappers’’, each so similar mentally to me, is not much more
prone to imagine a cat than he is to imagine a dog, or a horse.) Indeed,
it would be extremely unlikely that there should be, among the billions
of choosers ‘‘in my situation’’, fewer than ten million real choosers
who imagined a dog, when I myself was imagining a cat. And, equally,
it would be extraordinarily unlikely that should there be, among
the billions with independent powers, fewer than ten million who
would choose, quite effectively, to imagine a horse experientially.
With any less diversity of chosen animal images than that, among my
overlapping physical-and-mental cohort of independent full choosers,
there would be far too little qualitative experiential diversity, among
‘‘the population in my situation’’ for an outcome that’s even the least bit
credible.
   The point here is, in its essentials, quite the same as a point about
choice concerning me and you, and billions of other relevantly inde-
pendent choosers, thinkers who aren’t largely overlappers, thinkers
who aren’t ‘‘in numerically the same situation’’. For this case of
‘‘spatially separated choosers’’, or choosers with spatially separate
bodies, and brains, we may playfully consider the most suitable two
billion subjects, for a very widespread but temporally tiny psychological
experiment, selected from among the world’s current population, which
numbers a bit over six billion. Now, as we may similarly suppose here,
very few of these two billion have a tremendous proclivity toward
imagining cats, as against horses or dogs. The great majority have a
                               The Mental Problems of the Many | 215

roughly equal propensity in each of the three speciﬁed directions. So, if
fewer than ten million of us choose, freely and effectively, to imagine a
dog, while almost all of us choose to imagine a cat, that is an unbeliev-
ably great coincidence. I myself would not believe in such an outcome.
Rather than accepting that overly coincidental nonsense, I’d go back and
question various propositions that we were supposing to hold true. Was
there, perhaps, mass mesmerization going on globally, so that almost all
of us were made to imagine a cat, with few really able to exercise his
power to choose?
   Whether overlapping or not, it’s just incredible that billions of real
choosers should all choose to imagine a cat experientially, with hardly
any opting for a dog or a horse, when those two are, quite as forcefully,
presented as appropriate alternatives. But at the same time it’s not really
credible, either, that there really was, in my situation, truly substantial
diversity in experiential imagining, when I was (supposedly) just
imagining a cat. So it’s just incredible that, overlapping with me right
now, there are many other complex entities, many physical-and-mental
beings, who really do choose.
   In one of its endless variations, that is the Problem of Too Many Real
Choosers. Maybe I’m being overly quick about the matter, or even
simply quite dense. But, in any case, I suspect that this problem may
be an insuperable difﬁculty for the dominant Scientiphical Metaphysic.
And, as I also suspect, it may undermine the Emergentist View.


this problem and the emergentist idea
of physical-and-mental complexes
On the Emergentist view we’ve been exploring, each of us is a physical-
and-mental complex. By contrast with our severe Scientiphical View,
which has all our power as physical propensities, whatever the details of
their physical derivations, on this Emergentism each of us will have, in
addition to ever so many physical proclivities, various non-physical
radically emergent mental powers. Yet, on the Emergentist View, any
being that has such radical mental powers must be, at the same time, a
complex physical entity. Indeed, it is precisely this aspect of our Emer-
gentism that has it as a more conservative departure from Scientiphic-
alism, or less of a departure, than a Cartesian View, or any Substantial
Dualism concerning mind and body.
216 | Peter Unger

   In my ‘‘Free Will and Scientiphicalism’’, I argued that Scientiphical-
ism is, in several ways, incompatible with our thought that we really
choose from among real alternatives for our thoughtful activity. And
after offering those arguments, I observed that, so far as any of us could
then tell, this fairly conservative Emergentist View might be as free of
such Scientiphical Incompatibilisms as is Substantial Dualism. Our
Emergentism might be tenable, but only insofar as a complex physical
being’s real physical features are no obstacle to her having, as well,
many non-physical mental powers, saliently including a radically emer-
gent purely mental power to choose. And, as it was then suggested, that
might be quite far indeed; for, as it then appeared, there wasn’t any such
obstacle; there wasn’t any real philosophic difﬁculty. Well, that was
then; and, this is now.
   In the light of our current discussion, there does appear to be a very
real philosophic difﬁculty. In the ﬁrst place, it appears that, ‘‘in your
situation right now’’, there are very many different physical-and-
mental complexes (each greatly overlapping with many others)—sup-
posing, of course, that ‘‘in your situation right now’’ there’s at least one
complex physical entity with radically emergent non-physical mental
powers. Though it may be logically possible that there is a great plural-
ity of spatially extended real choosers, each of whom may share much of
your space with you now, this is a proposition that deﬁes belief. Indeed,
this conﬂict becomes quite unbearable when we reﬂect, as we have, that
the almost perfectly certain consequence of this is that, from time to
time, there’ll be great qualitative diversity in the chosen mental lives of
the largely overlapping physical-and-mental beings.
   Nor is there, on our Emergentist View, a credible way out of this
philosophic difﬁculty. In a ‘‘messily gradual’’ world like this actual one,
with very many very similar physical complexes to be found ‘‘in the
situation of’’ any alleged physical-and-mental complex being, there’s no
credible resolution as to which one, among all the very many overlap-
ping complexes, alone has the power to choose. Nor is it credible that,
while each of the many complexes has a power to choose, there’s
somehow just one physical-and-mental complex, among the billions
overlapping, that, at any given moment of time, gets to exercise his
power. Nor is there any other credible way to offer a suitably singular
resolution of the matter. But the only alternative, we have just ob-
served, is an incredible diversity of choosers diversely choosing experi-
entially. So, at least in any world much like our messily gradual actual
                               The Mental Problems of the Many | 217

world, the Emergentist View is not a credible alternative to our besieged
Scientiphicalism.


a singular physical manifestation of the
power to choose underscores this problem
To make the presentation of the problem both vivid and manageable,
the initial offering of the Problem of Too Many Choosers featured just
such choosing as might be considered quite purely mental activity, and
even quite isolated from all physical happenings. It may now proﬁt us
further, I imagine, to explore cases of choosing an imaginative option
where the agent, just before she starts to imagine as she chooses to do,
communicates to others what she’s imagining, presumably via an ap-
propriate physical sign or signal.
   As before, again I’ll now imagine either a horse, or a cat, or a dog.
And, while I’m imagining it, I’m going to produce a physical signal of
what it is that, because I just chose to imagine it, I’m now imagining
experientially. (Pretend that I’m communicating by writing on a pad in
plain view, or by an electronic instant messaging system.) Anyway,
with this very physical sentence that I’ve just produced and that you’re
now reading, I tell you that it’s a dog I’m now imagining, not a horse or
a cat.
   In producing that writing, I made a certain change in physical reality.
And this change was a real result, of course, of the choice I just effected.
   Putting aside our previous worries, maybe we can somehow make it
palatable to ourselves that, this time ‘‘in my situation’’, there are
millions of people choosing to imagine a horse, quite effectively, and
millions of others choosing to imagine a cat, as well as the millions who,
like me, were imagining a dog. Each of the people, though overlapping
ever so many others, chose quite independently and very effectively,
with each managing to alter his own imaginative experiencing just as he
independently chose freely to do. Well, maybe that’s too far-fetched
really to be palatable. Even so, let’s suppose that there are all these
overlapping choosers, independently and effectively choosing images of
striking qualitative diversity. If, quite fantastically, that should be true,
will it help our Emergentism?
   No, it won’t. Even if we allow ourselves this supposition, there will
arise, or will remain, this parallel problem: with each of our three
218 | Peter Unger

animal options chosen by many millions, each of them an independent
chooser though overlapping so many other free choosers, how is it that
just those who chose to imagine a dog managed to produce an intended
(revealing) signal change—but not those millions who imagined a
horse, or imagined a cat? Here’s one speciﬁc suggestion. Maybe it’s a
matter of the numbers, as with a voting procedure; and maybe more
chose to imagine a dog than chose a cat, or a horse. But, though that idea
may occur more obviously than most of its equally speciﬁc alternatives,
it’s no less absurd than so many other terribly incredible thoughts.
   All this just brings home to us how incredible is the idea that, in my
situation, or in yours, there are very many real choosers. Indeed, it’s
absurd for us to believe anything in the neighborhood. It’s absurd to
think that there are many overlapping people here—but only one of
them has the power really to choose. It’s also absurd to think that there
are many with this power—but at any one time only one gets to exercise
the power; and, so on, and so forth.



does this problem of real choosers
favor substantial dualism?
Recall our remarks about how each of many overlapping nervous
systems, ‘‘in my situation’’, might be one of my nervous systems. In
what serves to constitute my overlapping nervous systems, there are
propensities to the effect that there’s a limit to be placed—a limit of just
one—on how many experiencing particulars may be promoted by these
overlapping systems. How so? Here’s a way. Each of a system’s simple
physical constituents, as with each of its constituting quarks, has mar-
velous propensities regarding how it may interact with very many other
simple physical things, so that, in their optimal arrangements for pro-
moting experience, there’s an effective singular resolution as to what
experiencer they may promote. And, because there’s that singular
resolution, there’s also a nice singular resolution as to what experi-
encing may be promoted by them all.
   It was hard to believe, we said before, that the single experiencer thus
promoted should be a complex physical thing, whether or not the
complex should have radically emergent purely mental powers. For, as
it surely appears, no good candidate for being the single experiencing
complex, ‘‘in the situation’’, is any better a candidate than each of very
                              The Mental Problems of the Many | 219

many extremely similar and massively overlapping others. It’s hard to
believe that, somehow or other, just a single one of these should have
the power to experience richly, while all the others should be perfectly
powerless in this salient regard. (Yet it’s also hard to believe that,
running very much in parallel with me, there are vastly many highly
similar distinct experiencers promoted, rather than just me experiencing
here alone.) Indeed, if a certain one of these physical complexes should
somehow be the sole experiencer here, what happens when it loses one
of its peripheral constituents, as will surely happen quite soon? Does
this sole experiencer go out of existence? That’s incredible. Does it,
rather, come to coincide with a just slightly smaller complex, previously
‘‘nested’’ in it, while having only one fewer simple component than just
before the slight loss? Will there be, then, an experiencing complex
that’s materially coincident with an insensate complex? That too is
incredible. Will there then be, alternatively, two experiencing com-
plexes, one previously experiencing and one just now newly experi-
encing? That’s also incredible. Is a further alternative markedly more
credible than these patently fantastic claims? I can’t see any further
alternative to be much more credible. In line with our Scientiphical
Metaphysic, or even in line with our noted Emergentism, there’s
no credible resolution, I submit, to our Experiential Problem of the
Many.
   So, for folks so accepting of Scientiphicalism, myself included, there’s
a disturbing problem with the Experiential Problem of the Many. But,
as I’ve lately been arguing, we may ﬁnd the Problem of Too Many
Choosers to be still more disturbing. With that Problem, there’s the
following dilemma: on the one hand, it’s blatantly absurd to think that
there are very many real experiencing choosers ‘‘in my situation’’,
sometimes many choosing in a certain experiential way and many
others choosing in a very different experiential way. This is yet more
disturbing, I think, than our thinking there to be, ‘‘in my situation’’,
very many experiencers, where it may always be that each of them
experiences, immediately and totally, in much the same way as all the
others. But on the other hand, and just as with the Experiential Problem,
it’s also absurd to think that there’s a single complex physical being
that’s the only real chooser here; rather, any promising candidate for
being such a choosing complex appears no better at all, not even the least
bit more qualiﬁed or promising, than each of very many extremely
similar, and massively overlapping, complexes.
220 | Peter Unger

   Well, then, are there other alternatives for the Scientiphically in-
clined to favor here, evidently less absurd for us to accept? While there
are other logical possibilities, I suppose, I can’t see any that are notably
more credible options. Certainly not that I’m a simple physical thing. So
far as I can tell, there are ever so many quarks, or maybe superstrings,
each of which might be a simple physical thing. But, then, it’s not at all
credible that I’m a quark, or whatever. (The matter can’t be improved by
suggesting I might be a simple physical-and-mental thing. For, any such
entity must be a simple physical thing, of course, whatever else also
might be true of it.) And, not that I’m a complex spatially extended
entity that’s not physical, with substantial simple spatial parts that
aren’t physical parts. Nor is it at all credible that I’m any other, still
different, sort of spatial or physical thing.
   Now, remember, I’m an independent real chooser, a conscious being
who, at least from time to time, chooses fully and freely his own
conscious activity. So, I’m not any mere epiphenomenal being, nor
anything that merely supervenes on a base that’s fully physical. In all
of our Scientiphicalism, there’s nothing that does much justice to my
being a real chooser.
   While still believing in a vast heterogeneous physical reality, what
are we now to think ourselves to be? Among the traditionally available
options, the least implausible view may be a Substantial Dualism, rather
like the Cartesian View noted earlier. As I’m suggesting, then, maybe
we should think that our mental problems of the many, especially the
Problem of Too Many Choosers, mean a point in favor of such a
Dualistic Metaphysic. (This may be so, of course, even if these problems
also favor views that depart still further than does Dualism from the
Scientiphical Metaphysic now so widely accepted, as with many Idealis-
tic worldviews.)
   I myself cannot yet believe in a metaphysic that departs even as much
as a Substantial Dualism departs from our standard metaphysical con-
ception. For one thing, I can’t believe that I really haven’t any spatial
extension; at least, not yet I can’t. And, as I suspect, you’re in the same
commonsensical boat. So, what are we to do?
   Three main courses strike me as available.
   First, we may go back over what our investigation has so far offered,
and look for serious errors. Then, we may come to think, perhaps quite
rightly, that there’s no mental problem of the many, nor any other
difﬁculty, that’s truly a serious problem for our widely accepted Scien-
                               The Mental Problems of the Many | 221

tiphicalism. I hope that you will try this very seriously. And, whether
successful or not, I hope you may be so good as to tell me what you ﬁnd.
As for myself, however, at this point in time this option has been
exhausted and, in the wake of my laborious struggles, is not widely
available. So, for me, right now, that leaves two courses.
   Second, we may ask ourselves what are the most disturbing aspects of
a Cartesian View. And, after trying our best to articulate them well, we
might then endeavor to show how they might really give far less cause
for intellectual disturbance than at ﬁrst they appear to do. Yet, this has
been often tried before, by many others. So, while I think I should try to
do something here, I have doubts as to how much I might accomplish in
this way.
   Third, and ﬁnally, there’s a more novel and speculative approach,
though it’s not wholly divorced from the Dualistic course just noted.
Perhaps, in addition to many physical and spatial parts, many of
them overlapping many others, I might have a single non-physical
non-spatial part. And perhaps it may be that it’s only in this non-
physical part of me, in my ‘‘soul’’, that I’m mentally propensitied
and empowered. It’s through my exercise of certain powers inhering
in this soul, my soul, that I may perhaps choose various aspects of
my mental life, and sometimes even choose how it is that my body
moves.
   Though it’s pretty speculative, so far that’s not novel, but just old hat.
In bare and sketchy terms, here’s something that, far from being so old
hat, is even more strangely speculative: though this non-physical part of
me—my mind, or my soul—may not have any spatial extension, at
least not in any strict or narrow sense of the terms, perhaps it may have
some non-spatial spacelike extension. In what’s only a very schematic
way indeed, I’ll try to say something about the general tenor of this
strange speculation.
   Now, as it seems to me, space is the only clearly non-temporal
dimension of concrete reality in which I exist. But that appearance
may be an illusory appearance. As it might really be, space is but one
of the clearly non-temporal dimensions in which I exist; as I’m specu-
lating, there’s at least one other such dimension in which, quite equally,
I also participate—in which I also exist. Even as my many substantial
physical parts exist in space, I may have another enduring substantial
part (or maybe more than one) that does not exist in space itself. This
non-spatial part of me, this soul of mine, if you will, may exist in some
222 | Peter Unger

other clearly non-temporal dimension (or in more than one) that is
extended, all right, but not spatially extended.
   No easy matter; it remains for us to suggest for these speculative
ideas some helpfully more concrete terms, not so abstract as those I’ve
just employed or offered. Since they require our engagement with the
most profoundly radical sort of imaginative thinking, we may need to
connect the offered abstract speculations with some of our (more nearly)
experiential thinking, or at least with some thinking of ours that’s more
experientially informed. With no great conﬁdence that I’ll have much
success in any such positive effort, I postpone this for another occasion.
Anyway, and as with almost everything else in ﬁrst philosophy, here
too it may be that only the problems rightly last long with us, while our
attempted resolutions are all ﬂeeting, fashionable, and, maybe, ﬂat-out
futile as well.
                                                   New York University
