On the Method of Theoretical Physics
Author(s): Albert Einstein
Source: Philosophy of Science, Vol. 1, No. 2 (Apr., 1934), pp. 163-169
Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Philosophy of Science Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/184387 .
Accessed: 22/05/2013 11:58

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.




                The University of Chicago Press and Philosophy of Science Association are collaborating with JSTOR to
                digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophy of Science.




http://www.jstor.org




                            This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Wed, 22 May 2013 11:58:00 AM
                                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
   On        the             Method                          of        Theoretical
                                          Physics*
                                                     BY

                                  ALBERT EINSTEIN
                   'FYOU wish to learn from the theoretical physi-
                    cist anything about the methods which he uses,
       ~ 5'K        I would give you the following piece of advice:
                    Don't listen to his words, examine his achieve-
                   ments. For to the discoverer in that field, the
                    constructions of his imagination appear so
necessary and so natural that he is apt to treat them not as the
creations of his thoughts but as given realities.
   This statement may seem to be designed to drive my audience
away without more ado. For you will say to yourselves, 'The
lecturer is himself a constructive physicist; on his own showing
therefore he should leave the consideration of the structure of
theoretical science to the epistemologist'.
   So far as I personally am concerned, I can defend myself against
an objection of this sort by assuring you that it was no suggestion
of mine but the generous invitation of others which has placed
me on this dais, which commemorates a man who spent his life
in striving for the unification of knowledge.
   But even apart from that, I have this justification for my pains,
that it may possibly interest you to know how a man thinks about
his science after having devoted so much time and energy to the
clarification and reform of its principles.
   *The Herbert Spencer Lecture, delivered at Oxford, June Io, I933.                             Reprinted by
permission of the Oxford University Press, New York, Inc.
                                                     163




                   This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Wed, 22 May 2013 11:58:00 AM
                                   All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
164                     Theoretical Physics
   Of course his view of the past and present history of his subject
is likely to be unduly influenced by what he expects from the
future and what he is trying to realize to-day. But this is the
common fate of all who have adopted a world of ideas as their
dwelling-place.
   He is in just the same plight as the historian, who also, even
though unconsciously, disposes events of the past around ideals
that he has formed about human society.
   I want now to glance for a moment at the development of the
theoretical method, and while doing so especially to observe the
relation of pure theory to the totality of the data of experience.
Here is the eternal antithesis of the two inseparable constituents
of human knowledge, Experience and Reason, within the sphere
of physics. We honour ancient Greece as the cradle of western
science. She for the first time created the intellectual miracle of a
logical system, the assertions of which followed one from another
with such rigor that not one of the demonstrated propositions
admitted of the slightest doubt-Euclid's geometry. This mar-
vellous accomplishment of reason gave to the human spirit the
confidence it needed for its future achievements. The man who
was not enthralled in youth by this work was not born to be a
scientific theorist. But yet the time was not ripe for a science
that could comprehend reality, was not ripe until a second ele-
mentary truth had been realized, which only became the common
property of philosophers after Kepler and Galileo. Pure logical
thinking can give us no knowledge whatsoever of the world of
experience; all knowledge about reality begins with experience
and terminates in it.
   Conclusions obtained by purely rational processes are, so far
as Reality is concerned, entirely empty. It was because he
recognized this, and especially because he impressed it upon the
scientific world that Galileo became the father of modern physics
and in fact of the whole of modern natural science.
   But if experience is the beginning and end of all our knowledge
about reality, what role is there left for reason in science? A
complete system of theoretical physics consists of concepts and
basic laws to interrelate those concepts and of consequences to




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Wed, 22 May 2013 11:58:00 AM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                            Albert Einstein                                               I65
be derived by logical deduction. It is these consequences to
which our particularexperiencesare to correspond,and it is the
logical derivation of them which in a purely theoretical work
occupies by far the greater part of the book. This is really
exactly analogous to Euclidean geometry, except that in the
latter the basic laws are called 'axioms';and, further,that in this
field thereis no questionof the consequenceshaving to correspond
with any experiences. But if we conceiveEuclideangeometryas
the science of the possibilities of the relative placing of actual
rigid bodiesand accordinglyinterpretit as a physicalscience,and
do not abstract from its original empirical content, the logical
parallelismof geometryand theoreticalphysics is complete.
   We have now assigned to reason and experience their place
within the system of theoretical physics. Reason gives the
structureto the system; the data of experienceand their mutual
relationsare to correspondexactly to consequencesin the theory.
On the possibility alone of such a correspondencerests the value
and the justification of the whole system, and especially of its
fundamentalconcepts and basic laws. But for this, these latter
would simply be free inventions of the human mind which ad-
mit of no a priori justification either through the nature of the
human mind or in any other way at all.
   The basic concepts and laws which are not logically further
reducibleconstitutethe indispensableandnot rationallydeducible
part of the theory. It can scarcely be denied that the supreme
goal of all theory is to make the irreduciblebasic elements as
simple and as few as possible without having to surrenderthe
adequaterepresentationof a singledatumof experience.
   The conceptionhere outlined of the purely fictitious character
of the basic principlesof theory was in the eighteenth and nine-
teenth centuriesstill far from being the prevailingone. But it
continues to gain more and more ground because of the ever-
wideninglogical gap between the basic concepts and laws on the
one side and the consequencesto be correlatedwith our experi-
ences on the other-a gap which widens progressivelywith the
developing unificationof the logical structure, that is with the
reductionin the numberof the logically independentconceptual
elements requiredfor the basis of the whole system.




            This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Wed, 22 May 2013 11:58:00 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
166                     Theoretical Physics
   Newton, the first creator of a comprehensive and workable
system of theoretical physics, still believed that the basic concepts
and laws of his system could be derived from experience; his
phrase 'hypotheses non fingo' can only be interpreted in this
sense. In fact at that time it seemed that there was no problem-
atical element in the concepts, Space and Time. The concepts of
mass, acceleration, and force and the laws connecting them,
appeared to be directly borrowed from experience. But if this
basis is assumed, the expression for the force of gravity seems to
be derivable from experience; and the same derivability was to
be anticipated for the other forces.
   One can see from the way he formulated his views that Newton
felt by no means comfortable about the concept of absolute space,
which embodied that of absolute rest; for he was alive to the fact
that nothing in experience seemed to correspond to this latter
concept. He also felt uneasy about the introduction of action
at a distance. But the enormous practical success of his theory
may well have prevented him and the physicists of the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries from recognizing the fictitious character
of the principles of his system.
   On the contrary the scientists of those times were for the most
part convinced that the basic concepts and laws of physics were
not in a logical sense free inventions of the human mind, but
rather that they were derivable by abstraction, i.e. by a logical
process, from experiments. It was the general Theory of Rela-
tivity which showed in a convincing manner the incorrectness of
this view. For this theory revealed that it was possible for us,
using basic principles very far removed from those of Newton,
to do justice to the entire range of the data of experience in a
manner even more complete and satisfactory than was possible
with Newton's principles. But quite apart from the question of
comparative merits, the fictitious character of the principles is
made quite obvious by the fact that it is possible to exhibit two
essentially different bases, each of which in its consequences leads
to a large measure of agreement with experience. This indicates
that any attempt logically to derive the basic concepts and laws
of mechanics from the ultimate data of experience is doomed to
failure.




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Wed, 22 May 2013 11:58:00 AM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                            Albert Einstein                                               167
   If then it is the case that the axiomatic basis of theoretical
physics cannot be an inference from experience, but must be
free invention, have we any right to hope that we shall find the
correctway? Still more-does this correctapproachexist at all,
save in our imagination? Have we any right to hope that ex-
periencewill guideus aright,when thereare theories(like classical
mechanics)which agree with experienceto a very great extent,
even without comprehendingthe subjectin its depths? To this I
answerwith complete assurance,that in my opinion there is the
correct path and, moreover, that it is in our power to find it.
Ourexperienceup to datejustifiesus in feelingsurethat in Nature
is actualized the ideal of mathematical simplicity. It is my
conviction that pure mathematical construction enables us to
discoverthe conceptsand the laws connectingthem which give us
the key to the understanding of the phenomena of Nature.
Experience can of course guide us in our choice of serviceable
mathematical concepts; it cannot possibly be the source from
which they are derived; experience of course remains the sole
criterionof the serviceabilityof a mathematicalconstructionfor
physics, but the truly creative principleresides in mathematics.
In a certainsense, therefore,I hold it to be true that pure thought
is competentto comprehendthe real, as the ancientsdreamed.
   To justify this confidence of mine, I must necessarily avail
myself of mathematicalconcepts. The physical world is repre-
sented as a four-dimensionalcontinuum. If in this I adopt a
Riemannianmetric, and look for the simplest laws which such a
metric can satisfy, I arrive at the relativistic gravitation-theory
of empty space. If I adopt in this space a vector-field, or in
other words, the antisymmetricaltensor-fieldderived from it,
and if I look for the simplest laws which such a field can satisfy,
I arriveat the Maxwellequationsfor free space.
   Having reached this point we have still to seek a theory for
those parts of space in which the electricaldensity does not van-
ish. De Broglie surmised the existence of a wave-field, which
could be used to explain certain quantum propertiesof matter.
Dirac found in the 'spinor-field'quantities of a new kind, whose
simplestequationsmake it possibleto deducea great many of the
propertiesof the electron, including its quantum properties. I




            This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Wed, 22 May 2013 11:58:00 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
i68                     Theoretical Physics
and my colleague discovered that these 'spinors' constitute a
special case of a field of a new sort which is mathematically con-
nected with the metrical continuum of four dimensions, and it
seems that they are naturally fitted to describe important prop-
erties of the electrical elementary particles.
   It is essential for our point of view that we can arrive at these
constructions and the laws relating them one with another by
adhering to the principle of searching for the mathematically
simplest concepts and their connections. In the paucity of the
mathematically existent simple field-types and of the relations
between them, lies the justification for the theorist's hope that
he may comprehend reality in its depths.
   The most difficult point for such a field-theory at present is
how to include the atomic structure of matter and energy. For
the theory in its basic principles is not an atomic one in so far as
it operates exclusively with continuous functions of space, in
contrast to classical mechanics whose most important feature,
the material point, squares with the atomistic structure of matter.
   The modern quantum theory, as associated with the names of
de Broglie, Schr6dinger, and Dirac, which of course operates
with continuous functions, has overcome this difficulty by means
of a daring interpretation, first given in a clear form by Max
Born:-the space functions which appear in the equations make
no claim to be a mathematical model of atomic objects. These
functions are only supposed to determine in a mathematical way
the probabilities of encountering those objects in a particular
place or in a particular state of motion, if we make a measure-
ment. This conception is logically unexceptionable, and has
led to important successes. But unfortunately it forces us to
employ a continuum of which the number of dimensions is not
that of previous physics, namely 4, but which has dimensions
increasing without limit as the number of the particles consti-
tuting the system under examination increases. I cannot help
confessing that I myself accord to this interpretation no more
than a transitory significance. I still believe in the possibility of
giving a model of reality, a theory, that is to say, which shall
represent events themselves and not merely the probability of




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Wed, 22 May 2013 11:58:00 AM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                            Albert Einstein                                               1 69
their occurrence. On the other hand, it seems to me certain
that we have to give up the notion of an absolute localization of
the particles in a theoretical model. This seems to me to be the
correct theoretical interpretation of Heisenberg's indeterminacy
relation. And yet a theory may perfectly well exist, which is in a
genuine sense an atomistic one (and not merely on the basis of a
particular interpretation), in which there is no localizing of the
particles in a mathematical model. For example, in order to
include the atomistic character of electricity, the field equations
only need to involve that a three-dimensional volume of space on
whose boundary the electrical density vanishes everywhere,
contains a total electrical charge of an integral amount. Thus in
a continuum theory, the atomistic character could be satisfac-
torily expressed by integral propositions without localizing the
particles which constitute the atomistic system.
  Only if this sort of representation of the atomistic structure
be obtained could I regard the quantum problem within the frame-
work of a continuum theory as solved.




            This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Wed, 22 May 2013 11:58:00 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
