Critical Points in Modern Physical Theory
Author(s): Henry Margenau
Source: Philosophy of Science, Vol. 4, No. 3 (Jul., 1937), pp. 337-370
Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Philosophy of Science Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/184447 .
Accessed: 18/07/2011 17:11

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at .
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ucpress. .

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




                The University of Chicago Press and Philosophy of Science Association are collaborating with JSTOR to
                digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophy of Science.




http://www.jstor.org
          Critical Points in Modern
               Physical Theory
                                          BY

                           HENRY MARGENAU
                    ECENT discussions in the physical literature,'
                     designed to clarify the logical position of modern
                     physical theory, have brought to light an amaz-
                     ing divergence of fundamental attitudes which
                     may well bewilder the careful student of physics
                     as well as philosophy. Quantum mechanics,
representing    an  abstract formalism, should be capable of having
its logical structure analyzed with great precision like any other
mathematical discipline. Its consequences in all problems to
which its method can be applied are so unambiguous, consistent,
and successful in predicting physical experience as to disperse
immediately all thoughts of possible discrepancies in its funda-
mental texture. Yet it must be said that even the founders of
quantum theory are not in harmony in their various expositions
of the bases of that theory. However, while this situation seems
disquieting on the face of it, there is no cause for serious brow
raising, for it is a fact that there exists agreement with regard to
the central axioms of the theory, and that the ambiguities affect
only their philosophical interpretation, a field in which differences
of opinion may at present be honestly entertained.
   In the present article we desire to draw attention to several
ways in which these axioms can be and have been interpreted.
Without attempting finality we shall investigate the consequences
  'See bibliography at the end of this paper.
                                         337
338        Critical Points in Physical Theory
of different views and separate clearly their incompatible features,
appraising now and then the various possibilities as to their
reasonableness and their degrees of popularity among scientists.
In the course of this endeavor there will arise occasional sugges-
tions dealing with wide-spread terminology, whose aim will be
to guard against confusion of language and to eliminate certain
annoying contradictions the origin of which is purely verbal.
There will be an analysis and proposed definitions of such impor-
tant terms as state and measurement, for it is believed that they
have not yet acquired universal meaning and are for that reason
the chief source of confusion in discourses on the foundation of
modern physics. We begin by outlining those axioms of the new
quantum mechanics on which the description of nature essentially
depends.
               I. THE AXIOMS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS2

   There are two ways in which the basic postulates of any theory
may be presented: the inductive and the deductive. Textbooks
on quantum mechanics generally use the former. They start
by giving an account of the failures of classical physical descrip-
tion, then proceed to involve the reader in the intracacies of
measuring devices, tell him with enormous emphasis that there
is absolutely no hope of ever performing a measurement which
achieves simultaneous accuracy for complementary (conjugate)
physical quantities, dazzle him with Heisenberg's uncertainty
relations and finally introduce him to the use of matrices and
general operators. This process is awe-inspiring and pedagogi-
cally effective with minds that wish to learn rapidly. But it
leaves unsatisfied the student who is interested in fundamental
questions of meaning, for the steps lack logical compulsion and
uniqueness. In the first place, no inductive proof, based on
experiments, can ever be given for the impossibility of increasing
the accuracy with which canonically conjugate observables can
be measured. Secondly, the complete meaning of indeterminacy
is difficult to convey by examining individual measurements alone,
     Only a general discussion is here intended. For a complete statement see P. A. M.
   2

Dirac, Principles of Quantum Mechanics, or Lindsay and Margenau, Foundations of
Physics, p. 401.
                               H. Margenau                                      339
 and finally, the particular choice of operators which is made in
 quantum mechanics does not follow uniquely from the uncer-
 tainty relations. It may be that the general use which this
particular mode of presentation enjoys everywhere is partly
responsible for the uncritical attitude toward basic matters which
many working physicists have so long displayed.
   The second, the deductive method, does not pretend to prove
anything new-a semblance which often attends the former pro-
cedure-but resigns itself to an enumeration of a new set of
axioms in terms of which we agree tentatively to describe our
physical experience. The analysis of the situation thus created,
once the postulates are stated, is a matter of complete logical
and mathematical rigor, and the consequences are capable of
experimental test. Success in fitting data strengthens the belief
that the initial axioms are a suitable starting point in physical
investigations, though it cannot convey the conviction that these
axioms are unique, for it might well be that another set were
equally successful. This question of uniqueness will probably
never be settled, and it is a fortunate circumstance that we have
no means for doing so, a circumstance which prevents our theories
from freezing into rigid patterns, which keeps our inspiration and
our hopes alive. But strongest confidence in the essential "cor-
rectness"of the axioms, which have proven their worth in empiri-
cal predictions, comes when we begin to interpret them and find
that they differ from the postulates of classical physics precisely
at those points where critical analysis has already shown the
latter to be defective. In this manner the new theory acquires
a degree of certainty which is the maximum attainable. This
form of presentation, which exposes more truly the logical status
of quantum mechanics and provides a ready answer to the ques-
tion of its ultimate correctness, will here be chosen although it
does not possess the obvious pedagogical advantages of the
former method.
   Physical analysis deals with the behavior, imagined or observed
but always in principle observable,of physical systems.3 Quantum
   3Physical systems are in general constructs in the sense of a previous communication
(Journal of Phil. of Science, 2, 48 ('935); 2, 164 (I935)). We shall here assume the
terms to be so understood.
340      Critical Points in Physical Theory
mechanics, in particular, has to do with systems observable only
by indirect means, principally because of their smallness. To
analyze their behavior the physicist invents states. Now in
common language a state carries with it the connotation of some
mysterious objective reality, whatever that word may mean; it
implies something entirely independent of our description, some-
thing to which our description must conform. As a matter of
physical convention, however, a state is deprived of this exalted
independence and is entirely at our mercy. We determine how
we are going to describe states, and the agreement with respect to
this matter constitutes the first axiom of any theory. In classical
mechanics states were defined, or specified, by means of coor-
dinates and momenta of mass points; in thermodynamics an
altered convention is being used: by state is meant a coordination
of two thermodynamic variables, such as pressure and volume
of a system. In quantum mechanics, finally, we agree to mean
by state, or the representative of a state, a certain finction of a
suitable number of variables.
   The distinction between state and representative of a state has
here been made merely as a concession to ultra-meticulous readers.
Such a difference exists only on the scale of ordinary experiences
where an intuitive conception of the coordinates and momenta
of a body, as a bullet in flight, is obtainable. Here one can
associate an unambiguous mental picture with the state which
has as its representative a certain group of positions and mo-
menta. On the atomic scale, where no such picture can be
obtained except by intrinsically unverifiable extrapolation of large
scale experience, the dangers of which are now quite apparent,
it seems in order to drop the distinction and refer to the "repre-
sentative of a state," which alone is available, briefly as the state.
   But the introduction of a state function is exceedingly abstract
and is not at all linked with physical experience. What is the
operational meaning of this procedure? This leads to an impor-
tant point. It is true that classical physics did formulate its
states in terms of measurable quantities, as well it might, for it
operated on a scale of visual perception. But this should be
regarded as a coincidence rather than a logical necessity: there is
                       H. Margenau                          34I
no consideration which compels that states be directly measurable.
All properties, to be sure, with which physical systems are en-
dowed, must be measurable. States are invented in order to
enable statements regarding measurable physical properties to
be made, which is by no means synonymous with saying that
states must be measurable. In quantum mechanics it happens
indeed that states become intermediators between abstract con-
structs called systems and their measurable properties.
   The invention of states which, while they are themselves not
observable, would also fail to provide a definite connection with
experience, must be considered as futile. But quantum me-
chanics is not in such sterile condition. By means of a second
axiom a very precise link is made between a system characterized
by a given state and its observable properties. The connection
is not of the usual reversible type but involves probability aggre-
gates. The axiom posits that when a state function is given, the
exact probability distribution with regard to every observable
quantity can be computed. The detailed manner in which this
is to be done is not relevant to the main theme of this discussion.
We have thus established a one-one correspondence, not between
states and observed properties, but between states and probability
distributions of observed properties. If causality were to be
defined as residing in a unique transition between state and obser-
vation, then the description to which this axiom gives rise would
have to be termed non-causal. Practically speaking, when the
state of a system is known, the probability that a given value of
the momentum shall be observed can be predicted, but the out-
come of a given momentum measurement is in general obscure.
One of the notable consequences of this axiom is Heisenberg's
famous principle of related indeterminacies. It states that the
standard deviation of the probability distribution with respect
to the momentum of a system multiplied by the standard devia-
tion of the probability distribution with respect to its measured
position is never smaller than a certain universal constant
(Planck's h divided by 4w; momentum and position may here, of
course, be replaced by any other two so-called canonically con-
jugate quantities). The reader who is unfamiliar with the statis-
3 42       Critical Points in Physical Theory
tical term "standard deviation" may in this connection think
qualitatively of the spread of the measurements.
   We have already indicated that on the basis of the present
formalism a single measurement can never suffice to determine a
state. This leads at once to the important question: Can the
state function be inferred at all, even from a number of observa-
tions sufficient to determine all probabilities with respect to a
given observable (measurable quantity)? The answer is not an
unqualified yes. Let us take a simple example. We wish to
determine by observation the state function of an electron about
which nothing is known at present. For this purpose we might
decide to measure its energy. According to our preceding con-
siderations, we must not expect to find the same energy value
every time the measurement is repeated on the system in the
same state (supposing here that we have means of reproducing
the state; cf. below). Hence we are forced to determine how
many measurements yield the value E1, how many yield the
value E2 and so forth. If we perform altogether Iooo measure-
ments, Ioo of which have given the value E1, we say that the
probability of that occurrence is I/Io etc. Finally we shall be in
possession of a sequence of numbers pi, P2, ... , the probabilities
of the individual measured values, the totality of which consti-
tutes the probability distribution. The point is that from this
knowledge the state function can not be constructed. It involves,
not the p-values, but numbers characterized merely by the re-
quirement that the squares of their absolute values shall equal
the p's, and this requirement is not sufficient to specify these
numbers completely. Thus it would be impossible in our example
to predict the probable distribution of momentum measurements
on the basis of the results obtained with regard to the energy.4
This proposition is proved in detail in the appendix (AI).
   The situation here described is indeed disturbing; it would
seem to require that the description of states adopted in quantum
mechanics is forever aloof from physical experience, that states
can never be known completely through observation. But this
  4
    Excluding, of course, those special cases, like the free electron, where energy and
momentum operators commute.
                        H. Margenau                           343
is not the case, at least not in principle. Suppose, for instance,
that our energy measurements had all yielded the same value,
which is entirely possible. Then we should have known the
state function with sufficient completeness to predict the prob-
ability distribution with respect to every other type of measure-
ment. It is true in general that if a given kind of observation
does not spread, the statistical distribution governing the obser-
vations on all other quantities can be inferred, and this is the
only condition under which such an inference is possible. We are
now in possession of the clue which can ideally lead to an experi-
mental determination of any state function: If the particular
kind of observation which we happen to perform is seen after a
few trials to spread, we proceed to measure other quantities until
one is found with respect to which the state is "pure," i.e., which
yields the same value in all trials.
   But now we come to the troublesome question: does such a
quantity exist? Nobody knows. If this answer implies, in good
positivistic fashion, that such a quantity does not exist, then the
matter is settled for the time being: a state function can not in
general be found, or constructed, on the basis of measurements.
Such a position, by the way, is entirely tenable and does not
reflect in the least upon the usefulness or legitimacy of quantum
mechanics as a theory. But let us not dispense with this matter
too hastily. There are, after all, those who hold that the num-
ber 7rexisted before it was discovered.
   The question as to the existence of a quantity whose measure-
ments will not spread for an arbitrary state function resolves
itself on closer analysis into two; first, the mathematical one: does
an arbitrary function of a fixed number of variables, which satis-
fies certain (boundary) conditions, possess an operator with re-
spect to which it is an eigenfunction? second, is it possible to
associate with every operator an operation which could be re-
garded as a measurement of a physical quantity? It is clear that
the number of possible mathematical operators as well as the
number of physical operations is infinite, so that there is an un-
limited choice. While it is at present a pious hope that the diffi-
cult program of correlating functions, operators, and physical
344      Critical Points in Physical Theory
operations in the unique manner here required will ever be carried
out, there is at least no basic obstacle in the way of its execution.
The fact is of course that the interest of physicists has been
limited to relatively few physical quantities which can be repre-
sented by about half a dozen different operators, and that research
has been remarkably successful despite this limitation. On the
whole it seems not unreasonable to answer the question at the
beginning of this paragraph in the affirmative, and thereby to
provide an ideal basis for linking states with observations.
   The first axiom had to do with the definition of states; the
second dealt with the relation between states and experience and
involved several matters which can easily give rise to misunder-
standing. We now take up the thread of the original discourse
and introduce the third and final axiom. It is clear and concise
and requires very little comment. It amounts to a recipe for
determining what possible values any given physical quantity
can assume when a measurement is made. In barring much, it
imposes a most daring restriction upon experience and exposes
itself to exceedingly severe tests. Suffice it to say that it has
successfully survived many tests and may be said to be in good
standing. The structure of this axiom is mathematical; it states
that only eigenvalues of operators associated with physical
observables can appear as the results of measurements. But a
complete technical understanding of these matters is hardly
necessary for the subsequent discussion.
       II. CLOSER ANALYSIS    OF THE MEANING     OF STATES

   We now leave aside the factual content of the postulates and
propose to view them-as far as we are able to do so-from the
vantage point of the philosopher. At the same time we are
entering upon controversial ground. States were said to be
(represented by) certain functions having an indirect but defi-
nitely specifiable connection with possible experiences. They
served to describe the behavior of physical systems. Let us be
more precise and examine whether these states describe physical
systems or merely our knowledgeof physical systems. The answers
to several controversial questions depend on the stand which is
                        H. Margenau                           345
 taken on this particular issue as will appear later, and it is very
 surprising that the importance of a clear-cut decision in this
matter has rarely been recognized even by the most authoritative
 writers. It is difficult to find an article in which the author,
 though evidently speaking from one point of view, does not
 somewhere permit himself at least a verbal lapse toward the other.
A middle stand (or shall we say seat, for this is by far the most
 comfortable position) is taken by many who pronounce the ques-
 tion as meaningless and consequently recognize no distinction.
This possibility must also be investigated.
    The contrast between physical systems and our knowledge of
physical systems is not as deep as the epistomological difference
between realism and subjective idealism, and the philosopher who
hopes for a decision between these issues from any physical theory
will be disappointed. No physical theory is tied to any such
metaphysical basis. Classical physics made sense to Newton as
it did to Berkeley, the only difference being that Newton thought
of physical systems as objective entities transcending conscious-
ness, while Berkeley regarded them as existing within conscious-
ness, but nevertheless "existing." So in quantum mechanics:
whether we place physical systems outside ourselves and contrast
them with conscious knowledge of them in a fundamental epis-
temological sense, or whether we recognize, within consciousness,
a difference between knowable systems and knowledge of them,
the systems themselves being merely constructs-the choice does
not matter as long as we maintain an intelligible distinction be-
tween the concept of system and that of knowledge about the
system. This distinction, it seems, is so thoroughly ingrained in
our thinking, so vividly alive in our intuition that it would be
difficult to eradicate even if there were logical or metaphysical
grounds for doing so. Or must we, after all, yield to superior
logic and admit that the distinction fails? If the electron has no
transcendental "reality" but is only a construct with which we
operate, does it not, as a concept, become identical with our
knowledge, i.e., awareness of it? It seems that, unless we are
willing also to confuse the existence of the solution of an equation
with our knowledge of that solution, the answer must be no. But
346     Critical Points in Physical Theory
there are in many cases definite rules for telling whether a solu-
tion exists, while to know the solution would be an altogether
different matter. Logically, we feel that the distinction must be
maintained, and this is fortunate, for otherwise logic would pain-
fully contradict our intuition.
   Having cleared away the metaphysical underbrush we may now
proceed with greater ease. Does the quantum mechanical state
function refer to the system, or does it describe our knowledge?
Planck, who according to his recent writings professes a very
wholesome realism, would seem to favor the first alternative.
The spirit of Dirac's writings, although they contain no specific
pronouncements, indicates that his states refer to systems apart
from our awareness. Schr6dinger, on the other hand, speaks
occasionally of the state function as the "maximal sum of knowl-
edge," indicating perhaps a preference for the second view. Bohr
and Heisenberg mention frequently the conflict between observer
and observed object with their unavoidable interaction and
thereby presumably express themselves in favor of an objective
world, the properties of which are to be described according to the
first view. But this last diagnosis may be in error.
   Let it be said at once that neither position can be wrong in the
sense that it leads to erroneous consequences if carried through
correctly. We mean here consequences of a positively verifiable
character. The logical implications are in some respects very
different, and this is particularly true about the meaning ot
probability in the two cases. But before examining the necessi-
ties of interpretation enforced by each of the two points of view,
it may be well to pause for a moment and to see if one of them is
not more plausible, or more in line with other accepted doctrines
than the other.
   In common language, which after the foregoing orienting excur-
sions may perhaps be used without fear of misinterpretation, the
distinction in question is simply that between physical objects
and the observer's knowledge about physical objects. In classical
mechanics the distinction was extremely sharp, and it was sup-
posed that the two, besides being generically different as logical
entities, were independent even in a physical sense. States
                         H. Margenau                            347
 clearly referred to the objects themselves, positions and momenta
 were their direct properties. The objectivity of states had its
 culminating expression in the equations of motion, which were
 understood to imply actual space-time propagation of systems.
This propagation took place according to rigid laws independently
of the observer's knowledge.
    Such an extreme view regarding the independent objectivity of
physical states cannot be carried over into quantum mechanics;
 there must at least be a shift of emphasis. One of the great
discoveries at the beginning of the present era in physics was the
recognition that objects and knowledge are related, because the
classical notion of ideally unlimited accuracy of experimental
devices failed and made classical knowledge intrinsically impos-
sible. Hence if the view of objectivity be adopted, its classical
meaning must be modified to this extent. It goes without saying
that states must also be stripped of all impediments pertaining
to sensual perception, and thought of entirely in abstracto. Psy-
chological objections to this procedure, frequently raised by mem-
bers of the older school, are of no particular moment in this con-
nection, for it is not a matter of convenience, but one of logic
which concerns us here.
   The objective view of quantum mechanical states is enormously
strengthened by the fact that states develop in time according
to a definite differential equation (Schr6dinger's) which has a
form not unlike the equations of motion in classical physics. It
is true that the simple interpretation of spatio-temporal propaga-
tion presents its difficulties or is at any rate no longer intuitively
direct, but the fact remains that there are determinate changes
in time which are difficult to correlate with simultaneous changes
in the observer's knowledge because they seem enforced dynami-
cally and not psychologically.
   There are further points which may be cited as evidence for the
plausibility of the objective view. We have seen (third axiom)
that quantum mechanics makes very drastic positive predictions
about possible experience, predictions which do not resemble laws
of thought and give an impression of utter independence of human
knowledge. To be sure this axiom has little to do with the
348     Critical Points in Physical Theory
definitionof states, but it does indicate that part at least of the
new formalismconcernsitself with matters that are thoroughly
factual in a sense distinct from mere knowledge. And if this is
true there seems to be little motive for insisting that another
concept, that of state, should deal not with factual objects but
with our modes of awareness.
  It was pointed out that classicalmechanicsin all its structure
suggests the objective view. Now it is possible to show that, if
applied to large scale bodies, quantum mechanics leads to the
same physical consequencesas does the classical theory. The
latter may be said to be the analyticalcontinuationof the former
in the field of ordinary experience. This is felt to be a very
happy circumstancewhich bespeaks the unity of physics and
encouragesthe hope that some day a universal theory may be
achieved, a hope which at present animates the researchesof
Einstein. In view of the analytical smoothnesswith which the
two disciplines join it might seem unwise to maintain in one a
fundamentalattitude which has no place in the other and which
would constitute a conceptualbreak at the passage from one to
the other. This argument, too, would suggest an adoption of
the objective view. But it should be observed that the points
here presentedcan aim at no more than plausibility,and do not
render the opposite view basically untenable.
   The oppositeview, to be called for brevity the subjectiveview,
is the one whichholds that state functionsdescribeour knowledge
of physical systems. It is psychologicallymotivated by the sig-
nificant observation that the independenceof classical states is
a fallacy. It springsfromthe desireof makinga cleanbreakwith
erroneousnotions and thereforeemphasizesan opposite extreme.
Let us first see what can possibly be meant by it. Obviouslyit
can not mean that the state function describes the observer's
awareness,his momentarystate of mind, and the changes in it
which occur in time. It is clear that all this dependson factors
far removed from the field of physics. Quantum mechanics
certainlydoes not have the aim of convertingphysicsinto a highly
expressionistictype of psychology. Although proponentsof this
view often employ ambiguouslanguage, what they wish their
                               H. Margenau                                     349
states to represent is not actual knowledge but potential knowl-
edge. The state function is to be regarded as a convenient carrier,
a symbol for the sum total of all that knowledge which the specu-
lative observer can possibly accumulate, at any instant, with the
use of all his resources. It may coincide with that knowledge at
certain moments of very acute awareness, that is, when the inves-
tigator has made all possible measurements and all calculations
pertaining thereto. No one can deny that this view, even in its
extreme, has in it a trace of objectivism because of the admission
that states refer to potential and not to actual knowledge, and
this is a feature which makes it slightly inconvenient to have to
defend the subjective position; it demands constant vigilance lest
an inadvertant lapse should contradict the initial tenet.
   The chief virtue of the standpoint under discussion is that it
provides complete safety against positivistic attacks. Its tenant
can justly pride himself in being under no obligation to transcen-
dental agencies for transmitting his knowledge, for he deals with
nothing but knowledge which he may believe if he wishes to be
generated within his mind. He may wonder perhaps why the
laws which govern the evolution of potential knowledge operate
with almost dynamic regularity, but this is after all no greater
a miracle than the existence of rigid laws in an objective world.
   The author has not succeeded in bringing to light any further
merits of the latter, subjective view. While admitting its pos-
sibility on logical grounds, he wishes to record his preference for
the former. This preference is partly based on reasons so far
presented, partly on considerations of the meaning of probability
peculiar to the two attitudes which will now be discussed.
   The contrast between objectivity and subjectivity of states
has an interesting analogue in the theory of probability,6 which,
as the reader very likely recalls, can be formulated either as an
empiricalfrequency theoryor as a subjective("a priori") discipline.
   In the former case, probability is defined as the limit, with
increasing number of trials, of the relative frequencies of an occur-
rence.8 Probability can be ascertained only empirically, by con-
   6 The philosophical
                        consequences of the quantum mechanical probability formulation
have been stated clearly by F. S. C. Northrop, Philosophy of Science, I936, pp. 215 if.
   6 For a detailed discussion see
                                   Lindsay and Margenau, p. I6i, Wiley and Sons, 1936.
350          Critical Points in Physical Theory
tinued observations. There are difficulties inherent in this
conception,especiallymathematicalones connectedwith the exist-
ence of the limit, but it seems that they can be removed. The
conceptionhas, however, the great advantageof being applicable
to all scientificproblemswhich call for the use of probabilities.
Notable also is the circumstancethat it permits probabilitiesto
be measurednumericallyto any desiredapproximationin accord-
ance with their definition. It is not possible, on this view, to
predict probabiliticsby a priori considerations peculiar to the
probabilitycalculus, although this may in many cases be done
tentatively by introducingspecial physical theories. (Thus the
probabilitiesfor tossing heads or tails can be ascertaineddirectly
only by making a large number of trials. Yet there is nothing
to prevent us from consideringthe coin as a physical body, then
making the assumption of symmetrical mass distribution and
supposinga plausibledistributionof initial conditionsas well as a
sufficient variety of them-a basis on which the probabilities
may be computedby means of a physical theory.)
   But there are cases to which the empiricalprobabilityconcep-
tion can not be applied. They constitute the class of all proposi-
tions about single events,such as the statement: it will probably
rain tomorrow. Such statements have the peculiarity that no
unambiguousmeasure can be attached to the probability in-
volved, except that, on retrospect, the probability is one if the
event has happened,zero if it has not taken place. These cases
are covered by what is usually termed the subjectiveor a priori
probabilityformulationmentioned above. Analysis shows that
it always refers to intensityof beliefof an individual or to con-
ventional beliefs of groups. Attempts are often made to assign
a numericalestimate to such probabilities. In doing so, one of
two courses is usually employed. Thinking again of the state-
ment: it will probablyrain tomorrow,a measurecan be obtained
by studying the weather today and then referringto a recordof
meteorologicaldata for this locality7 and finding the relative
numberof cases in which rain has ensuedon a day prior to which
the weather agreedwith today's. But in this procedurewe are
  7   For an analytic discussion of the meaning of measurement cf. the next section.
                        H. Margenau                            35
clearly giving up the subjective idea of probability as well as the
individuality of the day "tomorrow," which now merges in the
statistical aggregate of days characterized by the property that
the previous day had weather like the present. Proponents of
the subjective view are not always aware of the necessity of a
reversion to the frequency concept, typified by the preceding
example, which necessity invariably arises when any scientific
application is to be made. The other course sometimes adopted
for making a priori probabilities statable in numerical terms is
to count causes or reasons for or against the occurrence of the
event in question. Thus it might be said: 7 causes indicate rain
tomorrow, only 2 indicate clear weather, therefore the probability
that it will rain is 7/9. But who can determine the relative
weights of these causes, or who can say that I have counted the
correct number of them (for any given cause can be split up into
a number of causes)? In some instances one can say: 7 available
theories favor the event, 2 theories oppose it, hence the proba-
bility is 7/9. But then, what are we to do with that infinite
number of theories, also favoring or opposing the event, which
have not yet been invented, or what are the antecedent probabili-
ties of being true for those that have been taken into account?
We return therefore to the initial statement regarding subjective
probabilities and phrase it thus: Probabilities referringto intensity
of belief, or degree of completenessof knowledgeregarding a single
event, are intrinsically unmeasurable.
   Now it is a fact that the student who holds the objective view
concerning states is practically forced to couple it with the em-
pirical frequency concept of probabilities, whereas those who
incline toward the subjective interpretation of states almost
invariably adopt the subjective idea of probability also. The
internal compulsion for this alignment is unmistakable. A per-
son willing to assign to a physical system a state independent of
his cognition would find it natural also to allow this state numer-
ous modes of empirical manifestation, whereas the knower of a
subjective state has room only for greater or lesser certainty of
his knowledge. He would say: Now I have made a calculation
which makes my knowledge of the electron's momentum certain
352      Critical Points in Physical Theory
to the degree 1/2, my knowledge of its position certain to a similar
degree; now I have measured the electron's momentum and I
know it with complete certainty, while my knowledge of its posi-
tion is now extremely uncertain, etc. In his opinion this is
describedin the changeswhich the state functionundergoes.
  It must already be apparent that the choice of interpretation
of physical axioms is not always a matter of logic, but often of
personal preference. So here the correlation of views is not
entirely rigid. A mixture is possible in the sense that the last
namedindividualmight, whilemaintaininghis fundamentalstand
with regard to the subjective characterof states, nevertheless
submit his knowledgeto experimentaltests and thus affix to it
an indirectobjective measureof certainty. But the view which
then results is needlesslycomplicatedand approachesthe former
in all essential respects. For this reasonit does not seem worth
recommending. The possiblenumberof combinationsof aspects
so far presentedin this report is alreadyso large that some cur-
tailment becomesimperative.
       III.   THE STATISTICAL   CHARACTER OF PREDICTIONS

   The considerationsin this section are irrelevantto the subjec-
tivist who has adopted the a priori probabilityidea. We wish
here to deal with the question: granted that the probability
predictionswhich arise in quantummechanicsreferto a statistical
aggregate in the spirit of the frequency theory, what type of
aggregateis meant? It is clear that it must be an aggregateof
physicalobservations,indeedin the ideal limit an infinitenumber
of observations,or measurements.7 Surveyingthe field, we find
after little search that three types of collectionsof observations
present themselves:
   I. Numerous simultaneous observations of a given quantity
        when the system is in a given state;
   2. Numerous observations,or a single collective observation,
        on a physical assemblageof many similar systems in the
         same state;
  3.  Numerous     repeated observationson the same system, the
         state in questionbeingrepreparedbeforeeachobservation.
                        H. Margenau                           353
The first of these is only a speculative possibility, for there are
many types of observation which can be carried out but once and
permit no simultaneity with any other measurements even of the
same type. Hence our choice is reduced to possibilities (2)
and (3).
   The contrast between these is best illustrated by an example.
Let the state function for the system "electron" be such as to
imply: the probability of observing its position in a certain speci-
fied volume is i/Io. According to (2) this means that if I take
 Iooo electrons all in the state under consideration (we suppose at
present that I know how to prepare this state) Ioo of these elec-
trons will lie in the specified volume. According to (3) it means
that if an electron is in the state in question, I may find it in the
specified volume or not, but if I prepare the state Iooo times, I
shall find it there approximately Ioo times. In (2) the proba-
bility aggregate is a collection of observations on a physical
assemblage, in (3) it is a collection of observations on an ideal
ensemble consisting of an infinite repetition of a set of physical
operations. The same fundamental distinction occurs at one
other place in theoretical physics, namely in the approaches to
thermodynamics by Darwin and Fowler on one hand, and by
Gibbs on the other.
   The decision here to be made clearly involves the question
whether or not quantum mechanical reasoning is at all applicable
so single systems. If it is not, (3) must be abandoned. Other-
wise both might be acceptable, but (2) might be a consequence
of (3). Now it is certainly true that in most physical observa-
tions dealing with atomic phenomena indirect means are em-
ployed, and the number of systems affected is very great indeed.
The energy of an atom can be measured for instance by allowing
it to radiate and then analyzing the radiation. But when the
spectrum is to be photographed the radiation from a single atom
is far too weak to register itself. Hence a great number of atoms
must be admitted. It is found that the spectrum always contains
many different frequencies. Does each atom emit all these fre-
quencies, or does each emit a single frequency, the different ones
coming from different atoms? Experiment does not provide the
354      Critical Points in Physical Theory
answer directly, but we shall find it by considering another
situation.
   Quantum mechanics predict for the coordinate (probability)
distribution of an electron which has passed through a narrow slit,
a diffraction pattern, i.e. well defined maxima and minima in a
plane behind the slit. If, in order to test this result, a beam
containing many electrons is used, the pattern can be observed
by means of appropriate devices, like ionization chambers. By
this experiment the question whether a large number of electrons
is necessary to produce the probability pattern can not be decided.
It is feasible, however, to make the electron beam very weak, so
weak in fact that the electrons constituting it are widely separated
in space and cannot be supposed to interact with one another.
Under that condition the predicted distribution is also observed,
but now as a frequency distribution among the positions of cap-
ture of the individual electrons, the captures being altogether
independent events. The conclusion is therefore inescapable that
the statistical feature of this process is attached to the individual
electron, and that, even if the same state were prepared again
for the same electron, it, too, would show a dispersion of positions.
And this means that quantum theory deals with an aggregate
characterized by (3), not necessarily by (2).
   Several other experiments could be adduced to confirm the
proposition that the theory is applicable to single systems. We
shall content ourselves with one further point. It is well known,
and demonstrable in many ways, that a light signal which is
emitted in a very short time cannot be monochromatic but must
have a wide spread in frequencies. Modern theory bids us con-
sider the light flash as a photon, a single photon if it is sufficiently
weak, and its frequencies as being proportional to energies. If
now that well-known fact is to be preserved, we must, in quantum
mechanics, associate many different energies with a single photon;
we must assume that a photon in a state defined by its sudden
generation must exhibit sometimes one, sometimes another energy
to the observer.
   We can now say what happens, presumably, when many atoms
emit a spectrum. One atom would generate the entire spectrum
                         H. Margenau                            355
if it were given sufficient time to register its radiation on a photo-
graphicplate. Of course a single photon would fall on only one
spot of the plate, but another photon would hit another spot,
and so on, until finally the whole plate is blackenedin accordance
with predicted probabilities. The suppositionis that the atom
is returnedto the same state beforeeach act of emission,and this
may be done, for example, by exposing it constantly to another
suitable sourceof radiation.
   It is clear, then, that the statistical aggregatein question can
not be defined by (2) at the exclusionof (3). The latter is cer-
tainly a correct interpretation. On the other hand, no one will
deny that possibility (2) is somehow more graphic and more
plausible. The reason for this is not far to seek. It is simply
because the older classical statistical theories have familiarized
physicists as well as philosopherswith the notion of assemblages
(e.g. gases) which exhibit probabilityfeatures only by virtue of
possessinghosts of constituents. There every constituentobeys
strict dynamicallaws, statistics arisefromour ignoranceof certain
parameters,such as the initial positions and momenta of all the
molecules,and the argumentgoes that if these parameterswere
known the use of probabilitieswould be unnecessary. In quan-
tum mechanics, as we have shown, the situation is altogether
different;no searchfor hiddenparametersin the ordinarydynami
cal sense can ever undo the probabilitythesis-unless the theory
itself is abandonedor essentially modified. This follows simply
from the fact that in quantum theory the single system, which
is the carrierof the statistical aggregate,can by definitionnot
be further decomposedinto entities with unknown properties.
   If (3) definesthe aggregateto whichthe theoreticalprobabilities
refer,what about the aggregate(2)? A moment'sreflectionwill
show, we believe, that it is a special case of the former,provided
we are willing to make a slight but very significantchange. In
(3) we spokeof repeatedobservationson the samesystem. There
are many reasons for believing that one ultimate system, like
an electronor a protonor a neutron,is physicallyindistinguishable
from another system of the same kind. Thereforeit seems per-
missible to loosen the strictness of the word same into a sort of
356      Critical Points in Physical Theory
of promiscuous identity, designating by the same system merely
a system of the same kind. The collective measurement on a
physical assemblage of similar systems, contemplated in (2), may
then be regarded as a sequence of almost simultaneous measure-
ments on the "same" system in the new sense of (3). Item (2)
thus becomes a special case of item (3). But item (3) expresses
the basic issue.
                IV. THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENTS

   A. Meaning of measurement. The usual way to theorize about
measurements is to select, for no obvious reason at all, a specific
type of experiment, analyze it very fully, and then generalize the
results without inquiring very much whether these results fit the
multitude of other measurements that might be considered. The
experiments chosen are mostly imaginary ones, a feature which
of course detracts in no way from the value of the example as
long as the imaginary procedures are permitted by known physical
laws. Heisenberg's experiment for determining the position or
the momentum of a particle by means of a y-ray microscope, and
Bohr's slit experiment have perhaps borne the brunt of this
procedure. Not as common but yet quite popular, particularly
among mathematicians, is a mode of inquiry which starts with
quantum mechanical theory, considers what ideally a measure-
ment ought to be, and then manages to find one which fits the
prescription. In studying J. von Neumann's excellent book8 on
the foundations of quantum mechanics we have had the impres-
sion that this method was being employed. What makes the
method seemingly successful is the wealth of existing types of
measurement; it insures that any prescription can be filled.
   Let us here try to avoid these procedures, let us begin by ana-
lyzing empirically, and on a sufficiently broad basis, what the
physicist means when he says he makes a measurement. The
breadth of the issue is at first bewildering, but it seems that the
following definition covers it completely: a measurement is any
physical operation by means of which the numerical value of a
  8 von Neumann, Mathematische
                                 Grundlagen der Quantum mechanik.
                       H. Margenau                          357
physical quantity can be determined. This wording is not meant
to suggest that physical quantities are always or sometimes
"real," or that they possess at any instant unique numerical
values. We know that they do not, and we refuse as physicists
to join the irrelevant altercations about reality. What matters
is that there are generally accepted physical operations whose
outcome is associated with a certain number, and this number is
commonly referred to as the value of some quantity. All dangers
are avoided if the reader thinks of "value of a quantity" as a
figure of speech. The definition shows that a measurement is
different from a physical operation and an observation, measure-
ment being more specific than either of the last terms, while an
observation differs from an operation in being a purely passive
act of perception. A measurement usually consists of an opera-
tion plus an observation, but this need not be the case.
   The present purpose is best served by leaving aside altogether
measurements on systems of the immediately perceptible domain,
i.e., on large scale bodies, and to concentrate our attention at
once upon the more problematical part of our question, the
measurement on atomic systems, atomic in the original sense of
the word. Our main endeavor is to show how rich is the field of
possible procedures.
   The simplest quantity to be measured on any system is perhaps
its position. Among the possible ways of effecting a position
measurement one seems to be most commonly employed: the
method of absorption. If the system is an electron, Faraday
cages or similar devices might be stationed at various places,
and the place of the one which registers is the place where the
electron has impinged. If the system is a photon, a photographic
plate is used, and the place of the photon's impact is indicated
by certain chemical changes. (We are not concerned at present
with limits of accuracy of measurements.) Next let us turn to
the momentum of a single system, say an electron or a photon.
Perhaps the simplest way of measuring it is to allow the particle
to be diffracted by a suitable grating and then to determine its
impact on a plate, i.e. its position in the manner just discussed.
The energy can of course be found in a similar fashion. These
358     Critical Points in Physical Theory
experiments are more complicated than the foregoing ones inas-
much as they require the addition of another stage or operation
to the position measurement, and this seems to be a typical fea-
ture of most measurements. It is to be observed that the phe-
nomenon of diffraction alone is not a momentum measurementin
accordance with our definition, for unless it is coupled with the
absorption of the photon on a plate no number can be ascer-
tained. We deem this fact of some importance despite the care-
lessness with which the matter is often treated, and we shall
have occasion to return to it in another connection.
   It would be folly to suppose that all physicists will consider
the simple measurements here chosen for discussion as more basic
or more representative than others. The point to be made is
that they are bonafide measurements of very common occurrence.
They present an interesting feature: after the measurement the
system can no longer be said to be present as an identity. This
is particularly true in the case of the photon which after absorp-
tion ceases to function as a physical system altogether, while the
electron may in a sense be said to be "still there," but has become
one of a large assemblage of indistinguishable electrons inside a
metal. We note, then, that some measurements annul a system,
others render them of no physical interest with respect to the
measurement in question. Further examples of measurements
which annul the system would be the determination of the place
of a neutron (by nuclear capture) and certainly that of a neutrino,
if this should prove to be a useful construct. Cases of this type
arise of necessity when systems are introduced which can be
created or destroyed.-Throughout this discussion the language
of classical physics has been used. In terms of it we might state
the matter thus: the classical fate of systems during measurement
is not describable in a uniform way; an attempt to describe it
completely would introduce irrelevancies. We shall see that
quantum mechanics, with its altered definition of states, relieves
us of all embarrassment in this connection.
   The number of legitimate measurements in physics is theoreti-
cally unlimited, as is easily seen from the fact that every new dis-
covery, every new verified theory provides new opportunities for
                       H. Margenau                           359
measuring old quantities. For instance, a Wilson cloud track
would not have been a means for measuring the energy of an
a-particle before Wilson's discovery of the condensation of water
vapor on gaseous ions. Nor would Heisenberg's y-ray microscope
have been a suitable device for measuring an electron's position
before the Compton effect was known. What is now termed a
measurement would then have been merely an experiment. In
view of the derivability of new kinds of measurement from special
discoveries, the temptation is strong to standardize the theory
of measurement by picking out a certain basic group, perhaps to
be called the primary group, on which may then be built an
unlimited system of secondary measurements. Sucn an analysis
would be extremely desirable for logical as well as linguistic
reasons, but will not be attempted here because the selection of
primary measurements would be an arbitrary undertaking.
   Besides measurements, there is another very important class
of physical operations: the preparation of states. We are not at
this moment interested in such operations, but we do not wish
measurements to be confused with them. For example, when
electrons are made to pass into a magnetic field, a new state with
respect to electron spin has been produced, but the spin has not
been measured.
   A word might be said about the compatibility of measurements.
The literature abounds with statements to the effect that simul-
taneous measurements on complementary quantities (in Bohr's
sense) are incompatible. If this is interpreted as meaning that
they cannot be made the statement is either without point or it
is wrong. For in that class of measurements which annul a
system no simultaneous ones are possible at all and the proposi-
tion seems void. On the other hand there is nothing to prevent
an inquisitive observer from illuminating an electron simultane-
ously with hard and soft quanta, and if, according to the orthodox
view, the hard quantum on being scattered tells the electron's
position and the soft one its momentum (Doppler effect), two
"incompatible" measurements have been performed. We know
that the results are not to be trusted and that, on repetition, the
measured values would scatter greatly, but the example does
360        Critical Points in Physical Theory
constitute an exception to the general claim of incompatibility
for (simultaneous) complementary measurements. What the
phrase should mean is that such measurements have a predictable
spread.9
   There appears to be a tendency to regard quantities of a physi-
cal system which can be measured collectively without spread in
the previously defined statistical sense, as real quantities, others
being unreal. This is the most peculiar use of a metaphysical
term, a term which would be objectionable in physics even if it
were used more correctly. It springs very clearly from a failure
to abandon classical notions where they should be dismissed. In
classical mechanics, when a definite ultimate state is given, an
elementary quantity which refuses to yield the same value every
time it is measured is a self-contradiction, is unimaginable. In
quantum mechanics such things do occur, and the success of the
formalism has forced many classically-minded physicists to accept
it. But their displeasure still prevents them from acquiescing
completely, and they feel better when they are able to give things
a private little knock by calling them unreal.
   B. Measurementand Uncertainty. The mathematical meaning
of the "uncertainty principle" is perfectly clear and requires no
comment. To wit: when any state function is given, the uncer-
tainty-a term which has no precise accepted significance but
can be defined suitably-may be computed numerically. Am-
biguity prevails only as to the interpretation of the numbers
which so result.
   Here again account has to be taken of the two possible mean-
ings of probability. On the subjective view, the uncertainty
affects a single measurement, but it can in that case be nothing
more than a qualitative subjectiveestimate, clad in numericalform
but incapable of verification, of the assurance with which certain
results may be expected. Every other interpretation would at
once revert to the position which envisages the single measure-
ment as the constituent of a statistical aggregate, and this would
   9 In
        making such predictions the exact meaning of the word "simultaneous" must be
known. The results of the measurements depend on the order in which they are per-
formed because the operators in this case are not permutable.
                         H. Margenau                            361
necessarily be the one discussed in section III, (3). The usual
statement according to which an uncertainty represents an error
is meaningless on this view, for a single measurement contains
no error, or, more explicitly, no verifiable error. The present
position, if maintained consistently, is by no means illogical; but
it fails to utilize a wealth of formal structure potentially present
in quantum theory.
   If, on the other hand, the probability concept is accepted in
its empirical sense, uncertainty can truly be interpreted as an
error. The uncertainty principle (for the sake of definiteness let
us think of it in the form Ap Aq _-)         then relates the spread,
                                       4"/
Ap, occurring in numerous momentum measurements on similarly
prepared systems, to the spread Aq in corresponding position
measurements. On this view the principle becomes far more
explicit, it exposes itself in a simple way to empirical verification,
which, by the way, lends it the strongest support. The inequality
sign appearing in the usual form of the relation, or the sign -
which is also frequently used, does not imply that Ap or Aq are
not known with precision; indeed in any given case both Ap and
Aq can be computed exactly from a knowledge of the state func-
tion; and the computed values are independent of the kind of
measurements to be used for their determination.
   Most physicists consider it very important to secure a plausible
classical explanation of the uncertainty relations, which funda-
mentally are nothing more than a by-product of the quantum
mechanical description of nature. There is indeed no harm in
seeking such an explanation, but in doing so one should be aware
that the procedure involves basically a fusion (and often a con-
fusion) of incongruous physical concepts: the classical and the
quantum mechanical ideas of a state. In this connection it is
well to remember that the uncertainty relations were implicitly
used before they were discovered. The common claim is that
they express the uncontrollable error introduced into physical
description by the interaction between system and measuring
devices in the act of measurement. The physical facts under-
lying this assertion are undoubtedly correct, but the statement is
362       Critical Points in Physical Theory
unfortunate in the light of a more meticulous analysis of the
meaning of measurement. We have seen that the theoretical
uncertainties are completely independent of the choice of measur-
ing devices, whereas measurements affect a system in a perplexing
variety of ways. Uncertainties are in a very definite sense
inherent in a state even before measurements have been made.
The correct statement therefore is that the uncertainty relations
reflect the interaction betweensystem and apparatus when the state
is being prepared, not when it is measured. A closer inspection
of the arguments presented in the literature for the former loose
assertion reveals that its defenders perhaps unwittingly mean the
latter. Logically, however, there is a difference, for the former
position inevitably leads to a theory which counts the disturbing
interactions twice, once in the preparation of the state, once in
its measurement. What quantum mechanics actually does is to
stop all inquiry at the act of measurement.
   We feel that the matter is really quite simple and that most
argumentation on this issue has resulted from a failure to define
concepts clearly. The most common artificial complication arises
in this way. Numerous measurements (not all) have of course
the property of preparing a new state, a fact which is of no interest
if I agree to regard the act in question as a measurement. If,
however, by a mental lapse I forget to efface all interest after this
event and continue to question what happens, then I have con-
tradicted the original premise according to which I was making a
measurement and am regarding the act as an operation preparing
a state. The practically-minded physicist will probably regard
these distinctions with mild amusement-but we are, after all,
dealing with the finer points of modern theory.
   The problem of causality, which naturally raises its head at
this place, has been dealt with previously10 from this point of
view. We have no cause to modify the conclusions then pre-
sented.
   C. Does a measurementproduce an eigenstate? The reader will
recall that an eigenstate of an observable quantity is a state for
  10H. Margenau, Journal of Phil. of Science, 1, 133 (I934).
                            H. Margenau                                  363
which the measurementof a singlevalue of that observablequan-
tity can be predictedwith certainty. In other words, the prob-
ability distributionwith respect to that observable,which can
be computed from the state function, degeneratesinto zeros for
all values but one. Now orthodoxtheoryclaims"that a measure-
ment, performedupon a system in an arbitrarystate, immediately
and suddenly converts this state into an eigenstate with respect
to the quantitymeasured. This changeis held to be indescribable
by any theory and essentiallyunpredictable. Troublesomeques-
tions as to the length of time which must be allowed for this
sudden change, whether it takes place discontinuouslyin zero
time or whetherit is somehowrelatedto the kind of measurement
enacted, have already arisen but are left unansweredbecause
quantum theory is felt to be not sufficientlycomplete to deal
with them. This doctrinerecognizestwo possibleways in which
a state functionmay be altered;first, continuouslyin accordance
with the Schr6dingerequation, the change being uniquely pre-
dictable; second, in an unpredictableway when a measurement
is performed. The eigenstate thus generatedis of coursethe one
correspondingto that particularvalue of the observablewhich
the measurementhas yielded. On this theory of unpredictable
transitionsis often based the assertionthat quantummechanical
descriptionis an essentially acausalone.
   Let us view this matter in the light of the analysis conducted
in this paper. It is then perfectlyclear that our attitude here is
decidedby the fundamentalchoicemadewith respectto the inter-
pretationof states. If we adoptthe subjectiveview,accordingto
which a state function is a symbol merely for knowledge, and
couple it with the subjective view of probabilities-and only if
this choice is made-the theoryof acausaljumps is indeedcorrect,
for a measurementconverts uncertainknowledgeinto certainty.
It is interestingto observe that this change occurs as the result
of a single measurement. Thereforethe probabilityinterpreta-
tion attending the whole processmust be the one which endows
the probability of single events with meaning, and it entrains
   11Cf. for instance von Neumann, Mathematische
                                                 Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik,
Schr6dinger, Naturwissenschaften 23, 823 (I935).
364         Critical Points in Physical Theory
those consequences,such as lack of measurability,which we have
discussedin section II. We have already indicated that in our
opinion such consequences are unfortunate, but if they are
accepted,the orthodoxview is entirely logical.
  On the other hand, let us see what happens if we regardstates
in the objective sense, and measurements as revealing states in a
statistical manner, the statistical aggregate being the one exposed
in section III.        T'hetheoryof acausaljumps is then decidedlyto
be rejected. For in the first place a single measurement allows
no inferenceas to the state at all. In the second place, we have
seen that measurements,if describedin classicallanguage,affect
systems in such a largevariety of ways, sometimeseven annulling
them completely, that they cannot be said to producean eigen-
state of an observablein a uniformmanner. It is the great merit
of quantummechanicsthat it permitsa descriptionof experience
without forcingus to take account of the sometimes disastrous
resultsof a measurement. Classicalphysics requiredthe investi-
gator to be ever on the guard for disturbancesoccurringwhen he
made his measurements. He maintained his vigilance in the
mistaken belief that such disturbancescould be controlled, but
had to capitulate when this belief was shaken. The new theory
permitsus to forget these difficultiescompletelyby incorporating
a suitablecompensationmechanismin its fundamentalstructure:
the method of describing measurements statistically.        On the
objective view, the assertion that a measurementproduces an
eigenstate is preciselyas meaningfulas the contention that, after
crackingand eating a nut, I still have a nut, but in its cracked
and eaten state. In an earlier paper12the present attitude was
briefly formulated,but sufficientreasons for its acceptancewere
not given.
   Perhapsit is well to remarkin some detail on a few arguments
which often serve as a basis for maintainingthe objective view
of states, together with the theory of acausal transitions. One,
illustratedwith the use of an example,runs as follows:I wish to
measurethe state of polarizationof a photon, about which I know
  12H.
         Margenau, Phys. Rev., 49, 240 (1936).
                        H. Margenau                          365
nothing initially. For this purpose I send it through a Nicoll
prism, an analyzer. If it passes through I have made the measure-
ment, for I then know its plane of polarization to be the plane in
which the Nicoll transmits. But if I station another analyzer
immediately behind the first, with its axis parallel to that of the
first, I am absolutely certain that it will go through the second
Nicoll also. Hence the first measurement has produced an eigen-
state with respect to the photon's state of polarization. The
error lies in forgetting that I have not made a measurement until
I have ascertained, by catching the photon on a plate, that it
has gone through the Nicoll. The error is simple but essential,
it springs from a hazy conception of what is meant by a measure-
ment, and this, incidentally, is the cause of many similar dif-
ficulties.
   Occasionally one finds the position, already shown to be un-
tenable in section III, that quantum mechanics deals with actual
assemblages of similar systems, like a swarm of electrons, in some
state. If a measurement is then performed, a sub-assemblage is
selected from the former group of systems, this sub-assemblage
comprising all those individuals, which have the measured prop-
erty. It is this new, smaller assemblage to which the state func-
tion after the measurement refers, and this is clearly in an eigen-
state. So goes the contention. Three comments should be made
with regard to it: (I) quantum mechanics is capable of dealing
with single systems and is not limited to assemblages; (2) very
few measurements have the property of selecting sub-assemblages,
on which the above argument rests; (3) a state function in quan-
tum mechanics refers always to the same number of individual
systems, i.e., to the same assemblage. This argument is even
weaker than the foregoing one and is indeed also less common.
   The real backbone of the theory of acausal jumps is probably
to be found, however, in a peculiar mathematical attitude which
gives way to a tendency of securing physical counterparts to
mathematical notions whether these counterparts fit into the
physical scheme or not. To wit: the mathematical theory of
quantum mechanics is full of operators, that is, to every physical
observable there corresponds an operator. But very few of the
366     Critical Points in Physical Theory
available mathematical operators are accommodated in this way,
are ennobled by being physically established. There is in par-
ticular a very beautiful and general class of operator, the projec-
tion operator (terminology comes from the theory of Hilbert
space) which converts a function into what amounts to an eigen-
state-function. This operator fairly cries for physical accom-
modation. What is more suggestive than to associate it with
measurement in general? This correlation, once tentatively
made, finds support in the fact that there are, as we have seen,
some measurements which, if they are wrongly interpreted as
operations producing states, do produce known eigenstates.
Hence the theory which we are critizing. We have here encoun-
tered another example where a theoretical suggestion, supported
by a few empirical instances, is blindly generalized into an all-
embracing law.
   The view that a state function jumps unpredictably during
measurement may lead to monstrous consequences of which only
one will be considered. Unless a measurement is cleanly sepa-
rated from other physical operations-and this separation, as we
have seen, involves a rejection of the jump theory-one is induced
to reason as follows: a measurement is, after all, the result of an
interaction between the system and some physical apparatus.
If, then, this same physical process is allowed to take place but
without the understanding that it shall constitute a measurement,
the state function describing it will develop continuously in
accordance with the Schr6dinger equation; if the process is re-
garded as a measurement it will change abruptly and indeter-
minately. Where is the line to be drawn? One might for
instance be looking at a recording device and, while day-dream-
ing, fail to take conscious cognizance of the registration. All
physical processes, as the term is ordinarily interpreted, are the
same as if he were taking conscious notice of the result, but in
one case the state function develops continuously, in the other it
changes abruptly. This conclusion is clearly not interpretable
unless we are willing to say that the state function means knowl-
edge. If the absurdity is justified, as is sometimes done, by the
observation that processes in the human brain do matter and that
                                H. Margenau                             367
the ego is to be introduced into the scheme somewhere, the only
significant reply is, we believe, that quantum mechanics does not
as yet pretend to be a psychological theory. As such it would
have to show a little more competence in the purely psychological
realm. Again the solution of the apparent dilemma is perfectly
simple: There are no acausal transitions of states; if I consider
the experimental procedure as a measurement I should refrain
from talking about it as though it were not. I must then stop
my description of the state after taking cognizance of the meas-
ured value. On the other hand, if the procedure is not a measure-
ment I can certainly (at least in principle, actually the description
it very difficult and usually impossible) continue to trace the state
function as long as I desire in definite fashion; the registration
which has occurred incidentally in this procedure does not, as
we now know, determine the state function completely, nor could
it in general have been predicted from a complete knowledge of
the state function.
   Of some interest in the present context is a mathematical
process known as the "method of reduction of the wave packet."
Its exact nature will not be discussed in great detail.13 Its usual
application to systems containing two elementary particles makes
use of the "jump theory" in this way. The state function of the
pair is, by reason of a past interaction, such that it can not be
written as a product of two functions each containing the coor-
dinates of but one particle, but appears as a sum of such products.
When a measurement on one particle is made, the state function
corresponding to that particle is known: it represents the eigen-
state belonging to the measured value. But this function
appears in the original sum as multiplied by a coefficient which
contains only the coordinates of the other particle, and which
can therefore be regarded as its state function after the measure-
ment. Thus, it is contended, a measurement causes the origi-
nally mixed function to reduce itself suddenly to a simple form,
thus "resolving the wave packet."
   On the present view, no such event happens; it can only be
  13See the appendix, II, for those parts which are here of interest.
368      Critical Points in Physical Theory
shown-and this is done in the appendix"3-that there exists a
peculiar correlation between the probabilities for the various
results of measurements. It is this: When suitable measurements
on the two particles are made, the probability for the occurrence
of a pair of values is zero unless thepair is the one which corresponds
to the two eigenfunctions of the reduced package. The physical
consequences are the same as on the customary view, but the
result appears now in less metaphysical language. The method
of the reduction of the wave package remains in good practical
standing, only its interpretation         requires greater care.
   It is hoped that the analysis, which is herewith concluded,
may contribute toward a more precise understanding, a deeper
appreciation of the internal logical consistency, and a clearer
linguistic formulation, of recent physical theories.
                           APPENDIX
                        <
   I. The state function of the electron, if it were known, could be
expandedin terms of the eigenfunctionsktx,of any other operatorA,
as follows:
                                     F ax {x
                                   = E                                (I)
                                      x

The ax are complex numbers,to be interpretedas follows: the square
of the absolutevalue of any particularone, say ak,is equal to the prob-
ability that a measurementof A yields the kt eigenvalueAk.
   Supposenow that q is not known, but that all i ax 2 are known from
experimentson A. The value of every axis then uncertainwith respect
to a factor of absolute value i.    If we attempt to construct eq. (I) we
can at best only get

                           ?' =       ax ei x x                       (2)

with all the 6x'sunknown,except that they must be real.
  The important point is that (I) predicts a different probability
distribution for another observable with operator B, than does (2).
For if x, is the sequence of eigenfunctionsbelonging to B, then the
probability of measuring the eigenvalue Bk when the electron is in the
state 0 will be

                    j 4fXkdr = Eax
                                 f              txxkd                 (3)
                                H. Margenau                                 369
But when the system is in the state 4' which is experimentally indis-
tinguishable from ?, this probability is
                                   2
                       f ?     'dr =             axe'X          k
                                                               ^xdr          (4)

(3) and (4) are equal only under two conditions:
   (a) when all 6x are equal
   (b) when the sum in (4) reduces to a single term.
Case (a) is an accident which is not under our control. Case (b) can
arise in one of two ways: Either the integral fJxxkdr is zero for all
but one value of X. Then xk is essentially the same as one of the ,'s,
and we are measuring the observable A over again. It is small wonder
that we can predict what we already know! Or every ax is zero except
one. This is the situation discussed in the text. It means that the
first operator A was one for which the measurements did not spread.
   II. Let the state function after the interaction be

                              I(x1X2) =    E vx(X2) ux(xl)                   (5)
                                            X

Here xi and x2 denote the coordinates of the two particles, respectively;
ux is an eigenfunction belonging to the eigenvalue Ax of the operator A;
vx is (a constant times) an eigenfunction belonging to the eigenvalue Bx
of the operator B. A "biorthogonal" development like (S) is sometimes
possible,14it has been made the basis of certain metaphysical conclusions
by Einstein, Rosen and Podolskil5 which we shall not discuss further.'2
We are here not interested in other cases. The probability that a
simultaneous measurement of A on particle (I) and of B on particle (2)
shall yield the pair of values Ai and Bj is, by the principles of quantum
mechanics,

                             Jj | (xlx2) ui(xl) V*(X2)dxldx2
               =s       f  v
                        |X(X2)         v*(X2)dx2 f       ux(xi)u*(xi) dxl
                                                 2
                 = ]      (X)
                         vi(x2          2) dx2       = Caij,

  14Cf.
        Schr6dinger, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 31, .55, (I935).
  '6 Einstein, Rosen, and Podolski, Phys. Rev., 47, 777 (I935).
370         Critical Points in Physical Theory
where c is a constant and aij the Kronecker 8-function. We are sup-
posing for simplicity that all states occurring here are non-degenerate.
It is thus seen that the probability of measuring Ai and Bj is zero unless
i and j characterize two functions paired in (5). This is all that matters
in any application of the method of resolving the wave packet. The
conclusion that the state function makes an abrupt transition is quite
irrelevant and avoidable.
                                     REFERENCES
A. Einstein, B. Podolski, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev., 47, 777 (I935).
E. C. Kemble, Phys. Rev., 47, 973 (I935).
A. E. Ruark, Phys. Rev., 48, 466 (I935).
N. Bohr, Phys. Rev., 48, 696 (I935).
E. Schr6dinger, Naturwissenschaften, 23, 807 (I935).
E. Schr6dinger, Naturwissenschaften, 23, 823 (I935).
E. Schrodinger, Naturwissenschaften, 23, 844 (1935).
E. Schr6dinger,Proc. Camb.Phil. Soc., 31, 555 (I935).
H. Margenau, Phys. Rev., 49, 240 (1936).
W. H. Furry, Phys. Rev., 49, 393 (1936).

   Tale University,
   New Haven, Conn.
