On the Notions of Causality and Complementarity
Author(s): Niels Bohr
Source: Science, New Series, Vol. 111, No. 2873 (Jan. 20, 1950), pp. 51-54
Published by: American Association for the Advancement of Science
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1677100 .
Accessed: 07/05/2013 17:35

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.




                American Association for the Advancement of Science is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
                extend access to Science.




http://www.jstor.org




                             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 17:35:25 PM
                                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
January 20, 1950, VcxlX111                               SCIENCE                                                   51




On the Notions of Causalityand Complementarityl
Niels Bohr
Institutefor TheoreticvG
                       Physics,Universityof Copenhagen,Denmark

THE              CAUSALMODE of descriptionhas deep given an absolute content. Still, relativity theory,
            roots in our conscious endeavors to utilize which has endued classioal physies with unpreee-
            experience for practical adjustment to our dented unity and scope, has just through its elucida-
            environments,and is in this way inherently tion of the conditions for the unambiguoususe of
incorporatedin commonlanguage. By the guidance elementaryphysical conceptsalloweda conciseformu-
mrhich  analysis in terms of cause and effect has offered lation of tWeprinciple of causality along most gen-
in many fields of human knowledge,the principle of eral lines.
czeusalityhas evell come to stand as the ideal for sci-            However,a wholly new situation in physical scienae
entifie e2rplanation.                                            was created through the discovery of the universal
   In physics, causal deseription,originally adaptedto quantum of action, which revealed an elementary
She problems of mechanics,rests on the assllmption feature of "individuality"of atomic processesfar be-
that the lmowledgeof the state of a material system yond the old doetrine of the limited divisibility of
at a given time permits the prediction of its state at matter originally introduced as a foundation for a
any subsequenttim*e. Here, however,alreadythe defi- causal explanationof the speciSe properties of mat@-
nition of state requires special considerationand it rial substances. This novel feature is not only en-
need hardly be recalled that an adequateanalysis of tirely foreign to the classical theories of mechanies
mechanicalphenomena was possible only after the and electromagnetism,but is even irreconcilablewith
recognitionthat, in the accountof a state of a system the very idea of causality.
of bodies,not tnerelytheir locationat a given moment                In fact, the specificationof the state of a physical
but also tlleir velocities have to be included.                  system evidently cannot determinethe choice betwe¢n
   In elassical mechanics,the forces between bodies dififerentindividual proeesses of transition to other
were assumedto depend simply on the instantaneous states, and an account of quantumeffects must thus
positions and velocities; but the discovery of the re- basieally operate with the notion of the probabilities
tardationof electromagneticeffects made it necessary of occurrence of the difEerentpossible transition
to considerforce fields as an essential part of a phys- processes. We have here to do with a situationessen-
ical system, and to include in the dessription of the tially differentin characterfrom the recourseto sta-
state of the system at a given time the specificationof tistieal methodsin the practical dealing with compli-
these fields in every point of space. lCet, as is well eated systems that are assumedto obey laws of clas-
known,the establishmentof the differentialequations sical mechanies.
connecting the rate of variation of electromagnetic                 The e2rtentto which ordinaryphysical pictures fail
intensities in space and time has made possible a in accountingfor atolziiephenomenais strikinglyillus-
descriptionof electromagneticphenomenain complete traid by the well-knowndilemmaconcerningthe cor-
analogy to eausal analysis in meehanics.                         puseular and lvave properties of materialparticles as
   It is true that, from the point of view of relativistic well as of eleetromagneticradiation. It is further im-
argumentation,such attributes of physical objects as portant to realize that any determinationof Planek's
position and velocity of material bodies, and even constant rests upon the comparisonbetween aspects
electric or magneticfield intensities, can no longer be of the phenomenawhich-ean be deseribed only by
                                                                 means of pictures not combinableon the basis of
   1 The purpose of this article is to give a very brief surrey  classicalphysical theories. Thesetheoriesindeedrep-
of some epistemological problems rnise(l in atomic phyBics.
It was originally published in Dialectwa, InterIlational Ite-    resent  merely idealizations of asymptotic validity in
view of the Philosophy of }inoavledt,e, Editions elu Griffon, the limit where the actions involved in any stage of
NeucllAtel, Switrerland, Vol. 7/8 ( 1948 ), p. 319. A iuller     the analysis of the phenomena are large compared
account of the historical development, illustrated by typical
esnmples which have served to clarify tlle general principles,   with the elementaryquantum.
is inclll(led in a chapterzof All)ert Einstein: PhiZosopher-sci-    In this situation, we are £aced with the necessity
6ntist, being pllblished by The Lxbraryof Living Philosophers,
Inc., Eranston, Illinois, under the alitorship of Paul Arthur    of  a radical revision of the foundationfor description
Schilpp.                                                         and explanation of physieal phenomena. Eere, it




                          This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 17:35:25 PM
                                          All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
52                                                    SCIENCE                                  January 20, 1950, Vol. 111

must above all be recognizedthat, howeverfar quan- individualtransitionsbetweentwo states of the system
tum effects transcend the scope of classical physical or by making use of the so-calledwave equation,the
analysis, the accountof the experimentalarrangement solutions of which refer to these states and allow us
and the record of the observationsmust always be to derive probabilities for the transitions between
expressedin commonlanguagesupplementedwith the them.
terminology of classical-physics. This is a simple         The entire formalismis to be consideredas a tool
logical demand,since the word "experiment"can in for derivingpredictions,of definiteor statisticalchar-
essencebe used only in referring to a situation where acter, as regardsinformationobtainableunder experi-
we can tell others what we have done and what we mental conditions described.in classical terms and
have learned.                                            specified by means of parameters entering into the
   The very fact that quantumphenomenacannot be algebraic or differentialequationsof which the mat-
analyzed on classical linesithus implies the impossi- rices or the wave functions,respectively,are solutions.
bility of separatinga behaviorof atomicobjects from These symbols themselves,as is indicated already by
the interaction of these objects with the measuring the use of imaginarynumbers,are not susceptibleto
instruments which serve to specify the conditions pictorial interpretation; and even derived real func-
under which the phenomenaappear. In particular, tions like densities and currents are only to be re-
the individualityof the typical quantumeffects finds garded as expressing the probabilitiesfor the occut-
proper expression in the circumstancethat any at- rence of individual events observableunder well-de-
tempt at subdividing the phenomenawill demand a fined experimentalconditions.
change in the experimentalarrangement,introducing          A characteristicfeature of the quantum-mechanical
new sourcesof uncontrollableinteractionbetweenob- descriptionis that the representationof a state of a
jects and measuringinstruments.                          system can never imply the accuratedeterminationof
   In this situation, an inherent element of ambiguity bothmembersof a pair of conjugatevariablesq and p.
is involved in assigning conventionalphysical attri- In fact, due to the noncommutabilityof suchvariables,
butes to atomic objects. A clear example of such an as expressedby (1) and (2), there will always be a
ambiguityis offeredby the dilemmamentioned,as to reciprocalrelation
the properties of electrons or photons, where we are
                                                                              Sq- Ap=4x                   (3)
faced with the contrast revealed by the comparison
between observationsregarding an atomic object, ob- betweenthe latitudesSq and Ap with whichthese vari-
tained by means of different experimentalarrange- ables can be fixed. These so-calledindeterminacyre-
ments. Such empiricalevidenceexhibits a novel type lations explicitly bear out the limitation of causal
of relationship, which has no analogue in classical' analysis, but it is importantto recognizethat no un-
physics and which may convenientlybe termed cons- ambiguous interpretation of such relations can be
plewDentartty in order to stress that in the contrasting given in words suited to describea situation in which
phenomena we have to do with equally essential physical attributes are objectifiedin a classical way.
aspectsof all well-definedknowledgeaboutthe objects.       Thus, a sentence like "we cannot know both the
   An adequatetool for the complementarymode of momentumand the position of an electron"raises at
descriptionis offeredby the quantum-mechanical      for- once questionsas to the physical reality of such two
malism, in which the canonicalequations of classical attributes, which can be answeredonly by referring
mechanicsare retainedwhile the physicalvariablesare to the mutually exclusive conditions for the unam-
replaced by symbolic operators subjected to a non- biguous use of space-time coordination,on the one
commutativealgebra. In this formalismPlanck'scon- hand, and dynamicalconservationlaws, on the other.
stant enters only in the commutationrelations            In fact, any attempt at locating atomic objects in
                                                         space and time demandsan experimentalarrangement
                  qp-pq=v-l2                         (1)
                                                         involving an exchangeof momentumand energy, un-
between the symbols q and p standing for a pair of controllablein principle, betweenthe objects and the
conjugate variables, or in the equivalent representa- scales and clocks definingthe referenceframe. Con-
tion by means of the substitutionsof the type            versely, no arrangementsuitable for the eontrol of
                              | hd                       momentumand energy balancewill admit precise de-
                     p=-\/-l   2 ,3                  (2) scription of the phenomenaas a chain of events in
by which one of each set of conjugatevariablesis re- space and time.
placed by a diSerential operator. According to the         Strictly speaking,every referenceto dynamicalcon-
two alternativeprocedures,quantum-mechanical      calcu- cepts implies a classicalmechanicalanalysis of phys-
lations may be performed either by representingthe ical evidence which ultimately rests on the recording
variables by matrices with elements referring to the of space-timecoincidences. Thus,also in the descrip-




                       This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 17:35:25 PM
                                       All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
January 20, 1950, Vo1. 111                            SCIENCE                                            53


tion of atomic phenomena, use of momentumand ical variablesin a state of a systemwith several atomic
energy variables for- the specificationof initial con- constituents. In fact, although any pair7q and p, of
ditions and final observationsrefers implicitly to such conjugate space and momentumvariables obeys the
analysis and therefore demandsthat the experimental rule of noncommutativemultiplication expressed by
arrangementsused for the purpose have spatixll di- (1), and thus can be fixed only with reciprocal lati-
mensions and operate with time intervals sufficiently tudes given by ( 3), the differenceql - q2 between the
large to permit the neglect of the reciprocalindeter- space coordinatesreferring to two constituents of a
minacy expressedby (3). Under these circumstances systemwill commutewith the sumP1 + P2 of the corre-
it is, of GOurSe, to a certain degree a matter of con- sponding momentumcomponents,as follows directly
venience to what extent the elassical aspects of th0 from the commutabilityof ql with P2 and of q2 with
phenomenaare ineluded in the proper quantum-me- P1- Both ql-q2            and P1+P2 can, therefore, be ac-
chanicaltreatmentwhere a distinctionin principle is curatelyfixed in a state of the complexsystem and we
made betweenmeasuringinstrllments,the description can consequentlypredict the value of either q1 or P1
of whichmust always be based on space-timepictures, if either q2 or P2 respectively, is determinedby di-
and objects under investigation, about which observ- rect measurement. Since at the momentof measure-
able predictionscan in general be derivedonly by the ment the direct interaction between the objects may
nonvisualizableformalism.                               have ceased,it might thus appear that both ql and P1
   Incidentally,it may be remarkedthat the construc- were to be regardedas well-definedphysical attributes
tion and the functioning of all apparatus like dia- of the isolated object and that, therefore, as has been
phragmsand shutters,serving to definegeometryand argued, the quantum-mechanicalrepresentationo£ a
timing of the experimentalarrangements,or photo- state shouldnot offer an adequatemeansof a complete
graphic plates used for recordingthe localization of descriptionof physical reality. With regard to such
 atomicobjects, will depend on propertiesof materials an argument,however,it must be stressedthat any two
 whieh are themselves essentially determinedby the arrangementswhich admit accuratemeasurementsof
 quantumof action. Still, this circumstanceis irrele- q2and P2 will be mutuallyexclusiveand that therefore
 vant for the study of simple atomicphenomenawhere, predictionsas regards q1 or P1 respectively,will per-
 in the specificationof the experimentalconditions,we tain to phenomena which basically are of comple-
 may to a very high degreeof approximationdisregard mentary character.
 the molecular constitution of the measuring instru-      As regards the question of the completenessof the
 ments. If only the instrumentsare sufficientlyheavy quantum-mechanical     mode of deseription,it must be
 comparedwith the atomicobjects under investigation, recognizedthat we are dealing with a mathematically
 we can in particularneglect the requirementsof rela- consistent scheme which is adapted within its scope
 tion (3) as regards the control of the localizationin to every process of measurementand the adequacyof
 space and time of the single pieces of apparatusrela- which can be judged only from a comparisonof the
 tive to each other.                                    predicted results with actual observations. In this
    In representing a generalization of classical me- connection,it is essential to note that, in any well-
 chanicssuitedwtoallow for the existence of the quan- definedapplication of quantummechanics,it is neces-
 tum of action,quantummechanicsoffersa frame sufR- sary to specify the whole e2cperimentalarrangement
 ciently wide to account for empirical regularities and that, in particular,the possibility of disposing of
 which cannot be comprised in the tlassieal way of the parametersdefiningthe quantum-mechanical         prob-
 description. Besides the characteristic features of lem just correspondsto our freedom of constructing
 atomic stability, which gave the first impetus to the and handling the measuringapparatus,which in turn
 developmentof quantummechanics,we may here refer means the freedom to choose between the different
 to the peculiar regularitiesexhibitedby systems com- complementarytypes of phenomenawe wish to study.
 posed of identical entities, such as photons or elec-    In order to avoid logical inconsistenciesin the ac-
 trons, and determiningfor radiative equilibriumor count of this unfamiliar situation, great care in all
 essentialpropertiesof materialsubstances. As is well questions of terminology and dialectics is obviously
 known, these regularitiesare adequatelydescribedby imperative. Thus, phrases often found in the phys-
 the symmetryproperties of the wave functions repre- ical literature,like ;;disturbanceof phenomenaby ob-
 senting the state of the whole systems. Of course, servation'2or ';creationof physical attributes of ob-
 suchproblemscannotbe exploredby any experimental jects by measurements,"representa use of words like
 arrangementsuited for the tracing in space and time phetsomenc6and observastzonas well as attrsbqeteand
 of each of the identical entities separately.          fneasuremetst which is hardly compatible with com-
    It is furthermoreinstructiveto considerthe condi- mon usage and practical definitionand, therefore, is
 tions for the determinationof positional and dynam- apt to cause confusion. As a more appropriate way




                        This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 17:35:25 PM
                                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
4                                                     SCIENCE                                   January 20, 1950, Vol. 111

of e2rpression,one may strongly advoeatelimitationof      The epistemolot,ieallesson we have reeeived from
the use of the word phenornenon to refer exelusively the new developmentin physieal seience, where the
to observationsobtainedunderspeeifiedeireumstanees, problemsenable a eomparativelyeoncise formulation
ineludingan aeeountof the whole experiment.             of prineiples, may also suggest lines of approaeh in
   With this terminology,the observationalproblemin other domainsof knowledgewhere the situation is of
atomicphysies is free of any speeial intrieaey,sinee in essentially less aecessible eharaeter. An example Ls
aetual experiments all evidenee pertains to observa- offered in biology, where meehanistic and vitalistie
tions obtained under reprodueibleeonditions and is arguments are used in a typieally eomplementary
expressedby unambiguousstatementsreferring to the manner. In soeiolot,y,too, sueh dialeetiesmay oftexI
registrationof the point at whieh an atomie partiele be useful, partieularlyin problemseonfrontingus in
arriveson a photographieplate or to a eorrespondint, the study and eoznparisonof human cultures, xvhere
reeordof some other aluplifieationdeviee. Moreover, we have to eope with the elementof eomplaeeneyin-
the ¢ireumstaneethat all sueh observationsinvolve herent in every national eultureand manifestingitself
proeessesof essentiallyirreversibleeharaeterlends to in prejudiees whieh obviously eannot be appreeiated
eaeh phenomenonjust that inherent featura of eom- from the standpoint of other nations.
pletion whieh is demandedfor its well-definedinter-       Reeognition of eomplementaryrelationship is not
pretationwithin the frameworkof quantummeehanies. least requiredin psyehology,where the eonditionsfor
   Recapitulating,the impossibilityof subdividingthe analysis and synthesis of experienee exhibit striking
individual quantum eSeets and of separating a be- analogywith the situationin atomiephysi. In fact,
havior of the objects froin their interaetionwith the the use of words like thoql,ghtsand sentiments, equally
lneasuringinstrumentssernng to definethe eonditions indispensableto illustrate the diversity of psyehieal
under wvhiehthe phenomenaappear implies an am- experienee, pertain to mutually exelusive situations
biguity in assigning eonventionalattributesto atomie eharaeterizedby a different drawing of tle line of
objeets whieh ealls for a reconsiderationof our atti- separationbetweensubjeetand objeet. In partieular,
tude towardsthe problemof physiealexplanation. In the plaee left for the feeling of volition is aSordedby
this novel situation, even the old question of an ulti- the very eireumstaneethat situationswherewe experi-
mate determinaeyof natural phenomenahas lost its enee freedom of will are ineompatiblewith psyeho-
eoneeptionalbasis, and it is against this baekground logieal situations where eausal analysis is reasonably
that the viewpoint of eonlplementaritypresents itself attempted. In other words, when we use the phrase
as a rational generalization of the very ideal of "I will" we renouneeexplanatoryargumentation.
eausality.                                                Altogether,the approaeh towards the problem of
   The eomplementarymodeof deseriptiondoes indeed explanationthat is embodiedin the notion of eomple-
not involve any arbitrary renuneiationof eustomary mentaritysuggests itself in our position as eonseious
demandsof explanationbut, on the eontrary,aims at beings and reealls foreefully the teaehing of aneient
an appropriatedialeetieexpressionfor the aetual eon- thinkersthat, in the searehfor a harmoniousattitude
ditions of analysis and synthesis in atomie physies. towards life, it must never be forgotten that we our-
Ineidentally,it would seenl that the reeourseto three- selves are both aetors and speetatorsin the dramaof
valued logie, sometimesproposed as means for deal- existenee. To sueh an utteraneeapplies, of eourse,as
ing with the paradoxiealfeatures of quantumtheory, well as to most of the sentenees in this artiele from
is not suited to give a eleareraeeountof the situation, the beginningto the end, the reeognitionthat our task
sinee all well-definedexperimentalevidenee, even if ean only be to aim at eommunieatingexperieneesand
it eannot be analyzed in tertns of elassieal pllysies, views to others by means of language, in whieh the
must be expressed in ordinary language making use praetiealuse of every wordstands in a eomplementary
of eommonlot,ic.                                        relationto attempts of its striet definition.




                       This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Tue, 7 May 2013 17:35:25 PM
                                       All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
