         EQUILIBRIUM OF HETEROGENEOUS SUBSTANCES.                      165

B and G also denoting functions of the temperature.       Therefore

                      f   t   =   *    +   <    7     1    o    g     (296)

 It will be seen (if we disregard the difference of notation) that this
 equation is equivalent in form to (216), which was deduced from
 a priori considerations as a probable relation between the quantity
 and the potential of a small component. When a liquid absorbs
several gases at once, there will be several equations of the form of
(296), which will hold true simultaneously, and which we may regard
as equivalent to equations (217), (218). The quantities A and C in
(216), with the corresponding quantities in (217), (218), were regarded
as functions of the temperature and pressure, but since the potentials
in liquids are but little affected by the pressure, we might anticipate
that these quantities in the case of liquids might be regarded as
functions of the temperature alone.
   In regard to equations (216), (217), (218), we may now observe
that by (264) and (276) they are shown to hold true in ideal gases or
gas-mixtures, not only for components which form only a small part
of the whole gas-mixture, but without any such limitation, and not
only approximately but absolutely. It is noticeable that in this case
quantities A and C are functions of the temperature alone, and do
not even depend upon the nature of the gaseous mass, except upon
the particular component to which they relate. As all gaseous bodies
are generally supposed to approximate to the laws of ideal gases when
sufficiently rarefied, we may regard these equations as approximately
valid for gaseous bodies in general when the density is sufficiently
small. When the density of the gaseous mass is very great, but
the separate density of the component in question is small, the
equations will probably hold true, but the values of A and G may
not be entirely independent of the pressure, or of the composition
of the mass in respect to its principal components. These equations
will also apply, as we have just seen, to the potentials in liquid
bodies for components of which the density in the liquid is very
small, whenever these components exist also in the gaseous state,
and conform to the law of Henry. This seems to indicate that the
law expressed by these equations has a very general application.


  Considerations relating to the Increase of Entropy due to the
                  Mixture of Gases by Diffusion.
   From equations (278) we may easily calculate the increase of
entropy which takes place when two different gases are mixed by
diffusion, at a constant temperature and pressure. Let us suppose
166     EQUILIBRIUM OF HETEROGENEOUS SUBSTANCES.

that the quantities of the gases are such that each occupies initially
one half of the total volume. If we denote this volume by V, the
increase of entropy will be
                                                  V                 V
                log                     v+            m 2a 2log V
                                                                -mlog
                                                                   , j - m2a2 log

or                              4- m2a2) log 2.
                           vV                     vV
Now                                               = 2 t ’and     m 2a 2 = % •

Therefore the increase of entropy may be represented by the
expression
                                — dog 2.                                  (297)

  It is noticeable that the value of this expression does not depend
upon the kinds of gas which are concerned, if the quantities are such
as has been supposed, except that the gases which are mixed must
be of different kinds. If we should bring into contact two masses
of the same kind of gas, they would also mix, but there would be
no increase of entropy. But in regard to the relation which this
case bears to the preceding, we must bear in mind the following
considerations. When we say that when two different gases mix by
diffusion, as we have supposed, the energy of the whole remains
constant, and the entropy receives a certain increase, we mean that
the gases could be separated and brought to the same volume and
temperature which they had at first by means of certain changes in
external bodies, for example, by the passage of a certain amount of
heat from a warmer to a colder body. But when we say that when
two gas-masses of the same kind are mixed under similar circum­
stances there is no change of energy or entropy, we do not mean
that the gases which have been mixed can be separated without
change to external bodies. On the contrary, the separation of the
gases is entirely impossible. We call the energy and entropy of the
gas-masses when mixed the same as when they were unmixed,
because we do not recognize any difference in the substance of the
two masses. So when gases of different kinds are mixed, if we ask
what changes in external bodies are necessary to bring the system
to its original state, we do not mean a state in which each particle
shall occupy more or less exactly the same position as at some
previous epoch, but only a state which shall be undistinguishable
from the previous one in its sensible properties. It is to states of
systems thus incompletely defined that the problems of thermo­
dynamics relate.
   But if such considerations explain why the mixture of gas-masses
        EQUILIBRIUM OF HETEROGENEOUS SUBSTANCES.                    167

of the same kind stands on a different footing from the mixture of
gas-masses of different kinds, the fact is not less significant that the
increase of entropy due to the mixture of gases of different kinds,
in such a case as we have supposed, is independent of the nature of
the gases.
   Now we may without violence to the general laws of gases which
are embodied in our equations suppose other gases to exist than such
as actually do exist, and there does not appear to be any limit to the
resemblance which there might be between two such kinds of gas.
But the increase of entropy due to the mixing of given volumes of the
gases at a given temperature and pressure would be independent of
the degree of similarity or dissimilarity between them. We might also
imagine the case of two gases which should be absolutely identical
in all the properties (sensible and molecular) which come into play
while they exist as gases either pure or mixed with each other,
but which should differ in respect to the attractions between their
atoms and the atoms of some other substances, and therefore in their
tendency to combine with such substances. In the mixture of such
gases by diffusion an increase of entropy would take place, although
the process of mixture, dynamically considered, might be absolutely
identical in its minutest details (even with respect to the precise
path of each atom) with processes which might take place without
any increase of entropy. In such respects, entropy stands strongly
contrasted with energy. Again, when such gases have been mixed,
there is no more impossibility of the separation of the two kinds
of molecules in virtue of their ordinary motions in the gaseous mass
without any especial external influence, than there is of the separation
of a homogeneous gas into the same two parts into which it has once
been divided, after these have once been mixed. In other words, the
impossibility of an uncompensated decrease of entropy seems to be
reduced to improbability.
   There is perhaps no fact in the molecular theory of gases so well
established as that the number of molecules in a given volume at a
given temperature and pressure is the same for every kind of gas
when in a state to which the laws of ideal gases apply. Hence the
          vV .
quantity      in (297) must be entirely determined by the number of
          v

molecules which are mixed. And the increase of entropy is therefore
determined by the number of these molecules and is independent of
their dynamical condition and of the degree of difference between
them.
   The result is of the same nature when the volumes of the gases
which are mixed are not equal, and when more than two kinds of
g<^s are mixed. If we denote by vlf v2, etc., the initial volumes of the
168       EQUILIBRIUM OF HETEROGENEOUS SUBSTANCES.

different kinds of gas, and by V as before the total volume, the
increase of entropy may be written in the form
                           E1(m1a1) log V —S 1(m1a1log vx).
And if we denote by rlt r2, etc., the numbers of the molecules of the
several different kinds of gas, we shall have
                     rx= (7m1a1, r2= Cm2a 2, etc.,
where G denotes a constant.             Hence
                           v1:V :: m1a1:2 1(m1a1) :: r x: H1r l ;
and the increase of entropy may be written
                                  log Z £ i - S / n log r,)                          ^298)



    The Phases of Dissipated Energy of an Ideal Gas-mixture with
              Components which are Chemically Related.
   We will now pass to the consideration of the phases of dissipated
energy (see page 140) of an ideal gas-mixture, in which the number
of the proximate components exceeds that of the ultimate.
   Let us first suppose that an ideal gas-mixture has for proximate
components the gases Gx, G2, and Gs, the units of which are denoted
by ©!, © 2 , ®3, and that in ultimate analysis
                                  ©3 = X1©1+ X2©2,                                   (299)
\  and X2 denoting positive constants, such that X1+ X2= l. The
phases which we are to consider are those for which the energy of
the gas-mixture is a minimum for constant entropy and volume and
constant quantities of G1 and G2, as determined in ultimate analysis.
For such phases, by (86),
                      /q Sm 1-f y 2 Sm 2 -f juls Sm3 ^ 0       (300)
for such values of the variations as do not affect the quantities of
Gx and G2 as determined in ultimate analysis. Values of $m v Sm 2,
SmB proportional to     X2, —1, and only such, are evidently consistent
with this restriction: therefore
                                      Xi/li + X2yU2= yU3.                            (301)
  If we substitute in this equation values of /q, p 2, /q taken from
(276), we obtain, after arranging the terms and dividing by t ,

           \   «1 lo S “    + ^2 «2 lo g “   -   «S   log n^ = A + B l o S t - J <   (3 0 2 )

where
        d —Xj       "t X2Id2 E 3 \ q X2c2~(-q —*X| cq —■X2u,2 | oq,                  (303)
                              JB= XjCj -j- X2c2 Cg,                                  (304)
                              C= \ E x+ X2E 2—E z.                                   (305)
