The British Society for the Philosophy of Science



Are There Quantum Jumps? Part I
Author(s): E. Schrödinger
Source: The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 3, No. 10 (Aug., 1952), pp.
109-123
Published by: Oxford University Press on behalf of The British Society for the Philosophy of Science
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/685552 .
Accessed: 07/04/2013 17:23

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.




                Oxford University Press and The British Society for the Philosophy of Science are collaborating with JSTOR to
                digitize, preserve and extend access to The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.




http://www.jstor.org




                             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
        The                British                   Journal                      for            the

                    Philosophy                               of          Science

VOLUME        III                               AUGUST,           1952                                 No. Io


                ARE THERE QUANTUM JUMPS?
                                                  PART I*

                                           E. SCHRODINGER

      . cominciai a credere, che uno, che lascia un'opinione imbevuta
col latte, e seguita da infiniti, per venire in un' altra da pochissimi seguita,
e negata da tutte le scuole, e che veramentesembraun paradossograndissimo,
bisognasse per necessitY,che fusse mosso, per non dir forzato, da ragioni
pid efficaci.' Galileo, Dialogueon the Two GreatestWorldSystems,2nd Day.

                                   I The CulturalBackground
PHYSICALscience, which aims not only at devising fascinating new
experiments,but at obtaining a rational understandingof the results
of observations,incurs at present, so I believe, the grave danger ot
getting severed from its historical background. The innovations
of thought in the last 50 years, great and momentous and unavoidable
as they were, are usually overratedcomparedwith those of the pre-
ceding century; and the disproportionateforeshortening by time-
perspective, of previous achievements on which all our enlighten-
ment in modern times depends,reachesa disconcertingdegreeaccord-
ing as earlier and earlier centuries are considered. Along with this
disregardfor historicallinkage there is a tendency to forget that all
science is bound up with human culture in general, and that scientific
findings, even those which at the moment appear the most advanced
and esoteric and difficult to grasp, are meaningless outside their cultural
context. A theoretical science, unaware that those of its constructs
considered relevant and momentous are destined eventually to be
                             * Received28. iv. 52
    H                                                 IO9




                    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                                   All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                E. SCHRODINGER

framed in concepts and words that have a grip on the educated com-
munityand becomepartand parcelof the generalworld picture-
a theoretical science, I say, where this is forgotten, and where the
initiated continue musing to each other in terms that are, at best,
understoodby a smallgroupof closefellowtravellers,
                                                will necessarily
be cut off from the rest of cultural mankind; in the long run it is
bound to atrophy and ossify, however virulently esoteric chat may
continue within its joyfully isolatedgroups of experts. This has
happened before in similar circumstances. Benjanun Farrington
puts it admirably in his Greek Science,1vol. 2, p. 173 :
    'Perhaps the most decisive defeat of the scientific spirit in antiquity
    had been the loss of the sense of history. History is the most funda-
    mental science, for there is no human knowledge which cannot lose
    its scientific characterwhen men forget the conditions under which it
    originated, the questions which it answered, and the functions it was
    created to serve. A great part of the mysticism and superstition of
    educated men consists of knowledge which has broken loose from its
    historicalmoorings.'
    The disregardfor historicalconnectedness,nay the pride of
embarkingon new ways of thought,of productionand of action,
the keen endeavourof shakingoff, as it were, the indebtedness
to our predecessors, are no doubt a generaltrendof our time. In
the fine arts we notice strong currentsquite obviouslyinformed
by this vein; we witnessits resultsin modernpainting,sculpture,
architecture,music and poetry. There are many who look upon
this as a new buoyantrise,while othersregardit as a flaringup that
inaugurates  decay. It is not herethe placeto dwell on this question,
and my personalviews on it mightinterestnobody. But I may say
that wheneverthis trend enters science,it ought to be opposed.
There obviouslyis a certaindangerof its intrudinginto sciencein
general,which is not an isolatedenterpriseof the humanspirit,but
grows on the samehistoricsoil as the othersand participates   in the
mood   of  the age. There  is, however, so I believe,no other nearly
so blatantexampleof thishappeningas the theoriesof physicalscience
in our time. I believethatwe areherefacinga developmentwhich
is the precisecounterpartof that in the fine artsalludedto above.
The most appropriate   expressionto use for it is one borrowedfrom
the historyof poetry: G6ngorism. It refersto the poetry of the
Spaniard  Luisde G6ngora(156I-I627), very fine poems,by the way,
                           1 Pelican Books, London, 1949
                                                IIO




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                ARE        THERE            QUANTUM                   JUMPS?

especiallythe early ones. Yet also his later poems (to which the term
more particularlyrefers) are well sounding and they all makesense.
But he uses all his acuity and skill on making it as difficultas possible
to the readerto unravel the sense, so that even natives of Castile use
extended commentariesto grasp the meaning safely.
     One ought not, I think, to say that if, in this, physics is following
a general trend of our time, we must not oppose it. Though we are
entirely the product of historicaldevelopment, yet it is we who make
its continuationand not history that dragsus along a predestinedtrail.
It dependsentirelyon us, on our stoppingto think andacting according
to reason, whether there will be decay or a new rise after the crisis.
This is what BertrandRussellin recent yearshas not tired to inculcate
with regard to much more momentous questions than the fate of
theoreticalphysics. However, here we shall be concerned with the
latter.
    My friend and scientific colleague Professor Hans Thirring,
in his book Homo Sapiens,' in which he conducts an elaborate
and very creditablecampaign against War, and for Universal Peace,
incidentally opines that in antiquity everybody except a few men
of genius considered the earth to be a flat disk. Professor E. P.
Wigner, in an articleon ' The Limits of Science' 2 is in doubt whether
to date the ' birthyear' of chemistry around 1780 (Lavoisier)or at
18o8 (Dalton's law). Physics, he says, is somewhat older, since
Newton's Principia became available in 1687. He grants that
'Archimedes discovered laws of physics around 2S50B.C. but his
discoveries can hardly be called the real beginning of physics.' I
must not take up space by refuting these strangeviews, but refer the
reader to Professor Benjamin Farrington's two excellent Pelican
books on Greek Science. Still I would mention that among the
'insignificant' discoveries of that period was the inference, drawn
(probablyby Archimedes)from the heliocentricsystem of Aristarchus,
that the fixed starsmust be at leastat a distanceof, in our units,about
two light years ; and the further conclusion that from there the sun
would appearas a faintstar,and therefore,inversely,many of those stars
must equaland even exceed the sun in size--or luminosity,as we would
call it today. Of course scientificknowledge takes some time to get
a grip on the cultured community. Charles Darwin tells us in the
 Voyageof a Naturalistof the sensationhe caused in 1833 among the
                   1
                       Wien, 1948
                   2Proc.Am.Philosoph.
                                    Soc.1950,94, 422
                                                III




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                               E. SCHRODINGER

'educated' society in Argentine by telling them that the earth is a
sphere. This knowledge was then more than 2,300 years old.
    What has all this to do with quantum jumps ? I have been
trying to produce a mood that makes one wonder what partsof con-
temporary science will still be of interest to others than historians
2,000 yearshence. Therehave been ingeniousconstructsof the human
mind that gave an exceedingly accurate description of observed
facts and have yet lost all interestexcept to historians. I am thinking
of the theory of epicycles. I confess to the hereticalview that their
modern counterpartin physical theory are the quantumj umps. Or
ratherthese correspondto the circleswhich the sun, the moon and the
starswere thought to describearoundthe earthin 24 hoursafterearlier
and better knowledge had been condemned. I am reminded of
epicyclesof various orderswhen I am told of the hierarchyof virtual
quantum transitions. But let these rude remarks not deter you.
We shall now come to grips with the subjectproper.

            2 The Discontinuous
                              Statesas ProperModes
    Max Planck'sessentialstep in 1900, amounted,as we say now, to
laying the foundation of quantum theory; it was his discovery,
by abstractthought, of a discontinuity  where it was least expected,
namely   in the           of
                 exchange energy     between  an elementary material
system (atom or molecule) and the radiationof light and heat. He
was at first very reluctantto draw the much more incisive conclusion
that each atom or molecule had only to choose between a discreteset
of 'states'; that it could normally only harbour certain discrete
amounts of energy, sharply defined and characteristicof its nature;
that it would normally find itself on one of these ' energy levels' (as
the modern expressionruns)-except when it changes over more or
less abruptlyfrom one to another,radiatingits surplusenergy to the
surrounding,or absorbingthe requiredamountfrom there,as the case
may be. Planck was even more hesitant to adopt the view that
radiation itself be divided up into portions or light-quanta or
'photons,' to use the presentterminology. In all this his hesitancehad
good reasons. Yet only a few yearslater (1905) Einsteinadvancedthe
hypothesis of light-quanta, clinching it with irresistiblearguments;
and in 1913 Niels Bohr, by taking the discrete states of the atoms
seriously and extending Planck's assumptionsin two directionswith
great ingenuity, but irrefutable consistency, could explain quantita-
                                                II2




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
              ARE THERE QUANTUM                                     JUMPS?
 tively some of the atomicline spectra,which are all patentlydiscrete,
 andwhichhadin theirentiretyformeda greatconundrum          up to then:
 Bohr'stheoryturnedthem into the ultimateand irrevocabledirect
 evidence,that the discretestatesare a genuineand realfact. Bohr's
 theoryheld the groundfor abouta dozenof years,scoringa grand
 seriesof so marvellousand genuinesuccesses,thatwe maywell claim
 excusesfor havingshut our eyes to its one greatdeficiency: while
 describingminutelythe so-called'stationary'stateswhichthe atom
 had normally,i.e. in the comparativelyuninteresting      periodswhen
                  the
 nothinghappens, theory       was  silentabout the periodsof transition
 or 'quantumjumps' (as one then began to call them). Since
 intermediary  stateshadto remaindisallowed,onecouldnot but regard
 the transitionas instantaneous  ; but on the otherhand,the radiating
 of a coherentwave trainof 3 or 4 feet length,as it can be observed
 in an interferometer,  would use up just about the averageinterval
 betweentwo transitions,    leavingthe atom no time to 'be' in those
 stationary       the
            states,    only onesof whichthetheorygavea description.
    This difficultywas overcome by quantummechanics,more
 especiallyby wavemechanics,    whichfurnished  a new description of the
states; thiswas preciselywhatwas stillmissingin the earliestversion
of the new theorywhichhadprecededwave mechanicsby aboutone
year. The previouslyadmitteddiscontinuitywas not abandoned,
but it shiftedfrom the statesto somethingelse, which is most easily
graspedby the simile of a vibratingstring or drumheador metal
plate, or of a bell that is tolling. If such a body is struck,it is set
vibrating,thatis to say it is slightlydeformedandthenrunsin rapid
succession  througha continuousseriesof slightdeformations    againand
again.   There      of
                is, course,    an infinite        of       of
                                          variety ways strikinga
givenbody,saya bell,by a hardor soft,sharpor bluntinstrument,         at
differentpoints or at severalpoints at a time. This producesan
infinitevarietyof initialdeformations   and accordinglya trulyinfinite
         of
variety shapes      of the ensuing vibration: the rapid'successionof
cinemapictures,'so we might call it, which describesthe vibration
following on a particularinitial deformationis infinitelymanifold.
But in every case,howevercomplicatedthe actualmotionis, it can
be mathematically    analysedasbeingthesuperposition of a discreteseries
of comparatively    simple'propervibrations,'   each of which goes on
with a quite definitefrequency. This discreteseriesof frequencies
dependson the shapeandon the materialof the body,its densityand
elastic properties. It can be computed from the theory of elasticity,
                                              113




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                             E. SCHRODINGER
from which the existence and the discretenessof proper modes and
proper frequencies,and the fact that any possible vibration of that
body can be analysedinto a superpositionof them, are very easily
deducedquite generally,i.e. for anelasticbody of any shapewhatsoever.
    The achievement of wave mechanicswas, that it found a general
model picture in which the 'stationary' states of Bohr's theory take
the rble of proper vibrations, and their discrete 'energy levels'
the rble of the proper frequenciesof these proper vibrations; and all
this follows from the new theory, once it is accepted, as simply and
neatly as in the theory of elastic bodies, which we mentioned as a
simile. Moreover, the radiated frequencies, observed in the line
spectra,are in the new model, equal to the differences   of the proper
frequencies;   and this  is easily understood, when  two  of them are
                        on
acting simultaneously, simple assumptions       about the nature of the
vibrating 'something.'


        3 The AllegedEnergyBalance-a Resonance     Phenomenon
    But to me the following point has alwaysseemedthe most relevant,
and it is the one I wish to stress here, because it has been almost
obliterated-if words mean something, and if certainwords now in
generaluse are taken to mean what they say. The principleof super-
position not only bridges the gaps between the 'stationary' states,
and allows, nay compels us, to admit intermediate states without
removing the discretenessof the 'energy levels' (becausethey have
become proper frequencies); but it completely does away with the
prerogativeof the stationarystates. The epithet stationaryhas become
obsolete. Nobody who would get acquaintedwith wave mechanics
without knowing its predecessor (the Planck-Einstein-Bohr-theory)
would be inclined to think that a wave-mechanicalsystem has a pre-
dilection for being affectedby only one of its proper modes at a time.
Yet this is implied by the continued use of the words 'energy levels,'
Ctransitions,'' transitionprobabilities.'
    The perseverance in this way of thinking is understandable,
because the great and genuine successesof the idea of energy parcels
has made it an ingrained habit to regard the product of Planck's
constant h and a frequency as a bundle of energy, lost by one system
and gained by another. How else should one understandthe exact
dove-tailing in the great 'double-entry' book-keeping in nature?
I maintainthat it can in all cases be understoodas a resonancepheno-
                                              114




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                ARE THERE QUANTUM JUMPS?
menon. One ought at least to try, and look upon atomic frequencies
just as frequenciesand drop the idea of energy-parcels. I submit that
the word 'energy' is at present used with two entirely different
meanings, macroscopic and microscopic. Macroscopic energy is a
 ' quantity-concept' (Quantitatsgr6sse). Microscopicenergy meaning
hv) is a ' quality-concept' or 'intensity-concept' (Intensititsgr6sse);
it is quite proper to speak of high-grade and low-grade energy
according to the value of the frequency v. True, the macroscopic
energy is, strangelyenough, obtainedby a certainweighted summation
over the frequencies,and in this relation the constant h is operative.
But this does not necessarilyentail that in every single case of micro-
scopic interaction a whole portion hv of macroscopic     energy is ex-
changed.    I believe one is allowed to regard microscopicinteraction
as a continuousphenomenonwithout losing either the preciousresults
of Planck and Einstein on the equilibrium of (macroscopic)energy
between radiationand matter, or any other understandingof pheno-
mena that the parcel-theoryaffords.
     The one thing which one has to accept and which is the inalien-
able consequenceof the wave-equationas it is used in every problem,
under the most various forms, is this : that the interactionbetween
two microscopic physical systems is controlled by a peculiar law of
resonance. This law requiresthat the diferenceof two proper fre-
quencies of the one system be equal to the differenceof two proper
frequenciesof the other:
          - V1= V2 V2()
         V1
The interactionis appropriatelydescribedas a gradualchange of the
amplitudes of the four proper vibrations in question. People have
kept to the habit of multiplyingthis equationby h and sayingit means,
that the first system (index I) has dropped from the energy level
hV1to the level       the balancebeing transferredto the second system,
          it to hvx',
enabling        rise from  hy2 to hV2'. This interpretationis obsolete.
There is nothing to recommend it, and it bars the understandingof
what is actually going on. It obstinatelyrefusesto take stock of the
principle of superposition,which enables us to envisage simultaneous
gradual changes of any and all amplitudeswithout surrenderingthe
essentialdiscontinuity,if any, namely that of the frequencies. To be
accuratewe must add, that the condition of resonance,equation (I),
may include three or more interactingsystems. It may for example
read          V - V' = v2' - v2 + v3' -v3                               ..                 (2)
                                                 IIs5




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                              E. SCHRODINGER
Moreoverwe may adoptthe view that the two or moreinteracting
systemsare regardedas onesystem. One is t;ien inclinedto write
equations(i) and (2), respectively,as follows
        V1
         +v2            V2 ..
                      V12+                                                               .   (
              ~ V V1
         v1+ •V          1 V21+2       ,.     .    .           (2')                      .
andto statethe  resonanceconditionthus: the interactionis restricted
to constituentvibrationsof thesamefrequency. Thisis a familiarstate
of affairs,of old. Unfamiliaris the tacitadmissionthat frequencies
are additive,when two or more systemsare consideredas forming
one system. It is an inevitableconsequenceof wave mechanics. Is
it so very repugnantto common sense? If I smoke 25 cigarettes
per day, and my wife smokesIo, and my daughter12-is not the
familyconsumption47 per day-on the average?

                        4 A TypicalExperiment
   Jokes aside, I wish to considersome typical experimentsthat
ostensiblyforcethe energyparcelview upon us, andI wish to show
thatthisis an illusion. A beamof cathoderaysof uniformvelocity,
which can be graduallyincreased,is passedthroughsodiumvapour.
Behindthe vesselcontainingthe vapourthe beampassesan electric
fieldwhichdeflectsit andtellsus the velocityof the particlesafterthe
passage. At the sametime a spectrometer    inspectsthe light, if any,
emittedby the vapour. For smallinitialvelocitynothinghappens:
no light, no changeof velocityin the cathodebeam. But when the
initialvelocityis increasedbeyonda sharplydefinedlimit, two things
happen. The vapourbeginsto glow, radiatingthe frequencyof the
first line of the 'principalseries'; and the beam of cathoderays
emergingfrom the vapouris splitinto two by the deflectingelectric
field, one indicatingthe initialvelocityunchanged,andanotherslow
one has'lost an amountof energy' equalto the frequencyof the said
spectralline multipliedby Planck'sconstanth. If the velocity is
furtherincreasedthe story repeatsitself when the incidentcathode
ray energy increasesbeyond the 'energy level' that is responsible
for the secondline (or ratherthe 'level-difference'in question);
thislineappearsanda thirdbeamof cathoderayswithcorrespondingly
reducedspeedoccurs; and so on. This was, and still is, regarded
as blatantevidenceof the energyparcelview.
    But it is just as easily understoodfrom the resonancepoint of
view. A cathoderay of particleswith uniformvelocityis a mono-
                                               116




            This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                           All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                ARE THERE QUANTUM                                     JUMPS?
 chromaticbeam of de Broglie waves. Only when its frequency
      surpasses the frequencydifference(v2'- v2) betweenthe lowest
 (vl)
 (v2) and the second  (v2')properfrequenciesof thesodiumatomis there
 a de Broglie frequencyv,' > o that fulfils the resonancedemand,
 equation(I). Then the vibrationv,' appearsin the de Brogliewave
 and v2,' among the atoms which begin to glow with frequency
v2' -V2,    since Maxwell's'electromagnetic     vacuum' is prepared
 for resonancewith anything. The splittingof the cathoderay beam
 in the deviatingelectricfield, afterpassingthe vapour,is accounted
 for by de Broglie'swave equation. An electricfield has for de
 Brogliewavesan 'index of refraction'thatdepends    on theirfrequency
 (' dispersion') and has  a         in
                            gradient the directionof the field (which
 thus acts as an 'inhomogeneousmedium'). Any furtherevents
 that might happen,for instancea transferof some of the 'energy
 quanta' h(v2'- v2) from the sodiumatomsto other gas molecules
 by 'impacts of the second kind,' arejust as easily understoodas
 resonancephenomena,providedonly one keepsto the wave picture
throughoutandfor all particlesinvolved.
     Many similarcases of apparenttransferof energy-parcelscan
 be reducedto resonance-for instancephotochemicalaction. The
patternis alwaysthe same: you may eithertake equationslike (I)
or (2) as theystand(resonance),   or multiplythemby h andthinkthey
expressan energybalanceof every single micro-transition.In the
precedingexampleone point is of particularinterest. One is able
by an externalagent (theelectricfield)to separate  in spacethe two or
more frequencieswhich have arisenin the cathoderay by the inter-
action; for theybehavedifferently    towardsthisagentandthedifferent
behaviouris completelyunderstood      fromde Broglie'swave equation;
one thus obtainstwo or more beamsof homogeneousfrequency(or
velocity). It is extremelyvaluablethattherearesimplecasesof this
kindin whichtheseparation     into two 'phases'hasnothingenigmatic;
it is an immediateconsequenceof the principleslaid down in L. de
Broglie'searliestwork on materialwaves. I say, this is fortunate;
for thereis a vast domainof phenomenain which the separationin
space either takes place in the naturalconditionsof observation,
or can easilybe broughtaboutby simpleappliances;but it is not
as easilyexplainedon firstprinciples. This might disheartenone in
acceptingthe view of graduallychangingamplitudes,that I put
forwardhere; for the separationinto differentphasesthatproduces
itself before our eyes seems to confirm the belief that a discontinuous
                                               117




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                               E. SCHRODINGER

abrupt and completetransition occurs in every single microscopic
interaction.

                                  andthe Photoelectric
         5 Chemistry,Photochemistry,                Effect
   The vast amountof phenomenaI am alludingto is in the first
place ordinarychemistry. Two or more constituents,mixed in a
solution or in a gaseousphase, begin to react with each other, under
the influenceof light or otherwise; the portionsthat have reacted
and have formed a new chemicalcompoundmay separatethem-
selvesalmostentirelyfromthe restandforma new phase,saybecause
theproductis almostinsolublein theliquid,or (inthe caseof a gaseous
mixture)by its beinga liquidor solidwith a low vapourpressureat the
temperaturein question. Almost any chemicalreactionmay serve as
an example,but let us takea slow oneto facilitatespeechandthought.
If a suitablemixtureof hydrogengas (H2)and oxygen gas (02) is
illuminatedby ultravioletlight,the followingslowreactionis induced
                   2H2 + 02 - 2H20                             (3)
As the concentration of water vapour (H20) increases,part of it
separatesoff into liquid droplets.
    The actual process is not as simple as the balance (3) indicates,
it is a chain reaction. But we need pay no attention to this, and
contemplate only the initial state and the end-product. Wave-
mechanicallythe gaseousmixture is representedby a vibration of the
combined system, and, by the way, not by oneproper vibrationsince
there is anyhow the vast variety of translationaland rotationalmodes,
and, of course, the electronic modes. The gaseous compound, H20,
is representedby an entirely different vibration of the samesystem.
The modes composing it, absent at first, are graduallychiming in as
the reactionproceeds. But then there is a thirdgroup of vibrations
representingthe liquid H20; they gradually build up where they
are facilitated by dust nuclei, and are observed as droplets. It is,
of course, deplorablethat wave mechanicsdoes not allow us to follow
this observedprocess analytically, while, in the now current inter-
pretation,ample informationis forthcoming about a host of experi-
ments that nobody has ever been or ever will be able to perform (for
instancewe are told, what is the probabilityof our finding at a definite
spot inside a given hydrogen atom an electron, if we look for one).
But there is no reasonto suspectthat the separationof phasesis funda-
mentally different from the spectroscopic resolution of a beam of
                                               II8




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                ARE THERE QUANTUM                                     JUMPS?
light or of cathoderaysinto its monochromatic     constituents.One
neednot be afraidthatthe formationof spatialboundaries,    separating
coherentregionsof chemicallyor physicallydistinctproperties,  cannot
possiblybe controlledby the wave equation,but must necessarily
be accountedfor by the picturesque  pageantryof individualmolecules
            or
swallowing re-spewing       whole energyparcels,beingdisruptedand
re-combined,  until they eventuallygo to form one or two molecules
of a new type.
    I deemthe lattersimplywrong; it is not in accordance    with our
present stateof knowledge,  whose furtherprogress hamperedif these
                                                 is
easypictures, thatare in commonuse, takenliterally. Andwe are
                                     are
encouragedto takethemliterallynot only by text-booksandpopular
essaysbut also by the languageusedin very high-browedtechnical
treatises. By this I will not deny that this imageryis a very useful,
nay indispensable, conceptualshorthandin chemicalresearch. One
cannotsee how to avoidit when, for example,a complicatedchain
reactionis to be unravelled. And, of course,the chemicalequation
for describinga reactionwill never be ousted,thoughit ostensibly
describesthe singlemicro-eventandis wrongin this. It is aninstance
of the famous'as if.' It is not the firstinstanceof this kind in the
relationof chemistryand physics. The chemistused the valency
strokefor buildingmodelsof complicatedmolecules. It represented
very realfactsof observation. Fora long timethephysicistcouldnot
affordanyexplanation   of themechanism  of thechemicalbond. Then,
in brief succession, two  were given: there is a heteropolarbond
(Kossel, 1916) and a homopolar bond (London-Heitler,1926). The
discoveries were illuminating to the chemist, indeed they removed
some difficultiescausedby interpretingthe valency strokestoo naively.
But, of course, the valency strokes were retained as an extremely
convenient shorthand. They could be retained because they were
based on carefully pondered observation.
   As one of the simplest photochemical reactions we may regard
the photoelectric effect, which was one of the main incentives for
Einsteinin 1905 to launchthe hypothesisof light quanta. When
a metal plate is illuminatedby light of sufficientlyhigh frequency,
electronsemergefrom it forthwithwith an energy correspondingto this
frequency. There is no time delay, even when the intensity of the
incidentlight is so weak that accordingto the electrontheory of H. A.
Lorentz,which was at the time in full swing, an electron would need
half an hour to be sped up to the velocity in question. This was-and,
                                                119




              This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                             E. SCHRODINGER
I am afraid,still is-regarded as convincingevidenceof the instan-
taneoustransferof whole quantaof energy from the light to the
electron. I understand  the presentorthodoxinterpretation  to be as
follows. The incidentlight beamproducesat oncein eachof tensof
thousands of electronsanexceedinglysmallprobability of takingwithin
the next splitseconda leapinto a stateof highertranslationalenergy;
a correspondingly   small fractionof those tens of thousandsdo so
andemergefrom the metal,andthatis why the gamestartswithout
delay.
    But accordingto wave mechanics,as put forwardby de Broglie
and myself and generallyaccepted,the interpretation    does produce
without delay electronicwave trainsof the higher frequencythat
we observeemergingfrom the metal. (Forto observethefrequency
of an electronor its velocitymeansthe same thing.) Afterthishas
been recognised,is the probabilityschemeanylongerneeded? Has
the idea of the mysterioussudden leaps of single electronsnot
becomegratituitous   ? Isit expedient? Thewavesarethereanyhow,
and we are not at a loss to prove it. We need only put a tube of
crystalpowder in the way of the emergingbeam and producean
interferencepatternof the type first achievedby G. P. Thomson
(it mightnot be as beautifulas Thomson's,butit wouldvouchfor the
waves all the same).

                 6 SingleInteraction
                                  Processes
                                         between
                     Micro-Systems(' Collisions')
    Thereare besideschemistryseveralother domainsof theoretical
investigationin which the simplifyingscheme of individualcon-
stituentmicro-systems  on sharpenergylevels,with abrupttransitions
between them, affordsa very convenientshorthand. Nearly all
thermodynamical                 are greatlyfacilitatedby adopting
                   considerations
thisschemein speechandthought,whichmakesverylittledifference,
if any, in the results. This constitutesa certaindanger. In the
inseparableunion of speechand thoughtthe primacy,ratherpara-
doxically,restswith speech. When we hear the samewords again
and againpronouncedwith authority,we areapt to forgetthatthey
were originallymeantas an abbreviation;we areinducedto believe
thattheydescribea reality.
    If the simplifiedschemeof sharpenergystatesand abrupttransi-
tionsbetweenthemwas workablethroughoutin all instances(which
                                               120




            This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                           All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
              ARE THERE QUANTUM                                     JUMPS?
I do not thinkis the case),one would have to try and castit into a
consistenttheory. At the momentno such theoryexistsand I can
see no prospectof obtainingone, nor any inducementto try, for the
reasonjust mentionedin parenthesis.At present the scheme is
inconsistent,not only becauseof the mysterythe transitions    continue
to presentfrom theirfirstappearance    in the theoriesof Planck(1goo)
and Bohr (1913), but also for anotherreason,intimatelyconnected
with the former. In applicationto two individualmicro-systems
which interact,it is not at all clearwhich are the pureenergylevels
distinguished,to which the scheme shall apply. The choice rests
with the mathematical    technique. The usualprocedure    is asfollows.
The total energy (which enters the mathematicalanalysisas the
'operator' of the wave equation)is regardedas made up of three
additiveparts; the two maincontributions      aresaidto pertainto the
singlesystems   and  aresaid to controltheir behaviours,respectively,if
           not
theydid interact; thethirdis saidto be theirenergy(or' operator')
of interaction. But thispartitionis ratherartificial,at any ratewhilst
the interactiontakesplace. It is largelyguidedby the requirement
that the mainpartsshouldbe comparatively       simpleand easyto deal
with analytically,the whole complicationof the problem being
shovedinto the interaction,which is calleda perturbation      and dealt
with by methodsof approximation.     Evenso, it is hardlyeveramenable
to a true solution(albeitan approximateone) ; one has to content
 oneselfwith findingout what happensin a smallintervalof time.
 One computesthe very smallchangesof amplitudes       thatoccurduring
 thisshortinterval; andone is pleasedto call the time-rateof change
 the probability of transition.By callingit so one expressesthe belief
 that afterthe interactionhas takenplace and the two systemshave
separatedagaineach of them will find itself in a pure sharpenergy
 state. The computationdoes notgive this result. The computation
 tellsus, thatin eithersystema hostof pureenergy-states  will be super-
 posed-with     a certain dependence   between  the  partialamplitudes
 in the one systemandthosein the other. But one choosesto interpret
 this resultas meaningthat therewill be complete     exchangebetween
 only one pair of proper modes, one of the many for which the
 resonanceconditionholds.
     One might say, why not, if this interpretation  works andif it is
 consistent? I maintainthat it is inconsistent.The reasonis the
 following. Assumeeach of the two systemsfound itself in a pure
 energystate,when they were isolated,beforethe interactionstarted.
                                                121




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                E. SCHRODINGER
 Now let the interactionset in ; take it to be very weak. It is certainly
 legitimateto adopt the attitudethatwe arenow facedwith onesystem;
 nay, this is the fundamentallycorrect attitude to take; the splitting
 of the wave-operator (' energy ') into two private parts plus a part
 depictingthe interactionis only a mathematicalartifice. But however
 weak the interaction be, it has the immediateconsequence that the
 combined system is now very far from any one of its pure energy
 states. This is not the resultof a very strongmutualphysicalinfluence.
 It obtains prior to any physical change. It resultsfrom a slight dis-
 tuning of the proper modes by the perturbation. What were clear
 'one tone' proper modes in the isolated systemsno longer are in the
 combined 'dis-tuned' systems-not nearly. You have to re-shuffle
 them and combine (superposethem) in your mindin an intriguing
 fashion to find the proper modes of the combined system. I say 'in
 your mind '-there is, of course, no immediate physicalre-shuffling;
 you just state that your combined system is very far from finding
itself in one of its proper modes. And that is the very reason why,
as time goes on, anything will happenat all, and why, in fact, even a
weak interaction,given time, will produce substantialchanges of the
amplitudes. For it is a simple elementaryand universallyrecognised
statement of wave mechanics that an isolated system that vibrates
exactly in one of its proper modes undergoesno change whatsoever.
    This has, by the way, a consequenceworth mentioning. When
we spoke just before of a weak interaction setting in between the
previously isolated systems, the reader may very naturally have
pictured to himself the two systems being first at great distanceand
then approachingeach other and getting in contact. I avoided this
descriptionon purpose,becauseit would flatly contradictthe assump-
tion that the isolated systems were in pure energy states. If so they
cannotbe saidto approach   eachother. To think of atoms and molecules
inpureenergystates,moving hitherandthither,collidingandrebounding
contradictsthe fundamentalconceptsof the theory. Where anything
happens,we are not facing pure energy states. So obviously we never
are.
    Let me return for a moment to our two micro-systemsin weak
interaction or, as I preferto say, to a system consistingof two parts
in slight coupling. The state of affairsis simply this : if this system
as a whole settled down in one of its exact proper modes, this would
not be a state which the currentview interpretsas indicating a definite
partition of the total energy between the two parts-not nearly;
                                               122




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
               ARE THERE QUANTUM JUMPS?
I mean to say, it is not a question of slight fluctuationor uncertainty,
but of many widely differentpartitions. If you abolishedthe coupling
at this moment, the now isolated parts would vibrate, each of them,
in a superpositionof widelydifferentproper modes.
    Summarising: the current view, which privileges the 'sharp
energy states,' is self-contradictory,anyhow in the language it uses
(what people mean, when they say something else than they mean,
is difficultto guess). We found it self-contradictoryin that it cannot
be maintainedfor both the whole and the parts; we are left to choose
and to apply the privilege the way it is most convenient. We found
a minor inconsistency in the apparently innocent statement that
two systems (both of sharplydefined energy) approach       each other and
collide. This seems a little less obnoxious, because it can be evaded
by saying : Oh well, we do not mean really quite sharp. Some may
consider this point a rather gratuitousnagging. I wonder whether
in actualcollision problemsit is entirely irrelevant.
        (Theconcludingpartof thisarticlewill bepublished
                                                       in November.)

                                            NOTE

    Professor Michael Polanyi drew my attention to a mistake.
My descriptionof the Franck-Hertzexperimentin the first paragraph
of Section 4 is, to put it mildly, oversimplified. The cathode ray
beam is appreciably scattered in the vapour. The two or more
electronicfrequenciesthat emerge could thereforehardlybe separated
by the simple transversalfield method. But any two of them can be
separatedby a potential barrierwhich the one can penetrate,while the
other is turned back, being totally reflected. Since this is also com-
pletely understoodby de Broglie's wave equation,the main argument
is not impaired.
                                                                E. S.


Schoolof TheoreticalPhysics
DublinInstitutefor AdvancedStudies
64-66 MerrionSquare,Dublin




                                                123




             This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 7 Apr 2013 17:23:30 PM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
