   Knowing How and Knowing That: The Presidential Address
   Author(s): Gilbert Ryle
   Source: Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, New Series, Vol. 46 (1945 - 1946), pp. 1-16
   Published by: Wiley on behalf of The Aristotelian Society
   Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4544405
   Accessed: 22-05-2015 18:36 UTC



   Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
   info/about/policies/terms.jsp

   JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content
   in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
   For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




            The Aristotelian Society and Wiley are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Proceedings of the
            Aristotelian Society.


http://www.jstor.org



                                    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                                                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
PAPERS READ BEFORE THE SOCIETY
                                 I945-46




Meetingof the AristotelianSocietyat the Universityof London
          Club on November5th, 1945, at 8 p.m.


      KNOWING            HOW AND KNOWING                     THAT


                    THE     PRESIDENTIAL       ADDRESS


                          By GILBERT RYLE

Preamble

IN this paper, I try to exhibit part of the logical behaviour
of the several concepts of intelligence, as these occur when
we characterise either practical or theoretical activities as
clever, wise, prudent, skilful, etc.
   The prevailing doctrine (deriving perhaps from Plato's
account of the tripartite soul) holds:       (1) that Intelligence
is a special faculty, the exercises of which are those specific
internal acts which are called acts of thinking, namely, the
operations of considering propositions ; (2) that practical
activities merit their titles " intelligent," " clever," and the
rest only because they are accompanied by some such
internal acts of considering propositions (and particularly
" regulative " propositions). That is to say, doing things
is never itself an exercise of intelligence, but is, at best,
a process introduced and somehow steered by some ulterior
act of theorising. (It is also assumed that theorising is not
a sort of doing, as if " internal doing " contained some
contradiction.)
  To explain how thinking affects the course of practice,
one or more go-between faculties are postulated which are,
by definition, incapable of considering regulative pro-
positions, yet are, by definition, competent correctly to
execute them.
                                                                        A



 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
2                            GILBERT RYLE.


   In opposition to this doctrine, I try to show that intelli-
gence is directly exercised as well in some practical
performances as in some theoretical performancesand that
an intelligent performance need incorporate no " shadow-
act " of contemplating regulative propositions.
   Hence there is no gap between intelligence and practice
corresponding to the familiar gap between theory and
practice. There is no need, therefore, to postulate any
Janus-headed go-between faculty, which shall be both
amenable to theory and influential over practice.
   That thinking-operations can themselves be stupidly or
intelligently performed is a notorious truth which by
itself upsets the assumed equation of " exercising intelli-
gence " with ' thinking." Else " stupid thinking " would
be a self-contradictoryexpressionand " intelligent thinking "
would be a tautology. It also helps to upset the assumed
type-difference between thinking and doing, since only
subjects belonging to the same type can share predicates.
But thinking and doing do share lots of predicates, such as
    clever," " stupid," " careful," " strenuous," "attentive,"
etc.
   To bring out these points I rely largely on variations of
one argument. I argue that the prevailing doctrine leads
to vicious regresses,and these in two directions. (1) If the
intelligence exhibited in any act, practical or theoretical,
is to be credited to the occurrence of some ulterior act of
intelligently considering regulative propositions, no intelli-
gent act, practical or theoretical, could ever begin. If no
one possessed any money, no one could get any money on
loan. This is the turn of the argument that I chiefly use.
(2) If a deed, to be intelligent, has to be guided by the
consideration of a regulative proposition, the gap between
that consideration and the practical application of the
regulation has to be bridged by some go-between process
which cannot by the pre-supposed definition itself be
an exercise of intelligence and cannot, by definition,
be the resultant deed. This go-between application-
process has somehow to marry observance of a con-
templated maxim with the enforcement of behaviour.
So it has to unite in itself the allegedly incompatible
properties of being kith to theory and kin to practice,


 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
              KNOWING      HOW    AND    KNOWING      THAT.                3

else it could not be the applying of the one in the
other. For, unlike theory, it must be able to influence
action, and, unlike impulses, it must be amenable to
regulative propositions. Consistency requires, therefore,
that this schizophrenic broker must again be subdivided
into one bit which contemplates but does not execute, one
which executes but does not contemplate and a third which
reconciles these irreconcilables. And so on for ever.
   (Some philosophers postulate a special class of acts,
known as " volitions," to perform this desperate task.
Others postulate some special impulses which can both
motivate action and lend docile ears to regulative
propositions.) In fact, of course, whatever " applying"
may be, it is a proper exercise of intelligence and it is not a
process of considering propositions.
   Regresses of this pattern show, I suggest, not only that
the prevailing doctrine is mistaken in equating exercises of
intelligence with acts of theorising, but also what sort of a
mistake it is. It is that radical sort of mistake which can
be labelled a " type-mistake." I shall here content myself
with stating summarily what this mistake is. I do not
develop this logicians' moral in the remainder of this
paper.
   Adverbs expressing intelligence-concepts (such as
  shrewdly,"     " wittily," " methodically,"           " scrupulously,"
etc.) have hitherto been construed in the wrong logical type
or category, namely, as signalising the occurrence of special
internal acts of that proprietary brand which we call
  thought" or " theory."
  But in fact they signalise not that a performance incor-
porates extra acts, whether of this brand or of any other
brand, but that the performance itself possesses a certain
style, method or modusoperandi. Intelligently to do some-
thing (whether internally or externally) is not to do
two things, one "in our heads " and the other perhaps
in the outside world ; it is to do one thing in a certain
manner. It is somewhat like dancing gracefully, which
differs from St. Vitus' dance, not by its incorporation of
any extra motions (internal or external) but by the way in
which the motions are executed. There need be no more
moves in a job efficientlyperformedthan in one inefficiently
                                                                      A2


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
4                              GILBERT RYLE.


performed, though it is patent that they are performed in
very different ways.      Nor need a tidy room contain an
extra article of furniture to be the real nominee of the
adjective " tidy."
   Phrases such as " teclhnical skill," " scrupulous conduct "
and even " practical reason" denote capacities to execute
not tandem operations but single operations with special
procedures.
   This is why ordinary language does not provide specific
verbs corresponding to our specific intelligence-adverbs and
adjectives.
   (This is not quite true of the adverb " voluntarily,"
since here philosophers have coined the specific verb " to
will."   But this verb has no ingenuous employment.
If it was ever employed, it would be a proper question to
ask, " When we will, do we always, sometimes or ever will
voluntarily? " Attempts to answer this question would
quickly get the verb relegated to its proper place, on the
shelf tenanted by " phlogiston.")
   To put it in Aristotelian terms, intelligence-concepts
belong to the category not of 7TOlEZV or of Ta'XEav but of
wr65s%This is why we, like Aristotle, squirm when we
hear intelligence-criteria addressed as " Values " or " The
Good." For these locutions and associated courtesies
suggest that they are superior but occult substances, which
is an even worse type-mistake than treating them as superior
but occult activities or occurrences.


   Philosophers have not done justice to the distinction
which is quite familiar to all of us between knowing that
something is the case and knowing how to do things. In
their theories of knowledge they concentrate on the dis-
covery of truths or facts, and they either ignore the
discovery of ways and methods of doing things or else they
try to reduce it to the discovery of facts. They assume that
intelligence equates with the contemplation of propositions
and is exhausted in this contemplation.
   I want to turn the tables and to prove that knowledge-how
cannot be defined in terms of knowledge-that and further,
that knowledge-how is a concept logically prior to the


    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
               KNOWING      HOW    AND    KNOWING      THAT.                5


concept of knowledge-that. I hope to show that a number
of notorious cruces and paradoxes remain insoluble if
knowing-that is taken as the ideal model of all operations
of intelligence. They are resolved if we see that a man's
intelligence or stupidity is as directly exhibited in some
of his doings as it is in some of his thinking.
   Consider, first, our use of the various intelligence-predi-
cates, namely, " wise," " logical," " sensible," " prudent,"
" cunning," " skilful," " scrupulous," " tasteful," " witty,"
etc., with their converses " unwise," " illogical," " silly,"
" stupid," " dull," " unscrupulous," " without taste,"
" humourless," etc. What facts or what sorts of facts
are known to the sensible which are not known to the
silly? For example, what truths does the clever chess-
player know which would be news to his stupid opponent ?
Obviously there is no truth or set of truths of which we could
say " If only the stupid player had been informed of them,
he would be a clever player," or " When once he had been
apprised of these truths he would play well." We can
imagine a clever player generously imparting to his stupid
opponent so many rules, tactical maxims, " wrinkles," etc.,
that he could think of no more to tell him ; his opponent
might accept and memorise all of them, and be able and
ready to recite them correctly on demand. Yet he might
still play chess stupidly, that is, be unable intelligently to
apply the maxims, etc.
   The intellectualist (as I shall call him) might defend his
case by objecting that the stupid player did not " really"
or "fully" know these truths. He had them by heart;
but this was perhaps just a set of verbal habits, like the
school-boy's rote-knowledge of the multiplication-table.
If he seriously and attentively considered these truths he
would then be or become a clever player. Or, to modify
the suggestion to avert an obvious rejoinder, if he seriously
and attentively considered these truths not just while in
bed or while in church but while playing chess, and
especially if he considered the maxim relevant to a tactical
predicament at the moment when he was involved in that
predicament, then he would make the intelligent move.
But, unfortunately,if he was stupid (a) he would be unlikely
to tell himself the appropriate maxim at the moment when


 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
6                              GILBERT RYLE.


it was needed and (b) even if by luck this maxim did occur
to him at the moment when it was needed, he might be
too stupid to follow it. For he might not see that it was
the appropriate maxim or if he did, he might not see how
to apply it. In other words it requires intelligence not
only to discover truths, but also to apply them, and knowing
how to apply truths cannot, without setting up an infinite
process,be reduced to knowledgeof some extra bridge-truths.
The application of maxims, etc., is certainly not any
mere contemplation of them. Equally certainly it can be
intelligently or stupidly done. (This is the point where
Aristotle's attempted solution of Socrates' puzzle broke
down. " How can the back-slider know moral and
prudential maxims and still fail to behave properly? "
This is only a special case of the general problem. " How
can a man be as well-informed as you please and still be a
fool ? " " Why is a fool not necessarily an ignoramus ? ")
   To switch over to a different example. A pupil fails to
follow an argument. He understands the premisses and he
understands the conclusion. But he fails to see that the
conclusion follows from the premisses. The teacher thinks
him rather dull but tries to help. So he tells him that there
is an ulterior proposition which he has not considered,
namely, that if thesepremissesare true, the conclusionis true.
The pupil understands this and dutifully recites it along-
side the premisses, and still fails to see that the conclusion
follows from the premisses even when accompanied by the
assertion that these premisses entail this conclusion. So a
second hypothetical proposition is added to his store;
namely, that the conclusion is true if the premisses are true
as well as the first hypothetical proposition that if the
premisses are true the conclusion is true. And still the
pupil fails to see. And so on for ever. He accepts rules
in theory but this does not force him to apply them in
practice. He considers reasons, but he fails to reason.
 (This is Lewis Carroll's puzzle in " What the Tortoise said
to Achilles." I have met no successful attempt to solve it.)
   What has gone wrong ? Just this, that knowing how to
reason was assumed to be analysable into the knowledge or
supposal of some propositions, namely, (1) the special pre-
misses, (2) the conclusion, plus (3) some extra propositions


    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
              KNOWING      HOW    AND    KNOWING      THAT.                7


about the implication of the conclusion by the premisses,
etc., etc., ad infinitum.
   " Well but surely the intelligent reasoner is knowing
rules of inference whenever he reasons intelligently." Yes,
of course he is, but knowing such a rule is not a case of
knowing an extra fact or truth ; it is knowing how to move
from acknowledging some facts to acknowledging others.
Knowing a rule of inference is not possessing a bit of extra
information but being able to perform an intelligent
operation. Knowing a rule is knowing how. It is realised
in performanceswhich conform to the rule, not in theoretical
citations of it.
  It is, of course, true that when people can reason intelli-
gently, logicians can then extract the nerve of a range of
similar inferences and exhibit this nerve in a logicians'
formula. And they can teach it in lessons to novices who
first learn the formula by heart and later find out how to
detect the presenceof a common nerve in a variety of formally
similar but materially different arguments. But arguing
intelligently did not before Aristotle and does not after
Aristotle require the separate acknowledgment of the truth
or " validity" of the formula. " God hath not .....
left it to Aristotle to make (men) rational." Principles of
inference are not extra premisses and knowing these
principles exhibits itself not in the recitation of formulza
but in the execution of valid inferencesand in the avoidance,
detection and correction of fallacies, etc. The dull reasoner
is not ignorant ; he is inefficient. A silly pupil may know by
heart a great number of logicians' formulae without being
good at arguing. The sharp pupil may argue well who has
never heard of formal logic.
   There is a not unfashionable shuffle which tries to
circumvent these considerations by saying that the intelli-
gent reasoner who has not been taught logic knows the
logicians' formulac " implicitly " but not " explicitly ";
or that the ordinary virtuous person has " implicit" but
not " explicit" knowledge of the rules of right conduct
the skilful but untheoretical chess-player " implicitly"
acknowledges a lot of strategic and tactical maxims, though
he never formulates them and might not recognise them if
they were imparted to him by some Clausewitz of the game.


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
8                           GILBERT RYLE.


This shuffle assumes that knowledge-how must be reducible
to knowledge-that, while conceding that no operations of
acknowledging-that need be actually found occurring. It
fails to explain how, even if such acknowledgements did
occur, their maker might still be a fool in his performance.
   All this intellectualist legend must be rejected, not merely
because it tells psychological myths but because the myths
are not of the right type to account for the facts which they
are invented to explain. However many strata of know-
ledge-that are postulated, the same crux always recurs that
a fool might have all that knowledge without knowing how
to perform, and a sensible or cunning person might know
how to perform who had not been introduced to those
postulated facts ; that is, there still remains the same gulf,
as wide as ever, between having the postulated knowledge
of those facts and knowing how to use or apply it; between
acknowledging principles in thought and intelligently
applying them in action.
    I must now try to speak more positively about what it is
like to know-how. (a) When a person knows how to do
things of a certain sort (e.g., make good jokes, conduct
battles or behave at funerals), his knowledge is actualised
or exercised in what he does. It is not exercised (save per
accidens)in the propounding of propositions or in saying
 " Yes " to those propounded by others. His intelligence
 is exhibited by deeds, not by internal or external dicta.
 A good experimentalist exercises his skill not in reciting
 maxims of technology but in making experiments. It is a
 ruinous but popular mistake to suppose that intelligence
 operates only in the production and manipulation of
 propositions, i.e., that only in ratiocinating are we rational.
 (b) When a person knows how to do things of a certain sort
(e.g., cook omelettes, design dresses or persuade juries), his
performance is in some way governed by principles,
rules, canons, standards or criteria.          (For most pur-
poses it does not matter which we say.) It is always
possible in principle, if not in practice, to explain
why he tends to succeed, that is, to state the reasons
for his actions.      It is tautology to say that there is
a method in his cleverness. But his observance of
rules, principles, etc., must, if it is there at all, be realised


 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
              KNOWING HOW AND KNOWING THAT.                                 9


in his performance of his tasks. It need not (though it can)
be also advertised in an extra performance of paying some
internal or external lip-service to those rules or principles.
He mustwork judiciously; he may also propound judgments.
For propounding judgments is just another special activity,
which can itself be judiciously or injudiciously performed.
Judging (or propositional thinking) is one (but only one)
 way of exercising judiciousness or betraying silliness ; it has
its own rules, principles and criteria, but again the
intelligent application of these does not pre-require yet
another lower stratum of judgments on how to think
correctly.
    In short the propositional acknowledgement of rules,
reasons or principles is not the parent of the intelligent
application of them ; it is a step-child of that application.
    In some ways the observance of rules and the using of
 criteria resemble the employment of spectacles. We look
 through them but not at them. And as a person who looks
 much at his spectacles betrays that he has difficulties in
 looking through them, so people who appeal much to
principles show that they do not know how to act.
    There is a point to be expounded here. I have been
arguing in effect that ratiocination is not the general
condition of rational behaviour but only one species of it.
 Yet the traditional associations of the word " rational "
 are such that it is commonly assumed that behaviour can
 only be rational if the overt actions taken are escorted by
 internal operations of considering and acknowledging the
 reasons for taking them, i.e., if we preach to ourselves before
 we practise. " How else " (it would be urged) " could
 principles, rules, reasons, criteria, etc., govern performances,
 unless the agent thought of them while or before acting ? "
 People equate rational behaviour with premeditated or
 reasoned behaviour, i.e., behaviour in which the agent
 internally persuades himself by arguments to do what he
 does. Among the premisses of these postulated internal
 arguments will be the formule expressing the principles,
 rules, criteria or reasons which govern the resultant intelli-
 gent actions. This whole story now seems to me false in
 fact and refutable in logic. We do not find in fact that we
 persuade ourselves by arguments to make or appreciate



 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
10                           GILBERT RYLE.


jokes. What sorts of arguments should we use ? Yet it
certainly requires intelligence or rationality to make and
 see jokes. But worse than this, when we do, as often
happens, go through the process of persuading ourselves to
do things, this process is itself one which can be intelligently
or stupidly executed. So, if the assumption were correct,
 it would be necessary for us to start one stage further back
and to persuade ourselves with second-order arguments
to employ first-order persuasions of a cogent and not of a
silly type. And so on ad infinitum. The assumption, that is,
credits the rationality of any given performance to the
rational execution of some anterior performance, which
would in its turn require exactly the same treatment.         So
no rational performance could ever be begun. Aristotle's
Practical Syllogism fails to explain intelligent conduct,
since its explanation is circular. For the postulated
syllogising would itself need to be intelligently conducted.
    What has happened once again is that intellectualists
have tried to explain prudence, say, or skill by reference to
a piece of acknowledging-that, leaving unexplained the
fact that this internal operation would itself have to be
cannily executed. They have tried to explain, e.g., practical
flair by reference to an intellectual process which, unfor-
tunately for their theory, again requires flair.
    We should, before leaving this side of the matter, notice
one variant of the doctrine that knowing-how is reducible
to a set of knowings-that. It could be argued that as
knowing-how always involves the knowing of a rule (in
some broad sense of " rule "), this could be equated with
the knowing not of any sort of truth, but of the truth of a
general hypothetical of the pattern " whenever so and so,
then such and such."      For much, though not all, intelligent
behaviour does consist in taking the steps likely to lead to
desired results. The knowledge involved might therefore be
knowing that when actions of a certain sort are taken in
certain situations, results of a certain sort tend to occur.
   The answer to this is two-fold: (i) a man might accept
any set of such hypothetical propositions and still not know
how to cook or drive a car. He might even know them well
enough to be a good teacher and still be stupid in his own
performances. Conversely a girl might be a clever cook


 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
               KNOWING      HOW     AND   KNOWING       THAT.               11


 who had never considered any such general hypothetical
propositions. If she had the knack or flair, she could do
without news of the inductive generalisation.
   (ii) The suggested general hypotheticals are inductive
generalisations. But making sound, as distinct from rash
inductions is itself an intelligent performance. Knowing
how to make inductions cannot await news of this higher-
order induction, that when people assemble certain
quantities of evidence in certain ways and produce con-
clusions of certain sorts, those conclusions tend to be true.
 Else induction could never begin ; nor could the suggested
higher-order induction have any data.
   There is another difficulty. Sometimes we do go through
the internal operation of persuading ourselves to do things,
just as we often go through the external operation of
persuading other people to do things. Let us suppose that
 the persuasion is cogent, i.e., that the recipient is convinced
by it. What happens then ? Does he necessarily do what
he has been persuaded to do ? Does he necessarily practise
what he preaches ? Notoriously not. I frequently per-
suade myself to smoke less, filling and lighting my pipe at
the very moment when I am saying " yes" to the conclusion
of the argument. Like Medea, I listen and am convinced,
but I do not obey. You say " Ah, but you weren't ' really'
or ' effectively' convinced. You said ' yes ' in some
theoretical or academic way, but you were not wise enough
to say ' yes ' in the practical way of putting your pipe back
in your pocket."      Certainly. This proves that unwisdom
in conduct cannot be defined in terms of the omission of
any ratiocinations and consequently that wisdom in conduct
cannot be defined solely in terms of the performance of any
ratiocinations. The intelligent application in practice of
principles, reasons, standards, etc., is not a legatee of the
consideration of them in theory ; it can and normally does
occur without any such consideration. Indeed we could
not consider principles of method in theory unless we or
others already intelligently applied them in practice.
Acknowledging the maxims of a practice presupposes
knowing how to perform it. Rules, like birds, must live
before they can be stuffed.
   (c) We certainly can, in respect of many practices, like



 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
12                           GILBERT    RYLE.



 fishing, cooking and reasoning, extract principles from their
 applications by people who know how to fish, cook and
 reason. Hence Izaak Walton, Mrs. Beeton and Aristotle.
 But when we try to express these principles we find that they
 cannot easily be put in the indicative mood. They fall
 automatically into the imperative mood. Hence comes the
 awkwardness for the intellectualist theories of stating what
 are the truths, or facts which we acknowledge when we
 acknowledge a rule or maxim. We cannot call an impera-
 tive a truth or falsehood. The Moral Law refuses to
 behave like a fact. You cannot affirm or deny Mrs.
Beeton's recipes. So, in the hope of having it both ways,
 they tend to speak guardedly of the " validity " rather than
 the " truth " of such regulative propositions, an idiom which
 itself betrays qualms about the reduction of knowing-how
 to knowing-that.
    What is the use of such formule if the acknowledgement
of them is not a condition of knowing how to act but a
derivative product of theorising about the nerves of such
knowledge ? The answer is simple. They are useful
pedagogically, namely, in lessons to those who are still
learning how to act. They belong to manuals for novices.
They are not quasi-premisses in the postulated self-per-
suasions of those who know how to act; for no such self-
persuasions occur. They are imperative because they are
disciplinary, because they are in the idiom of the mentor.
They are banisters for toddlers, i.e., they belong to the
methodology and not to the methods of intelligent practices.
 What logicians have long half-realised about the venue and
functions of their rule-formulx has yet to be learned by
moral philosophers about their imperatives and ought-
statements. When they have learned this they will cease
to ask such questions as whether conscience is an intuitive
or discursive faculty. For knowing how to behave is not
a sort of knowing-that, so it is neither an intuitive nor a
discursive sort of knowing-that.. The question itself is as
nonsensical as would be the corresponding question about
the sense of humour or the ability to infer. Other bogus
ethico-epistemological    questions also vanish, like the
question whether imperatives or ought-statements are
synthetic or analytic, a priori or a posteriori truths. How


 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
               KNOWING      HOW    AND    KNOWING      THAT.               13


should we deal with such questions if posed about Mrs.
Beeton's recipes ?
  Another ethical muddle is also cleared up. Philosophers
sometimes say that conscience issues imperatives or dictates.
Now " conscience" is an old-fashioned faculty-word, but
if the assertion means that the conscientious man exercises
his conscientiousness by issuing propositions or prescriptions,
then this is false. Knowing how to behave is exhibited by
correct behaviour, just as knowing how to cook is exhibited
by palatable dishes. True, the conscientious man may be
asked to instruct other agents how to behave, and then he
will, if he knows how, publish maxims or specific
prescriptions exemplifying maxims. But a man might know
how to behave without knowing how to give good advice.
   Sometimes a man might give good advice who did not
know how to behave. Knowing how to advise about
behaviour is not the same thing as knowing how to behave.
It requires at least three extra techniques: ability to abstract,
ability to express and ability to impress. In another class
of cases, a generally conscientious man might, in certain
interference-conditions, not know how to behave, but be
puzzled and worried about his line of action. He might
then remind himself of maxims or prescriptions, i.e., he might
resume, for the moment, the adolescent's task of learning
how to behave. He would be issuing imperatives or ought-
propositions to himself, but he would be doing so just
because he did not know how to behave. He would be
patching up a gap in his knowledge-how. And he might be
bad at self-counsel without being a bad man. He might
have a correct " hunch " that his self-suasions were invalid,
though he could detect no fallacy in them. There would
 be a circle in the attempted description of conscience as a
 faculty which issues imperatives ; for an imperative is a
formula which gives a description or partial definition of
 what is known when some one knows how to behave. You
 couldn't define a good chef as one who cites Mrs. Beeton's
 recipes, for these recipes describe how good chefs cook, and
 anyhow the excellence of a chef is not in his citing but in his
 cooking. Similarly skill at arguing is not a readiness to
 quote Aristotle but the ability to argue validly, and it is
just this ability some of the principles applied in which were


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
14                          GILBERT    RYLE.



extracted by Aristotle. Moral imperatives and ought-
statements have no place in the lives of saints or complete
sinners. For saints are not still learning how to behave
and complete sinners have not yet begun to learn. So
neither experiences scruples. Neither considers maxims.
   Logical rules, tactical maxims and technical canons are
in the same way helpful only to the half-trained. When a
person knows how to do things of a certain sort, we call him
  acute,"       " shrewd,"         " scrupulous,"           " ingenious,"
"discerning," " inventive," " an expert cook," " a good
general," or " a good examiner," etc. In doing so we
are describing a part of his character, or crediting him with
a certain dispositional excellence. Correspondingly when
we describe some particular action as clever, witty or wise,
we are imputing to the agent the appropriate dispositional
excellence. The way in which rules, standards, techniques,
criteria, etc., govern his particular performancesis one with
the way in which his dispositionalexcellencesare actualised
in those performances. It is second nature in him to behave
thus and the rules, etc., are the living nerves of that second
nature. To be acute and consistentin reasoningis certainly
to apply rules of inference to the propositions considered.
But the reasoner does not have both to consider propositions
and to cast sidelong glances at a formula ; he just considers
the propositions efficiently. The rules are the rails of his
thinking, not extra termini of it. The good chess player
observes rules and tactical principles, but he does not think
of them ; he just plays according to them. We observe
rules of grammar, style and etiquette in the same way.
Socrates was puzzled why the knowledge which constitutes
human excellence cannot be imparted. We can now reply.
Learning-how differs from learning-that. We can be
instructed in truths, we can only be disciplined in methods.
Appropriate exercises (corrected by criticisms and inspired
by examples and precepts) can inculcate second natures.
But knowledge-how cannot be built up by accumulation of
pieces of knowledge-that.
  An explanatory word is necessary here. "Discipline"
covers two widely disparate processes, namely, habituation
and education, or drill and training. A circus-seal can be
drilled or " conditioned " into the performance of compli-


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
              KNOWING HOW AND KNOWING THAT.                                15


cated tricks, much as the recruit is drilled to march and slope
arms. Drill results in the production of automatisms, i.e.,
performances which can be done perfectly without
exercising intelligence.   This is habituation, the formation
of blind habits. But education or training produces not
blind habits but intelligent povers.      In inculcating a skill
I am not training a pupil to do something blindly but to
do something intelligently. Drill dispenses with intelli-
gence, training enlarges it. (It is a pity that Aristotle's
sensible account of the formation of wise characters has
been vitiated by the translator's rendering of                       eS'aGuo's
as " habituation."       Aristotle was talking about how
people learn to behave wisely, not how they are drilled into
acting mechanically.)     When the recruit reaches the stage
of learning to shoot and read maps he is not drilled, but
taught. He is taught to perform in the right way, i.e., to
shoot and to use maps with " his head."         Unlike the seal
he becomes a judge of his own performance-he             learns
what mistakes are and how to avoid or correct them. He
learns how to teach himself and so to better his instructions.
He acquires not a habit but a skill (though naturally skills
contain habits). (Neglect of this distinction between
conditioning and training is what vitiates Hume's account
of Induction.) The fact that mathematics, philosophy,
tactics, scientific method and 'literary style cannot be
imparted but only inculcated reveals that these too are not
bodies of information but branches of knowledge-how.
They are not sciences but (in the old sense) disciplines.
The experts in them cannot tell us what they know, they
can only show what they know by operating with cleverness,
skill, elegance or taste. The advance of knowledge does not
consist only in the accumulation of discovered truths, but
also and chiefly in the cumulative mastery of methods.
   One last point. I have, I hope, proved that knowing-how
is not reducible to any sandwich of knowings-that, and that
our intelligence-predicates are definable in terms of knowing-
how. I now want to prove that knowing-that presupposes
knoving-how.
   (1) To know a truth, I must have discovered or established
it. But discovering and establishing are intelligent
operations, requiring rules of method, checks, tests, criteria,


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
16                           GILBERT RYLE.


etc. A scientist or an historian is primarily a man who
knows how to decide certain sorts of questions. Only
secondarily is he a man who has discovered a lot of facts,
i.e., has achieved successes in his application of these rules,
etc. (though of course he only learns how to discover through
exercises in discovery. He does not begin by perfecting
his method and only later go on to have successesin applying
it.) A scientist, that is, is primarily a knower-how and only
secondarily a knower-that. He couldn't discover any
particular truths unless he knew how to discover. He
could know how to discover, without making this or that
particular discovery.
    (2) But when I have found out something, even then
irrespective of the intelligence exercised in finding it out,
I can't be said to have knowledge of the fact unless I can
intelligently exploit it. I mean this. I might once have
satisfied myself of something, say the distance between
Oxford and Henley; and I might have enshrined this in
a list of road distances, such that I could on demand reel
off the whole list, as I can reel off the multiplication table.
So in this sense I have not forgotten what I once found out.
But if, when told that Nettlebed is so far out from Henley,
I cannot tell you how far Nettlebed is from Oxford, or if,
when shown a local map, I can see that Oxford to Banbury
is about as far as Oxford to Henley but still cannot tell you
how far Oxford is from Banbury or criticise false estimates
given by others, you would say that I don't know the
distance any longer, i.e., that I have forgotten it or that I
have stowed it away in a corner where it is not available.
   Effective possession of a piece of knowledge-that involves
knowing how to use that knowledge, when required, for
the solution of other theoretical or practical problems.
There is a distinction between the museum-possession and
the workshop-possession of knowledge. A silly person can
be stocked with information, yet never know how to answer
particular questions.
   The uneducated public erroneously equates education
with the imparting of knowledge-that.        Philosophers have
not hitherto made it very clear what its error is. I hope I
have provided part of the correction.




 This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 22 May 2015 18:36:00 UTC
                 All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
