   Philosophical Review


   On Being in the Same Place at the Same Time
   Author(s): David Wiggins
   Source: The Philosophical Review, Vol. 77, No. 1 (Jan., 1968), pp. 90-95
   Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of Philosophical Review
   Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2183184
   Accessed: 29-01-2016 02:33 UTC



   Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
   info/about/policies/terms.jsp

   JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content
   in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
   For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




            Duke University Press and Philosophical Review are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
            Philosophical Review.


http://www.jstor.org



                                     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 29 Jan 2016 02:33:26 UTC
                                                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
DISCUSSION

           ON BEING IN THE SAME PLACE
               AT THE SAME TIME
(WITH ONE REMARKABOUT CATEGORIESAND MATERIALISM)


IT IS a truism frequently called in evidence and confidently relied
     upon in philosophy that two things cannot be in the same place
 at the same time. Plainly this principle, which I shall call S, ought
 really to say that two things cannot completelyoccupy exactly the same
 place or exactly the same volume (or exactly the same subvolumes
 within exactly the same volume) for exactly the same period of time.
 No man is the same as his forearm. But there is a volume such that
 a man can wholly occupy it and such that both man and forearm are
in it at exactly the same time. But this does not count.
   More interestingly, think of a sponge and the water that makes it a
wet sponge. That does not count against principle S either. Here we
can press into service the chemical theory of molecules to distinguish
subvolumes or sub-subvolumes of the total volume occupied by the
sponge from those occupied by the water. But it is difficult to believe
that this determination of ours to allow nothing to count against S gets
us to the bottom of the matter. At very least, it would help to know
what was the a priori or metaphysical compulsion to think in our
present way about these questions. What if in defiance of fact and the
actual laws of chemistry and physics the water and the sponge were
so utterly mixed up that spatial distinction seemed impossible, not
only at the molecular level but also at the atomic and at the subatomic?
And what if you had only to squeeze to get water and sponge apart
again? Surely they would be the same sponge and the same (consign-
ment of) water afterward? And would they not have been in exactly
the same place at the same time? I think I know how to resolve one,
but only one, of the difficult questions which arise out of all this. For
one part of the a priori basis for principle S is not too difficult to
uncover. But S is still not correctly formulated.
   A certain tree T stands (leafless, suppose) at a certain spot at time
tj and occupies a certain volume v1 at this time tj. All and only v1 is
also occupied by the aggregate W of the cellulose molecules which
compose the tree. Indeed it is their occupation of v1 which precisely
determines that the volume which the tree occupies is volume vj. The
tree T and the cellulose molecules W are thus in exactly the same place

                                         90



    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 29 Jan 2016 02:33:26 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                   SAME PLACEAT THE SAME TIME

at exactly the same time. Are they identical? Now T = W only if
whatever is true of T is true of W (Leibniz' Law). It follows, I think,
that T = W only if T and W have exactly the same conditions of
persistence and survival through change. But self-evidently they do not.
   Suppose T is chopped down and then dismembered and cut up in
such a way that no cellulose molecule is damaged. It seems that W then
survives. And there is just as much wood in the world as there was
before. But T, the tree, cannot survive such treatment. Conversely, sup-
pose the tree is pruned and the clippings are burned, or that it under-
goes an organic change which destroys some of the original wood cells.
Then the tree T survives but W, the aggregate defined as the aggregate
of such and such particular cellulose molecules, does not survive. Of
course, you could define another notion of aggregate and give detailed
conditions for suitable co-option and expulsion of members of such an
aggregate. Perhaps you could get these conditions for gradual organic
variation of membership exactly right and produce an entity W'
with exactly the same criterion of individuation as T. But that would be
a boring trick. You would have defined a tree-and not wholly in terms
of molecules or wood cells. You would only have contrived an identity
connection between something in the category of stuff and something
in the category of substance by introducing the concept of something
organized and substance-like-that is, something foreign to the
category-into the category of stuff.
   None of this is to say that Tis something overandaboveW. It precisely
is not. The "is" of material constitution is not the "is" of identity. The
tree is madeof (or constituted of or consistsof) W. but it is not identical
with W. And "A is something over and above B" denies "A is (wholly
composed of) B" or "A is merely (or merely consists of) B." If A is

   1 There is much more to be said both about identity and about mereological
treatments of the notion of aggregate. I have tried to say a little of it in Identity
and Spatio-Temporal  Continuity(Oxford, I 967), pp. II-I 3, 67-68, 72.
   The argument seems to apply equally to artifacts. Mrs. Jones at t2 unpicks
her husband's old sweater and winds the wool into a ball. Equating matter and
object, we shall have to say the wool is the sweater. But suppose she then at
t3 crochets a pair of bed-socks with the wool. Then by transitivity the sweater
is the pair of bed-socks. But the bed-socks were crocheted at t3 out of a ball
of wool which was before t2 a sweater, and the sweater was not at t3 crocheted
out of a ball of wool which was before t2 a sweater. We must refuse to equate
matter and object, and refuse to think of this as a paradoxical refusal. It is not.
Crocheting, like knitting or weaving, is a way of makingbed-socks. The material
must pre-exist the making, and survive it. But what is made cannot pre-exist
its fabrication.

                                         9I




     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 29 Jan 2016 02:33:26 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                  DAVID WIGGINS

 something over and above B, then of course A # B, but the proper
 point of saying "over and above" is to make the further denial that B
 fully exhauststhe matter of A. But W does fully exhaust T and so T is
 not something over and above W.
    If it is a materialistic thesis that T  W, then my denial that T = W
 is a form of denial of materialism. It is interesting how very uninterest-
 ing an obstacle these Leibnizian difficulties-real though they are-put
 in the way of the reduction of botany and all its primitive terms to
 organic chemistry or to physics. (If it does not follow from T # W that
 trees are something over and above their matter, how much the less
 can it follow that they are immanent or transcendent or supervenient or
 immaterial beings. This is obviously absurd for trees. A Leibnizian
 disproof of strict identity could never be enough to show something so
intriguing or obscure.) I should expect there to be equally valid, and
from the point of view of ontology almost equally unexciting, difficulties
in the reduction of persons to flesh and bones,2 in psychophysical
event-materialism, and in the materialisms which one might formulate
in other categories (such as the Aristotelian categories propertyand
stateor the categories situationandfact). Overand aboveis one question,
identityis another. But of course the only stuff there is is stuff.
    I shall say no more about T and W here, except to remark that what
I have tried to show by this simple example is not wholly different
from a philosophical thesis which it has become a commonplace of
philosophy to defend in terms of different logical typesto which such
things as trees and the aggregates they "are" (-- consist of) belong.
I prefer to put the matter my way because it makes a smaller claim,
because it leaves room for a clear statement in the object language of
a perfectly intelligible connection between trees and cellulose molecules,
and because of the high degree of intelligibility enjoyed by this Leib-
nizian principle for predicative (as opposed to constitutive) "is": If
and only if A is anf (or is f) then A is identical with anf (or with one
of the + things); and if and only if A is one of theft's (or + things) then
it must share all its properties with thatf (or b thing).3 This does not
exhaust the content of standard doctrines of ranges of significance
(that is, those which derive from Russell's simple or ramified Theory of
Types4). They say much more than this about what you can and
  2 See Identity,p. 57.
  3 See ibid., pp. IO-II,   6i.
  4 See  Russell's Lectureson Logical Atomism, VII (reprinted in Logic and
Knowledge,ed. by R. Marsh [London, I956], pp. 254 if.), and G. Ryle, "Cate-
                   of theAristotelianSociety(I937-I938).
gories," Proceedings

                                        92




    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 29 Jan 2016 02:33:26 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                    SAME PLACE A T THE SAME TIME

 cannot say about A. But my own opinion is that the residue remains
 obscure. Let me now, however, revert to our principle S.
   The tree and its molecules and wood cells do not disprove what was
 originally intended by principle S. What has been shown is only that
 we must reformulate S to read:

   S*: No two things of the same kind (that is, no two things which
     satisfy the same sortal or substance concept) can occupy exactly
     the same volume at exactly the same time.

 This, I think, is a sort of necessary truth. It has at least three sources of
 support.

  (i) Space can be mapped only by reference to its occupants, and
spatial facts are conceptually dependent on the existence of facts about
particulars and the identities of particulars. If space is to be mapped
by reference to persisting particulars, then the nonidentity of particulars
A and B. both of kindf, must be sufficient to establish that the place of
A at t1 # the place of B at t1.

  (ii) A criterion of identity for material objects will have to be
something like this:

   'm: A is identical with B if there is some substance concept f
                                                                such
     that A coincideswith B under f (where f is a substance concept
     under which an object can be traced, individuated and distin-
     guished from other f's, and where coincidesunderf satisfactorily
     defines an equivalence relation all of whose members <x,y> also
     satisfyrthe Leibnizian schema F x = Fy) .5
Now I. logically implies S*. So if Im is an a priori truth, then so is S*.
Finding that A and B coincide under f settles the question whether
A = B. There is nothing more to decide.

  (iii) There is a conceptual basis for an even stronger truth than S*,
namely:


   5See "Individuation of Places and Things" (symposium with M. J. Woods),
AristotelianSocietysupp. vol. XXXVII (i963), where a certain difficulty of
circularity is discussed. Also Identity,pp. 34-36, 72.
   Leibniz' Law is only a criterion of difference, and in any case it can
be used to show A = B only where we already know that A is not 6 for some b
which we independently know B is.


                                         93



     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 29 Jan 2016 02:33:26 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                               DA VID WIGGINS

   S**: A and a proper part or constituent B of a third thing C, where
     A # C and A # B, and where no part of constituent of A is any
     part or constituent of B or of C, cannot completely occupy exactly
     the same volume at exactly the same time.

 The basis for this truth elucidates its import. Suppose A and B were
 distinct and in the same place at the same time. Then they could not
 have been distinguished by place. But then they would have had to be
 distinguished by their properties. But no volume or area of space can
 be qualified simultaneously by distinct predicates in any range (color,
 shape, texture, and so forth).
    I think (i), (ii), and (iii) may come near to accounting for most of
 the conceptual basis for the truth that material things have to compete
for room in the world, and that they must tend to displace one another,
 although I should not claim that they clear up all the questions which
 can arise about the water and the sponge, or about scientifically more
 realistic examples concerning chemical compounds and alloys.
    A final test for the soundness of S* or, if you wish, for Leibniz' Law,
 is provided by a puzzle contrived by Geach out of a discussion in
 William of Sherwood. A cat called Tibbles loses his tail at time t2.
But before t2 somebody had picked out, identified, and distinguished
 from Tibbles a different and rather peculiar animate entity-namely,
 Tibbles minus Tibbles' tail. Let us suppose that he decided to call this
 entity "Tib." Suppose Tibbles was on the mat at time t1. Then both
Tib and Tibbles were on the mat at t1. This does not violate S* or S**.
But consider the position from t3 onward when, something the worse
for wear, the cat is sitting on the mat without a tail. Is there one cat or
are there two cats there? Tib is certainly sitting there. In a way nothing
happened to him at all. But so is Tibbles. For Tibbles lost his tail,
survived this experience, and then at t3 was sitting on the mat. And
we agreed that Tib # Tibbles. We can uphold the transitivity of
identity, it seems, only if we stick by that decision at t3 and allow that
at t3 there are two cats on the mat in exactly the same place at exactly
the same time. But my adherence to S* obliges me to reject this. So
 I am obliged to find something independently wrong with the way in
which the puzzle was set up. It was set up in such a way that before t2
Tibbles had a tail as a part and Tib allegedly did not have a tail as a
part. If one dislikes this feature (as I do), then one has to ask, "Can one
identify and name a part of a cat, insist one is naming just that, and
insist that what one is naming is a cat"? This is my argument against
 the supposition that one can: Does Tib have a tail or not? I mean the


                                         94


     This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 29 Jan 2016 02:33:26 UTC
                     All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                    SAME PLACE AT THE SAME TIME

 question in the ordinary sense of "have," not in any peculiar sense
 "have as a part." For in a way it is precisely the propriety of some
 other concept of havingas a part which is in question. Surely Tib adjoins
 and is connected to a tail in the standard way in which cats who have
 tails are connected with their tails. There is no peculiarity in this case.
 Otherwise Tibbles himself might not have a tail. Surely any animal
 which has a tail loses a member or part of itself if its tail is cut off. But
 then there was no such cat as the cat who at t1 has no tail as a part of
 himself. Certainly there was a cat-part which anybody could call
 "Tib" if they wished. But one cannot define into existence a cat called
 Tib who had no tail as part of himself at t, if there was no such cat
 at t1. If someone thought he could, then one might ask him (before the
 cutting at t2), "Is this Tib of yours the same cat as Tibbles or is he a
 different cat?"6
                                                                DAVID WIGGINS
 New College,Oxford




   6 Professor Geach kindly permitted me to allude to his formulation of this
puzzle but he has no responsibility for the purpose to which it is put here, and
I understand that he originally devised it for the different purpose of posing
a challenge to Leibniz' Law.


                                        95


    This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 29 Jan 2016 02:33:26 UTC
                    All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
