See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265588770



Space-Time and Separability: Problems of Identity and Individuation in
Fundamental Physics

Chapter · June 1997
DOI: 10.1007/978-94-017-2732-7_9




CITATIONS                                                                                                 READS
15                                                                                                        104


1 author:

            Don Howard
            University of Notre Dame
            70 PUBLICATIONS 1,057 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE




 All content following this page was uploaded by Don Howard on 01 June 2015.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
                          Spacetime and Separability:
         Problems of Identity and Individuation in Fundamental Physics

                                          Don Howard
                                    Department of Philosophy
                                     University of Kentucky


1. Introduction: Einstein, Separability, and a “Pauli Program” for Fundamental Physics

       On 15 June 1935, shortly after the appearance of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) paper

(Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen 1935), and before he knew that Bohr would himself be publishing

a reply (Bohr 1935), Wolfgang Pauli wrote a long, worried letter to Werner Heisenberg complaining

about the damage the paper might do: “Einstein has again expressed himself publicly on quantum

mechanics, indeed in the 15 May issue of Physical Review (together with Podolsky and Rosen—no

good company, by the way). As is well known, every time that happens it is a catastrophe.” Since

the EPR paper was published in an American physics journal, there was a danger, Pauli said, of a

“confusion” in American public opinion, and he urged Heisenberg to publish a “pedagogical” reply

in the same journal.1 Pauli was most concerned that the reply elucidate what he, Pauli, took to be

the major issue in the debate:

               [Einstein] now understands this much, that one cannot simultaneously measure two
       quantities corresponding to non-commuting operators and that one cannot simultaneously
       ascribe numerical values to them. But where he runs into trouble in this connection is the
       way in which, in quantum mechanics, two systems are joined to form a composite system.
       ...
               A pedagogical reply to [this] train of thought must, I believe, clarify the following
       concepts. The difference between the following statements:
               a) Two systems 1 and 2 are not in interaction with one another (= absence of any
       interaction energy).
               Definition. This is the case if, after a maximal observation on 1, the expectation
       values of all quantities of 1 have the same temporal evolution as if 2 were not present. (NB.
       Anyhow, for sufficiently short times the concept of an interaction plays no role.)
               b) The composite system is in a state where the subsystems 1 and 2 are independent.
       (Decomposition of the eigenfunction into a product.)
                                                               Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 2

                Definition. This is the case if, after a measurement of an arbitrary quantity F2 is
        carried out on 2, with a known result F2 = (F2)0 (number), the expectation values of the
        quantities F1 of 1 remain the same as without a measurement on 2 having been carried out.
                Quite independently of Einstein, it appears to me that, in providing a systematic
        foundation for quantum mechanics, one should start more from the composition and
        separation of systems than has until now (with Dirac, e.g.) been the case. — This is
        indeed—as Einstein has correctly felt—a very fundamental point in quantum mechanics,
        which has, moreover, a direct connection with your reflections about the cut and the
        possibility of its being shifted to an arbitrary place. (Pauli 1985, pp. 402-404)

        This is a striking letter in many respects. Let me single out just three.

        First, Pauli displays real prescience with his highlighting of the concept of “independence”

in point b), for this is essentially the concept of independence that we now know to lie at the heart

of the puzzles over quantum nonlocality and nonseparability that have come to the fore in the

literature on the Bell argument and the Bell experiments of the last decade. More specifically, the

concept of independence highlighted by Pauli is essentially the same as the concept of “outcome

independence” that Abner Shimony introduced in his mid-1980s papers on the interpretation of the

Bell experiments (see Shimony 1984, 1986), which concept is, in turn, equivalent to the condition

that Jon Jarrett dubbed “completeness” in his 1983 University of Chicago dissertation (Jarrett 1983)

and subsequent papers (Jarrett 1984, Ballentine and Jarrett 1987), which were the inspiration for

Shimony’s own mid-1980s papers.           It is, therefore, also equivalent to what I have called

“separability” in my own papers on the subject (Howard 1984, 1989, 1990, 1993).

        As I will explain in more detail below, outcome independence or separability is to be

distinguished from the logically independent concept of “parameter independence,” or “locality,”

in my version of the argument (and Jon Jarrett’s original version), the conjunction of the two being

logically equivalent to the Bell locality condition, and hence sufficient for the derivation of the Bell

inequality, so that when the quantum mechanically predicted violations of the Bell inequality are
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 3

confirmed in the laboratory we can trace the cause to a failure of either outcome independence

(separability), or parameter independence (locality), or both. Thus isolating the cause of the

violations is helpful, because parameter independence arguably encapsulates the relevant physical

content of special relativistic prohibitions on superluminal signaling in the context of the Bell

experiments (hence Jarrett’s and my dubbing it “locality” simpliciter), leaving a failure of outcome

independence or separability as the likely culprit if, as resonable physicists, we do not too hastily

abandon special relativity. What the physical significance of the outcome independence or

separability condition might be is something of an open question, although, as I will argue, the

recognition that outcome independence is equivalent to a separability condition opens one window

on the understanding of its possible physical signficance.

       The second striking feature of Pauli’s last-quoted paragraph is that it points backward to

what was by 1935 an old debate over the nonseparable manner in which quantum mechanics

describes interacting systems. The fact that this was the central issue in the pre-1935 debate over

the adequacy of the quantum theory disappeared from the collective memory of the physics

community after EPR. But this aspect of the quantum had bothered Einstein since his own first

paper on the quantum hypothesis in 1905, and from the time in 1925 when his work on Bose-

Einstein statistics convinced him that it would be an unavoidable feature of any eventual quantum

formalism, Einstein had been trying in every which way to convince his colleagues that this was

sufficient reason to abandon the quantum path. Einstein believed that the spatio-temporal mode of

individuating physical systems, and hence the assumption of the separability of spatio-temporally

separated systems, had virtually the status of a priori truths, that they are conditions for the very

possibility of scientific knowledge, and that a nonseparable quantum mechanics was, therefore, at
                                                                Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 4

a very deep level, something fundamentally incoherent. Showing this was the point of his famous

thought experiments at the Solvay meeting as well as the various proto-EPR arguments of the early

1930s. Showing this was also the point of the EPR paper itself, although as a result of Podolsky’s

having written the paper, this point got “buried by the erudition,” as Einstein put it in a letter to

Erwin Schrödinger right after the paper’s publication. But it was not just Einstein who worried

about quantum nonseparability in the years before 1935. It was also at the forefront of the thinking

of Bohr and Schrödinger, and understanding better the quantitative phenomena associated with

quantum nonseparability was also the point of what might be called the “proto-Bell” correlation

experiments carried out by Walter Bothe and others during the 1920s.

        Curiously, this pre-1935 debate about quantum nonseparability came to an end after EPR,

largely, of course, because Bohr’s reply to EPR was thought by most to have settled the question.

A shift of interest to nuclear physics and quntum field theory no doubt also helped to divert attention

from the problem of quantum nonseparability, as did the personal, professional, and political

dislocations of the late 1930s and the absorption of the physics community into the war effort.

When Einstein himself tried to revive the question in the late 1940s, he found no audience. Only

in the wake of Bell’s work have we once again realized that there is still something to be learned

in connection with quantum nonseparability.

        The third point of interest in the last-quoted paragraph of Pauli’s June 1935 letter to

Heisenberg—perhaps the most important point of all— is the fact that it points forward to a program

for fundamental physics quite different from the then ascendent quantum field theory program.

Pauli’s reasoning is not spelled out in any detail, unfortunately, nor are the details of the alternative

program he envisions. But recognizing that quantum nonseparability is the chief ontological novelty
                                                                Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 5

of the quantum theory, and the chief point of difference between it and “classical” theories,

including general relativity, Pauli seems to be suggesting that rather than pursue a program of field

quantization—the concept of the field having been introduced, after all, only as device for

explaining interactions—we should instead start from the quantum mechanical description of

interactions.

        In what follows, I will follow out all three of the leads indicated by Pauli. I will first briefly

sketch the pre-1935 history of debates over quantum nonseparability, emphasizing Einstein’s

worries about the failure of separability and his careful disentangling of the relevant conception of

separability from the properly special relativistic concept of locality. I will then just as briefly

review the current state of the discussion of quantum nonseparability in light the recent literature

on Bell’s theorem and the Bell experiments. But this is really only by way of settting the context

for taking up Pauli’s last suggestion about an alternative program for fundamental physics. For the

real aim of this paper is to ask what a program of fundamental physics would look like that took

seriously the challenge of “start[ing] more from the composition and separation of systems,” a

program that I will call a “Pauli program.”

        Proceeding in this fahsion—history first, then contemporary theory and experiment, then

speculative extrapolation—is determined by more than just the accident of Pauli’s having organized

his letter to Heisenberg in this fashion. It is determined as well by the conviction that, with

fundamental physics in the state it is in today, with ever more frequent bold claims that we are on

the verge of a final unification, only a few small problems needing to be cleared up, the time is right

for a revival of the Machian historical-critical analysis of concepts and theories in physics. My

intuition is that we are a lot farther from final unification than many think, that what look like small
                                                                 Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 6

problems in quantum field theory, quantum gravity, cosmology, and other areas, may well be

symptoms of deeper ills in our fundamental physics, much like the problems of black-body radiation

and anomalous specific heats at the end of the last century were symptoms of deep problems in

mechanics and electromagnetism. Mach’s historical-critical analysis of the received concepts and

theories in areas like mechanics and the theory of heat helped to prepare the ground for the quantum

and relativity revolutions; indeed, it was this part of Mach’s legacy, not his positivism, that Einstein

praised in his 1916 obituary of Mach.

        Received concepts and theories, what we learn from our textbooks and teachers, come to us

with a certain fixity, almost an air of inevitability or necessity, not wholly the result of their

empirical credentials or their logical power. They seem so inevitable in large part simply because

they are so old and well-entrenched. But they often must be removed before a new understanding

of nature can emerge, as was the case with the quantum and relativity theories, and one of the best

ways—not the only way—to facilitate their removal is through a Machain historical-critical analysis

that seeks to discover how and why those concepts and theories became entrenched in the first

place. Concepts and theories have histories, such that understanding those concepts and theories

requires understanding those histories. So, for that reason, a proper critique of those concepts and

theories also requires a critical approach to their histories.



2. Einstein’s Life-long Worries about Quantum Nonseparability

        Already in this first paper on the light quantum hypothesis in 1905, Einstein realized that the

full story of the quantum would involve some compromise with classical notions of particle

independence. He remarked explicitly that the assumption that light quanta behave like independent
                                                            Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 7

particle-like carriers of electromagnetic energy would yield only the Wien end of the black-body

spectrum. As to what kind of independence assumption we were making here, he was quite explicit.

We are assuming, he said, that Boltzmann’s principle is valid for a collection of light quanta,

meaning, as he again said explicitly, that the joint probability for two light quanta to occupy two

specific cells of phase space factorizes as a product of the separate occupation probabilities

(Einstein 1905, pp. 139-142). But again, this assumption yields only the Wien end of the black-body

spectrum, to get the other end, by implication, we will have to assume something else.2

       Einstein returned to this issue in 1909, in his masterful survey paper, “Zum gegenwärtigen

Stand des Strahlungsproblems” (Einstein 1909a), in correspondence with H.A. Lorentz, and in his

influential address to the Salzburg Naturforscherversammlung, “Über die Entwickelung unserer

Anschauungen über das Wesen und die Konstitution der Strahlung” (Einstein 1909b). It was in

these papers and this correspondence that the notion of wave-particle duality first made its

appearance (as well as the idea of “ghost” or “guiding fields”), the wave conception being

introduced by contrast with particles as a device for conceptualizing the interference effects and

failure of classical assumptions about particle independence that are manifest in those aspects of

the interaction between matter and radition that give rise both to the full black-body spectrum and

to the mean-square fluctuations in energy and radiation pressure in black-body radiation. The issue

came to the fore again in 1914 in some papers by Mieczys³aw Wolfke (1914a, 1914b) reporting the

contents of conversations with Einstein about the kind of independence assumption made in the

1905 light quantum paper, where Wolfke repeats the point about the factorizability of the

probabilities being the essence of the independence assumption.
                                                               Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 8

        It was only in late 1924 and early 1925 that the issue became acute for Einstein, namely,

when his own work on Bose-Einstein statistics convinced him that the failure of classical notions

of particle independence would have to be a fundamental and ineliminable feature of the physics

of the quantum. The nature of this non-independence was still quite obscure to Einstein at that time,

as is evident from a letter to Schrödinger of 28 February 1925, where he writes:

        In the Bose statistics employed by me, the quanta or molecules are not treated as being
        independent of one another. . . . A complexion is characterized through giving the number
        of molecules that are present in each individual cell. The number of the complexions so
        defined should determine the entropy. According to this procedure, the molecules do not
        appear as being localized independently of one another, but rather they have a preference
        to sit together with another molecule in the same cell. One can easily picture this in the case
        of small numbers. [In particular] 2 quanta, 2 cells:


        Bose-statistics                                        independent molecules

            1st cell      2nd cell
                                                                 1st cell    2nd cell
 1st           #
                            —
 case          #                                   1st case        I II         —
 2nd           #             #                     2nd case          I          II
 case
                                                   3rd case         II           I
 3rd          —              #
 case                        #                     4th case         —          I II



        According to Bose the molecules stack together relatively more often than according to the
        hypothesis of the statistical independence of the molecules. (EA 22-002)

In a postscript, Einstein remarks that Bose-Einstein are not incompatible with the statistics

employed in his 1916 papers on transition probabilities, where the standard Maxwell-Boltzmann

distribution was employed (Einstein 1916a, 1916b), because it is really only in relatively dense gases

where the difference between the statistics of independent particles and the Bose-Einstein statistics
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 9

will be noticeable: “There the interaction between the molecules makes itself felt,) the interaction

which, for the present, is accounted for statistically, but whose physical nature remains veiled.”

        The problem here is simple. Boltzmann statistics, the statistics of independent particles,

assume that, owing to their being spatially separated, the systems in question have separate,

trackable identities, sufficient to enable us to name or label them and thus distinguish cases 2 and

3, which are collapsed into a single case in Bose-Einstein statistics because the systems in question

there lack separate, trackable identities. If we still assume equal prior probabilities for the

distinguishable cases, then the probability of two particles occupying the same cell of phase space,

and hence of being spatially close together, is 2/3 in Bose-Einstein statistics, whereas it was only

1/2 in Boltzmann statistics, so that the failure of the classical mode of particle individuation

manifests itself as a tendency for the systems in question to clump together. But how to explain this

tendency to clump and this failure of the classical scheme of individuation is not at all clear to

Einstein at this time.

        The puzzles about the non-independence of systems obeying Bose-Einstein statistics became

a prime focus of Einstein’s attention over the next few years, especially in his correspondence with

Schrödinger. At every step, one finds Einstein worrying Schrödinger with the question whether or

not the new wave-mechanical formalism he is developing will entail the same non-classical way of

individuating interacting systems evinced in Bose-Einstein statistics. Indeed, when looked at

through the window of his correspondence with Einstein in 1925-1926, Schrödinger’s development

of wave mechanics can be described as being aimed primarily at constructing a formalism within

which the Bose-Einstein scheme of individuation of interacting particles can be explained. The key

move, of course, was Schrödinger’s realization that wave mechanics had to be done in configuration
                                                            Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 10

space, not physical space, because only in configuration space can we find an ontology of joint

states rich enough to include non-factorizable joint states of the kind that are necessary for

explaining why two bosons cannot be endowed with separate, trackable identities.

       As late as the spring of 1927, Einstein was still trying to salvage separability in quantum

mechanics be means of a hidden variables model of the theory, as he explained in a lecture to the

Prussian Academy on 5 May of that year, “Bestimmt Schrödingers Wellenmechanik die Bewegung

eines Systems vollständig oder nur im Sinne der Statistik?” But he discovered to his dismay, after

the manuscript of the talk was already in proofs, that even his own hidden variables model suffered

from the same nonseparability that afflicted wave mechanics. This is the point of the following

remark added in proof:

       I have found that the schema does not satisfy a general requirement that must be imposed
       on a general law of motion for systems.
               Consider, in particular, a system Ó that consists of two energetically independent
       subsystems, Ó1 and Ó2; this means that the potential energy as well as the kinetic energy is
       additively composed of two parts, the first of which contains quantities referring only to Ó1,
       the second quantities referring only to Ó2. It is then well known that
                                           Ø = Ø1 @ Ø2 ,
       where Ø1 depends only on the coordinates of Ó1, Ø2 only on the coordinates of Ó2. In this
       case we must demand that the motions of the composite system be combinations of possible
       motions of the subsystems.
               The indicated scheme does not satisfy this requirement. In particular, let ì be an
       index belonging to a coordinate of Ó1, í an index belonging to a coordinate of Ó2. Then Øìí
       does not vanish. (EA 2-100)

The paper was never published. One might conjecture that it was because of the nonseparability

of the model.3

       From this time on Einstein ceased making positive contributions to the development of the

quantum theory. He turned his own constructive efforts back to unified field theory, which did

satisfy a spatiotemporal principle of separability. His future remarks on the quantum theory were
                                                              Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 11

to be confined to attempts to elucidate the paradoxical consequences of quantum nonseparability,

chiefly via the series of thought experiments that began to develop at the Solvay meeting in

September 1927. This was, for example, the real aim of the famous photon-box thought experiment

that was the focus of Einstein’s debate with Bohr at the 1930 Solvay meeting. Contrary to Bohr’s

reading of this as an attempt to disprove the indeterminacy relations (Bohr 1949, pp. 224-228), what

Einstein was actually trying to show was that, if one assumed the separability of the box and the

emitted photon, then one could ascribe two different state functions to the photon, even though, by

virture of the separation between the box and the photon, there would be one and only one reality

pertaining to the photon. One of these states would correspond to a definite energy or color, if one

chose to weigh the box, and one would correspond to a definite time of return, after reflection at a

distant mirror, if one chose to read the clock controlling the shutter. That means that each of the

two different state functions must be at best only an incomplete description of the unitary real state

of the photon.4

        It was no doubt this long history of Einstein’s wrangles with Schrödinger, Bohr, and others

that Pauli had in mind when he alluded to Einstein’s concern with the way we do the physics of

interacting systems in the above-quoted letter to Heisenberg. The issue of separability is not

obviously thematized in the published EPR paper, but Pauli had been arguing about separability with

Einstein and other colleagues for long enough to know what Einstein intended.

        Einstein himself explained his intentions in another series of letters with Schrödinger,

initiated by a letter from Schrödinger to Einstein of 7 June 1935 congratulating Einstein on the EPR

paper. Einstein wrote back on 19 June, explaining to Schrödinger that he, Einstein, had not written

the paper and that he did not like the way it turned out: “I was very pleased with your detailed letter,
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 12

which speaks about the little essay. For reasons of language, this was written by Podolsky after

many discussions. But still it has not come out as well as I really wanted; on the contrary, the main

point was, so to speak, buried by the erudition” (EA 22-047). Here goes on in this letter to explain

what he had intended. In principle, the argument is the same as that sketched above in connection

with the photon box thought experiment. Consider the two previously interacting but now widely

spatially separated systems, A and B, in the EPR-type thought experiment. Depending upon the type

of measurement we choose to perform on A, quantum mechanics has us assigning different

theoretical states (different ø-functions) to B. Einstein says that if we assume a “separation

princple” [“Trennungsprinzip”], according to which the separate real state of B cannot be influenced

by events in the vicinity of A, then there will be one and only one reality pertaining to B, regardless

of what we do in the vicinity of A. But that means that quantum mechanics has us assigning

different theoretical states to the same real state. According to Einstein, it follows that these

theoretical states must therefore be incomplete.5

       The “separation principle” of the 19 June 1935 letter to Schrödinger conflates two issues,

namely, the two systems possessing separate real physical states by virtue of their spatial separation

and one of these state’s not being capable of being influenced by events in the vicinity of the other

system. The first, which is what will now be designated more carefully than heretofore a

“separability” principle, seems to require only a spatial separation between the two systems. The

latter, which will be dubbed a “locality” condition, seems to require, beyond that, a spacelike

separation between the measurements we perform on the two systems, since it is obviously

motivated by special relativistic locality concerns. It is important that separability and locality be

distinguished. Separability is denied by the quantum mechanical theory of interactions, which
                                                               Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 13

ascribes a non-factorizable joint state to previously interacting systems. It is invalid, indeed, for any

theory that would incorporate the individuation schema implicit in Bose-Einstein statistics.

Quantum mechanics does not, however, violate locality.

        It was only in the late 1940s that Einstein clearly disentangled separability from locality.

One of the most interesting discussions that evinces this clearer understanding is his 1948 essay,

“Quanten-mechanik und Wirklichkeit,” which appeared in a special issue of the Swiss journal,

Dialectica, that was edited by Pauli and entirely devoted to the interpretation of quantum

mechanics. Here is the crucial passage:

        If one asks what is characteristic of the realm of physical ideas independently of the
        quantum-theory, then above all the following attracts our attention: the concepts of physics
        refer to a real external world, i.e., ideas are posited of things that claim a “real existence”
        independent of the perceiving subject (bodies, fields, etc.), and these ideas are, on the other
        hand, brought into as secure a relationship as possible with sense impressions. Moreover,
        it is characteristic of these physical things that they are conceived of as being arranged in
        a space-time continuum. Further, it appears to be essential for this arrangement of the things
        introduced in physics that, at a specific time, these things claim an existence independent
        of one another, insofar as these things “lie in different parts of space.” Without such an
        assumption of the mutually independent existence (the “being-thus”) of spatially distant
        things, an assumption that originates in everyday thought, physical thought in the sense
        familiar to us would not be possible. Nor does one see how physical laws could be
        formulated and tested without such a clean separation. Field theory has carried out this
        principle to the extreme, in that it localizes within infinitely small (four-dimensional) space
        elements the elementary things existing independently of one another that it takes as basic,
        as well as the elementary laws it postulates for them.
                 For the relative independence of spatially distant things (A and B), this idea is
        characteristic: an external influence on A has no immediate effect on B; this is known as the
        “principle of local action,” which is applied consistently only in field theory. The complete
        suspension of this basic principle would make impossible the idea of the existence of (quasi-
        ) closed systems and, thereby, the establishment of empirically testable laws in the sense
        familiar to us. (Einstein 1948, pp. 321-322)

What Einstein here calls the “mutually independent existence of spatially distant things” is what I

call separability. His “principle of local action” is what I call locality. Both are deemed necessary
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 14

for the doing of science. Without separability, says Einstein, “physical thought in the sense familiar

to us would not be possible.” Denying locality would make impossible “the establishment of

empirically testable laws in the sense familiar to us.” Why locality is necessary to secure the

existence of closed systems is clear. Why separability is necessary for physical thought is not, at

least not immediately. I will return to this question in a moment.

       What is most important in this passage for our purposes is what Einstein says about field

theories and separability: “Field theory has carried out this principle to the extreme, in that it

localizes within infinitely small (four-dimensional) space elements the elementary things existing

independently of one another that it takes as basic, as well as the elementary laws it postulates for

them.” What Einstein seems to be saying is that, in effect, a classical field theory like general

relativity provides an extreme embodiment of the separability principle because it treats each point-

event in the spacetime manifold as a separate physical system endowed with its own separate

physical reality in the form of, presumably, the value of the metric tensor at that point.

       If field theories like general relativity are privileged by their thus providing extreme

embodiments of the separability principle that quantum mechanics denies, then it is all the more

important that we understand why separability is thought to be necessary for “physical thought in

the sense familiar to us.” An important clue is contained in comments that Einstein wrote in the

margins of the manuscript version of Max Born’s 1949 Waynflete lectures (Born 1949), Born having

sent the manuscript to Einstein early in 1948 to get his reaction to Born’s account of their debates

over the foundations of quantum mechanics. Einstein returned his comments in March of 1948.

At the end he added the following long remark:
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 15

       I just want to explain what I mean when I say that we should try to hold on to physical
       reality. We are, to be sure, all of us aware of the situation regarding what will turn out to be
       the basic foundational concepts in physics: the point-mass or the particle is surely not among
       them; the field, in the Faraday—Maxwell sense, might be, but not with certainty. But that
       which we conceive as existing (“actual”) should somehow be localized in time and space.
       That is, the real in one part of space, A, should (in theory) somehow “exist” independently
       of that which is thought of as real in another part of space, B. If a physical system stretches
       over the parts of space A and B, then what is present in B should somehow have an existence
       independent of what is present in A. What is actually present in B should thus not depend
       upon the type of measurement carried out in the part of space, A; it should also be
       independent of whether or not, after all, a measurement is made in A.
                If one adheres to this program, then one can hardly view the quantum-theoretical
       description as a complete representation of the physically real. If one attempts, nevertheless,
       so to view it, then one must assume that the physically real in B undergoes a sudden change
       because of a measurement in A. My physical instincts bristle at that suggestion.
                However, if one renounces the assumption that what is present in different parts of
       space has an independent, real existence, then I do not at all see what physics is supposed
       to describe. For what is thought to be a “system” is, after all, just conventional, and I do not
       see how one is supposed to divide up the world objectively so that one can make statements
       about the parts. (Born 1969, pp. 223-224)

So separability is the key to understanding Einstein’s realism! But what is the argument for its

necessity? The argument is found in the last paragraph. Give up separability and then “I do not at

all see what physics is supposed to describe.” Why? Because “what is thought to be a ‘system’ is,

after all, just conventional, and [without separability] I do not see how one is supposed to divide up

the world objectively so that one can make statements about the parts.”

       Separability seems to be necessary for the purpose of dividing the world up into parts, this

being necessary in order for us to be able to make statements about the parts. We need some

conventional specification of what is to count as a system, and Einstein can see no objective way

to do this other than via the scheme of individuation implicit in the separability principle. Why?

       In a recent paper, I have explored the broadly Kantian background to this aspect of Einstein’s

thinking about separability, arguing that it was Einstein’s reading of Schopenhauer on space and
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 16

time as the principium individuationis that probably taught Einstein this lesson and that by virtue

of his adopting this view he stands in an old tradition regarding space as a ground for the

individuation of physical systems, a tradition reaching back at least to Newton, if not beyond that

to Pythagoras (see Howard 1996). But for now let us think about this question more from a physical

than from an historical point of view.

       The key word in Einstein’s succinct argument for the necessity of separability is surely

“objective.” Without separability Einstein can see no “objective” way of dividing the world up into

parts. In what sense does separability give an objective principle of individuation? This brings us

back to the previously-quoted remark about field theories like general relativity providing an

extreme embodiment of the separability principle.

       As noted, a field theory like relativity gives embodiment to the separability principle by

treating each point of the spacetime manifold as a separate physical system: “Field theory has

carried out this principle to the extreme, in that it localizes within infinitely small (four-

dimensional) space elements the elementary things existing independently of one another that it

takes as basic, as well as the elementary laws it postulates for them.” On one reading of this

passage, it would be the existence of a non-null spatiotemporal (metric) interval between two

spacetime events that serves as a sufficient principle for individuating those events. If we

understand the separabiltiy condition in this way, then we might have our answer to the question

why it provides the only imaginable objective scheme of individuation, for the metric interval is the

fundamental invariant of the general relativistic group, and, being an invariant, is objective in a way

that most other features of general relativistic spacetime, like simple spatial separation, are not. So

even though Einstein sometimes speaks, loosely, of the independence of “spatially distant things,”
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 17

perhaps we should, nevertheless, interpret him as assuming that the relevant objective notion of

separation is that of non-null spatiotemporal separation.

       One might object that this could not have been Einstein’s intention, since if we take non-null

spatiotemporal separation as a sufficient condition for individuation, that would mean that we would

have no basis for designating two light-like related events as separable, such as two stages in the

career of a photon or two events like the emission of a photon at one location and its absorption or

reflection at another location. Surely, one might argue, Einstein did not intend to have us deny the

independence of two such events.         Thus, in Einstein’s version of the photon-box thought

experiment, mentioned above, would not the emission, reflection, and eventual detection of the

reflected photon have to count as independent events? Frankly, I do not know what Einstein’s

intention was in this respect; nowhere, to my knowledge, did he comment on it specifically. But

in point of fact, it is not two or more events in the career of a single photon that have to be

accounted independent by terms of the logic of the photon-box thought experiment or Einstein’s

own intended version of the incompleteness argument. All that is required is the independence of

typically spacelike related events such as, in the case of the photon-box thought experiment, the

reflection of the photon at a distant mirror and the choice either to weigh the box or to check the

time of emission on the clock.

       What are the alternatives to taking non-null spatiotemporal separation as sufficient for

individuation? Surely it is not enough to stipulate just spacelike separation as a sufficient condition

for individuation, for while that is an invariant, and thus objective notion, we certainly want to

designate as independent all manner of timelike related events. Indeed, outside of the context of

the quantum mechanical account of interactions, it would be causally related, which is to say
                                                              Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 18

timelike related events (think of the collisions of molecules) that an Einstein would need most to

mark as independent for the purpose of securing the applicability of the Boltzmann principle, S =

kAlogW, which is to say, the factorizing of the cell-occupation probabilities, in classical statistical

mechanics.

        Yet another invariant, objective notion is the existence of a non-null spatial interval in at

least one frame. That would comprise spacelike, timelike, and lightlike related events, thus marking

any two events anywhere in spacetime as separable, which, as I suggested above, was meaning of

Einstein’s characterizing classical field theories as providing the most extreme embodiment of the

separability principle. Moreover, this is not at all an implausible reading of Einstein’s talk of the

mutual independence of “spatially distant things.”

        On the other hand, it was that same Albert Einstein who recognized, already at the time of

his 1905 paper on the photon hypothesis, that the full Planck distribution formula for black-body

radiation (as opposed to just the Wien end of the formula), could be derived only if one denied to

the constituents of a photon gas the kind of independence possessed by molecules as described in

classical, Boltzmann statistical mechanics. And it was the same Einstein who came to understand

in 1924, inspired by the work of Satyendra Nath Bose, precisely how the denial of classical

assumptions of particle independence in the case of photons could be turned into a positive program

for the derivation of the Planck formula. Finallly, as shall be explained in more detail shortly, it was

this same Einstein who in 1920 invented what is today, sadly, a too-little-known argument to the

effect that general relativistic covariance considerations actually entail the indistinguishability and

hence the non-independence of particles, like photons, that act as the carriers of a field. On the face

of it, of course, it is one thing to deny the mutual independence of two photons and quite another
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 19

to deny the independence of two events in the career of a single photon. Yet a closer considertion

of Einstein’s mentioned argument from covariance to indistinguishability will show that there is

less of a difference between these two denials of independence than might at first appear to be the

case.

        Thus, the first proposed reading of Einstein’s conception of separability, namely, as resting

on the presence of a non-null spatiotemporal interval—rather than the existence of a non-null spatial

interval in at least one frame—may well not be too far from the mark, even with its possibly

paradoxical implication that two events in the career of a single photon are not independent of one

another. In any case, even if one wants to argue for the weaker, more inclusive condition of the

existence of a non-null spatial separation in at least one frame, the stronger condition of separation

by a non-null spatiotemporal interval still works as a sufficient condition for individuation. The

disagreement would be over whether or not it should also be a necessary condition. In section 4,

below, this feature of the spatiotemporal interpretation of Einstein’s separability condition will be

turned to advantage in my sketch of a “Pauli program” for fundamental physics.

        It should now be possible to understand better why Einstein attacked the quantum theory

with such conviction and tenacity. Separability is necessary because, in its infinitesimal, four-

dimensional, classical field theoretic embodiment, it provides the only objective criterion of

individuation. But quantum mechanics denies separability. Quantum mechanics is therefore not

merely incomplete, it is downright incoherent for Einstein. All the more unfortunate for Einstein’s

case then that precisely this feature of the quantum theory seems to be gain in credibility thanks to

Bell’s theorem and the results of the Bell experiments, to which I now turn.
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 20

3. Shimony, Jarrett and Bell: The Experimental Evidence for Quantum Nonseparability.

       One of the reasons why Einstein’s disentangling the respective roles of the separability and

locality assumptions was so important is because there is a way of telling the story of Bell’s theorem

and the Bell experiments that places essentially those two principles at center stage. The crucial

step toward this new understanding of Bell’s theorem was taken by Jon Jarrett in his 1983 University

of Chicago dissertation, written under the direction of Howard Stein and David Malament (Jarrett

1983). Let me summarize what I am now taking the separability and locality principles to assert,

and then let me briefly outline what I like to call the Jarrett decomposition theorem.

       Separability Principle: Regardless of their history of interaction, any two systems, A and B,
       separated by a non-null spatiotemporal interval possess their own separate real states, of
       such kind that the joint state is completely determined by the separate states.


       Locality Principle: Given any two space-like separated systems, A and B, the separate real
       state of B, say, cannot be influenced by events (such as the choice of an observable to
       measure, say by rotating a Stern-Gerlach apparatus plus detectors) in the vicinity of system
       A.

(In the statement of both the separability and locality conditions, reference to separations between

systems should be taken as shorthand for separation between the relevant events in which those

systems figure, such as two measurement events or the “events” of the two systems’ merely being

at specific spacetime points. )




                             Figure 1 Schematic of Bell Experiment
                                                                Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 21


        To understand what Jarrett proved with his decomposition theorem, first recall the original

Bell locality condition, which may be written in this form:6

                                   pëAB(x,y*i,j) = pëA(x*i) @ pëB(y*j).                             (BL)

The superscripts A and B refer to the two wings of the typical Bell experiment, as illustrated

schematically in Figure 1. The joint state of the composite system is represented by ë. The symbols

i and x represent, respectively, the observable to be measured in the A wing and its possible values,

while j and y represent the observable measured in the B wing and its possible values. In this form,

then, the Bell locality condition says that for a composite system in joint state ë the joint probability

of outcomes x and y for measurements of observables i and j in the A and B wings, respecitvely, is

equal to the prodouct of the separate probabilities.

        Jarrett proved that the Bell locality condition is actually a conjunction of two logically

independent conditions (Jarrett 1983, 1984; Ballentine and Jarrett 1987; Shimony 1986). Jarrett

calls one of these the locality condition:7

                                          pëA(x*i,j) = pëA(x*i),                                  (JL-A)

                                          pëB(y*i,j) = pëB(y*j).                                  (JL-B)

This condition says that the outcome in A wing is statistically independent of the choice of a

parameter to measure in the B wing and, conversely, that the outcome in the B wing is independent

of the choice of a parameter to measure in the A wing. Thus, Shimony call this condition

“parameter independence.” Jarrett calls this the locality condition because it is supposed to capture

the physical content of special relativistic locality constraints more precisely than the original Bell

locality condition, and, indeed, special relativity would seem to require that the act of setting the
                                                                 Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 22

apparatus in , say, the B wing, if it were spacelike separated from a measurement event in the A

wing, should not affect the outcome of that measurement.

        Jarrett calls the other condition the completeness condition:

                                         pëA(x*i,j,y) = pëA(x*i,j),                           (COM-A)

                                         pëB(y*i,j,x) = pëB(y*i,j).                           (COM-B)

From a mathematical point of view, the content of this condition is clear. It says that the outcome

in each wing should be statistically independent of the outcome in the other wing, which is why Shi-

mony calls it “outcome independence.” The physical content is much less clear, until we see that

it is, essentially, identical to the separability condition.

        The proof that the Bell locality condition is equivalent to the conjunction of Jarrett’s locality

and completeness conditions is quite straightforward; for details, the reader is referred to standard

presentations (see especially Jarrett 1984 and Ballantine and Jarrett 1987). Our interest is in the

relation between Jarrett’s completeness condition and separability.

        In order to prove to prove that outcome independence or completeness (COM) is equivalent

to a separability condition, we must be careful about the state concept that we employ. I define a

state ë as a conditional probability measure pë(x*m) assigning a probability to a measurement result

x, conditional upon the presence of a measurement context m. This is, by intention, a very general

state concept. Designed to facilitate the comparison of the ontologies of diverse theories, it is

supposed to comprise the state concepts of both the quantum theory and general relativity. Thus,

a ray in a Hilbert space can be made to generate such a probability measure, as can the metric tensor

at a point of the spacetime manifold. For our purposes, it makes no difference that, in the latter

case, which is a deterministic theory, the probabilities are all zero or one. I might also add that
                                                               Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 23

while it is not essential for the sake of the proof to follow, it is nevertheless natural, from a physical

point of view, to interpret states as I have defined them here as corresponding to physical

propensities, which is to say, real dispositions of physical systems to display certain properties in

certain contexts.8

        Systematic reference to the measurement context, m, is a crucial feature of the concept of

a physical state. Failure to “contextualize” the state concept has historically, I think, obscured the

difference between separability and locality conditions as well as the connection between a

separability condition and outcome independence. Think of the context, for the moment as

consisting of the whole universe in which a measurement event is located, including events outside

of the measurement’s forward and backward light cones, events spacelike separated from the

measurement event.       Conditionalizing thus on the context allows for the possibility that

measurement results might be influenced by events that are spacelike separated from the

measurement, this disposition to repsond differentially to events in spacelike separated regions of

the universe being thus a part of the very reality that the state in question in supposed to represent,

as opposed to being seen only as an influence on that reality. Omitting explicit reference to the

context from the state concept, say by defining states simply as probability measures assigning

probabilities to measurement outcomes, means that we are implicitly taking all states to be local

states, which in turn makes it hard, both conceptually and mathematically, to distinghish the

different varieties of possible influences on measurement outcomes. Make the context part of the

state concept and then one can distinguish failures of locality or parameter independence from

failures of outcome independence or separability.
                                                                  Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 24

        For our immediate purposes, we can think of the context as including only the observables

to be measured in each wing. Thus, one should read an expression like pë(x*i,j) as representing a

state ë that assigns a probability to measurement result x, in a context in which observable i is

measured in the A wing, and observable j is measured in the B wing.9

        To prove that outcome independence or completeness is equivalent to a separability

condition, we must first formulate the latter in an appropriate manner. Thus, two systems A and B

will be said to be separable if there exist separate states á and â for these systems, such that

                                  pëAB (x,y*i,j) = páA(x*i,j) @ pâB(y*i,j),                       (SEP)

with ë representing the joint state of A and B together. One can easily show that (SEP) is closely

related to the ordinary quantum mechanical definition of separable systems, according to which the

joint state is a tensor product of the separate states, i.e., øAB = øA q ø B, inasmuch a pairs of systems

satisfying this latter condition satisfy (SEP) and pairs of systems that are nonseparable in the

quantum mechanical sense violate (SEP). Furthermore, it should be evident that two systems

satisfying the separability principle defined a few paragraphs earlier, which asserted that two

spatiotemporally separated systems possess separate reals states of such a kind that their joint is

exhaustively determined by the separated states, also satisfy (SEP) and that violating the separability

principle would violate (SEP), given, that is, the state concept being employed here.

        (SEP) is a factorizability condition, but it is not equivalent to Bell-locality (BL), for on the

right-hand side of (SEP), unlike the right-hand-side of (BL), we conditionalizes on both i and j. For

that reason, (SEP) makes no assumption about whether or not Jarrett locality holds.

        To prove that (SEP) is equivalent to (COM), one first introduces the following

identifications:
                                                                    Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 25

                                           páA(x*i,j) = pëA(x*i,j),                                  (1)

                                           pâB(y*i,j) = pëB(y*i,j).                                  (2)

From the definitions of joint and conditional probablity we have

                                 pëAB(x,y*i,j) = pëA(x*i,j,y) @ pëB(y*i,j),                          (3)

which, for the case where pëB(y*i,j)      0, can be rewritten in the form:

                                 pëA (x*i,j,y) = pëAB(x,y*i,j) / pëB(y*i,j).                         (4)

From equation (4) and (SEP) one gets immediately

                           pëA (x*i,j,y) = [ páA (x*i,j) @ pâB (y*i,j) ] / pëB(y*i,j).               (5)

(COM-A) follows from (5) with (1) and (2). An analogous derivation yields (COM-B) from (SEP).

To complete the other half of the proof of equivalence, note that equation (3) and (COM-A) yield

                                   pëAB(x,y*i,j) = pëA(x*i,j) @ pëB(y*i,j).                          (6)

(SEP) follows directly from (6) together with (1) and (2). Since (SEP) and (COM) imply one

another, they are logically equivalent.

        We have already seen Einstein arguing that both the locality and separability principles, but

especially the latter, are virtually a priori conditions for the very possibility of a physical science.

Locality was said to be necessary to insure the existence of systems that are “closed,” or at least

screened off from extraneous influences, in a manner sufficient to allow us to ascribe measurement

results to the systems putatively undergoing measurement. Separability was said to be constitutive

of the very concept of physical reality itself. Now we see that their conjunction—upon which

Einstein based his incompleteness argument—also entail the Bell locality condition, meaning that

the experimental confirmation of quantum-mechanically predicted violations of the Bell inequality

now force us to abandon one or the other (or both) of locality and separability.
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 26

        Quantum mechanics, we now understand, works in the context of the Bell experiments by

virture of its being a local, nonseparable theory. Bohm-type hidden variable theories, which are

empirically equivalent to quantum mechanics in the context of the Bell experiments, pull off the

same trick by being separable—all systems at all times possess their own, individual states, such that

joint states factorize—but nonlocal, the nonlocality being found in the quantum potential.

        Which is the right choice? Bohr or Bohm? The answer seems simple: If we do not want

to repudiate special relativistic locality constraints, then we must choose the quantum mechanical

path, meaning locality but nonseparability. My guess is that even Einstein would have concurred

in this choice, given the news about the results of the Bell experiments, because separability

partakes more of the character of a constructive model, whereas locality has more the character of

those high-level empirical generalizations that Einstein dubbed “principles” and that he thought

should serve as regulative principles guiding our search for possible constructive models of the

phenomena.10

        What Einstein would have chosen is not, however, the important issue. We are the ones who

must choose and what is imporant in that connection is our understanding the physical implications

of our choice. Foremost among those is that, if we take the quantum mechanical path, then the

spatiotemporal mode of individuation for physical systems that Einstein thought essential to the

classical field theoretic approach of general relativity must be abandoned. That is to say that, the

results of the Bell experiments do not threaten special relativity; they threaten, instead, general

relativity.



4. A “Pauli Program” Program for Fundamental Physics
                                                               Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 27

         So the situation is this. Einstein rightly believed that field theories like general relativity,

which assign a determinate value of the fundamental field parameter—the metric tensor in general

relativity—to every point of spacetime, represent an extreme embodiment of spatiotemporal

separability, since, in effect, they treat each point of the spacetime manifold as a physical system

endowed with its own well-defined physical state, separate from the physical states of all of its

neighbors, near and far, excepting perhaps those with which it is lightlike related. Einstein thus

takes any nonnull, even infinitesimal spatiotemporal separation as a sufficient condition for

regarding two points or regions of spacetime as separate and separable physical systems, this latter

possibility being secured by the fact that the infinitesimal metric interval is the fundamental

invariant of the general relativistic class of transformations, and hence an objective feature of

general relativistic spacetime.

         On the other hand, Bell’s theorem and the results of the Bell experiments must be read as

confirming the quantum mechanical violations of spatiotemporal separability, if, that is, we agree

not to admit nonlocalities of the kind prohibited by special relativistic prohibitions on superluminal

physical effects. But this means that we have discovered a fundamental incompatibility between

general relativity and quantum mechanics at the level of the fundamental ontologies of the two

theories: General relativity requires separability, quantum mechanics denies it, and experience, in

the form of the Bell experiments, suggests that quantum mechanics is right and general relativity

wrong.

         The conflict between general relativity and quantum mechanics at the level of their

fundamental ontologies suggests that any ontologically naive unification program is bound to fail,

that gravitation will not be incorporated into a unified approach to fundamental physics by anything
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 28

so simple as quantizing the gravitational field. Another approach is needed, one that begins with

the lessons of quantum nonseparability at the level of fundamental ontology. In line with Pauli’s

suggestion to Heisenberg, it is this alternative approach that I want to call a “Pauli program” for

fundamental physics. What would such a program look like?

       In an earlier paper, I deliberately urged an unblushingly metaphysical approach to the

question of how quantum nonseparability might be incorporated into a fundamental understanding

of nature, with special reference to the task of imagining alternatives to general relativistic

spacetime as the context in which such a fundamental theory should be located. I toyed there with

ideas like higher-dimensional spaces, where systems separated in ordinary four-dimensinal

spacetime would be immediately adjacent in one or more higher dimensions, or miniature

wormholes providing backdoor connections in spacetime (Howard 1989). Here, again, I want to

focus on questions of spacetime structure, but I now want to pursue a different, more “Einsteinian”

approach, and this in two respects.

       First, Einstein was famous for arguing that progress is more likely to be made in a new

theoretical domain not by seeking, too early, a constructive model of the phenomena, but instead

by identifying a few well-confirmed, high-level empirical generalizations, like the light and

relativity principles in special relativity or the Boltzmann principle in statistical physics, that can

serve as regulative principles guiding the search for a constructive model (Einstein 1919). Newton

advocated a similar approach, especially in his early work on the constitution of light, where he

cautioned his critics, like Hooke, not to “mingle conjectures with certainties,” “conjecture” being

hypothetical models for the constitution of light, “certainties” being high-level empirical

generalizations about the constitution of light of the kind confirmed in Newton’s prism experiments
                                                            Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 29

(see Howard 1991). What would be the corresponding “principles” or “certainties” that might

govern the search for conjectural, constructive models of a nonseparable quantum spacetime?

       The obvious answer is nonseparability itself, understood first and foremost as a restriction

on the kinds of statistical correlations between previously interacting systems that a Pauli program

can admit, and by extension both as a constraint on the kind of joint state functions that are to be

assigned to previously interacting systems, and as a constraint on the basic ontology itself, at the

level of the method whereby we individuate the physical systems that are the possessors of those

physical states. What kind of constraint on the joint state functions? If states are taken to be

assignments of joint probabilities to ordered pairs of contexts and outcomes, as explained in section

3 above, then the joint state functions must not be decomposable into separate state functions. What

kind of constraint on the basic ontology itself? At least by way of example, non-null spatiotemporal

separation may not be taken as a principle or ground for the individuation of otherwise identical

fundamental physical systems.

       The spacetime event ontology of general relativity does not satisfy these constraints. Let us

pause to reflect, for a moment, on how it was that we nevertheless thought our way to a spacetime

theory whose fundamental ontology now proves to be unacceptable. Newton invented spacetime

as the ground against which systems interacting gravitationally and their states were to be

individuated, space individuating the systems and time individuating the states of those systems.

The gravitational field, which was a metaphysical puzzle for Newton, was invented as a device for

explaining gravitational interactions without assuming either action-at-a-distance or some kind of

mysterious, Leibnizian pre-established harmony.
                                                              Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 30

        Spacetime and the gravitational field were married by Einstein when he elevated the

equivalence of inertial and gravitational mass to the level of principle, and thus was effected a

considerable ontological economy, since, once the two were conjoined, we had one and the same

structure doing both the mediating of gravitational interactions in a local fashion and the

individuating of the interacting systems in a separable manner. Not only that, but with the

relativistic merger of space and time into spacetime, we now had just one structure, spacetime,

individuating both systems and their states, which is to say that the distinction between systems and

states of systems also loses its fundamental siginificance in the event ontology of relativity. Further

simplification came via Einstein’s choice to enlarge the relevant group from the Lorentz group to

the general relativistic group, a move that was not only possible, but in a sense natural, since neither

mediation nor individuation required the invariance of finite spatiotemporal intervals, the invariance

of the infinitesimal metric interval in general relativity being all that was needed for either purpose.

Electricity and magnetism had already been given a home in the relativistic spacetime framework

when, with the development of special relativity, the Galilean group was replaced by the Lorentz

group, the latter being the implicit invariance group for Maxwell’s equations.

        Quantum mechanics was born out of the effort to understand the peculiar non-Boltzmannian

statistics that emerge when we examine the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with ponderable

matter, that is with systems having non-null gravitational mass, the photon eventually being invented

as the massless carrier of electromagnetic energy. As long as we considered either electromagnetic

interactions between charged particles (where inertial mass still plays a role in parameterizing a

system’s resistance to changes in its state of motion due to electromagnetic forces) or purely

gravitational interactions (with inertial mass here parameterizing a system’s resistance to changes
                                                              Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 31

in its state of motion due to gravitational forces), no quantum theory was needed. Again, quantum

phenomena came to the fore only when we asked about what might be termed “mixed” interactions:

electromagnetic effects on bodies capable also of feeling gravitational effects thanks to their

gravitational mass. And what was found for those situations was that the non-Boltzmannian

statistics were most naturally generated by adopting a non-classical scheme for the individuation

of the relevant physical systems, with non-null spatiotemporal separation no longer being a

sufficient condition for endowing two (or more) interacting systems with trackable identities, herein

lying the germ of quantum nonseparability.

        Quite apart from the nonseparability that emerges in quantum mechanics, there were already,

as mentioned before, some puzzling features about the way the photon, the carrier of

electromagnetic energy, lives in relativistic spacetime.        Most importantly, even though the

infinitesimal metric interval is the fundamental invariant of general relativity, its objectivity thereby

securing the possibility of the spatiotemporal mode of individuation of physical systems so prized

by Einstein, nevertheless, there is a null separation between any two lightlike related events and

hence between any two stages in the career of a single photon. The same will be true for any

massless particle “traveling” at the speed of light. This is a consequence of our doing physics on

a spacetime manifold with Lorentz signature.

        Let’s stop and think for a moment about what this feature of photon trajectories entails. In

particular, let’s think more systematically about the consequences of interpreting the existence of

a non-null spatiotemporal separation as a necessary condition for individuation. Historically, of

course, non-null spatiotemporal separation was read as both a sufficient and a necessary condition

for individuation. Its role as a necessary condition for individuation is implicit in the classical
                                                               Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 32

definition of matter or a material body, according to which no two pieces of material substance

could occupy the same place at the same time. For, in effect, this definition says that if two pieces

of material substance do occupy the same place at the same time, that is, if they are separated by a

null spatiotemporal interval, then they are not two, but one. Moreover, the idea that non-null

spatiotemporal separation is a necessary condition for individuation also played, historically, a

crucial, if not always clearly articulated role in our thinking about the distinguishability of particles.

Because if we permitted two different pieces of matter to occupy the same portion of space at the

same time, then two otherwise identical particles could interpenetrate and exchange identities in a

“collision,” the only kind of purely mechanical interaction in classical mechanics. But if pariticle

identities could be exhanged in a collision, we would no longer have trackable particle identities and

so, for example, the Boltzmann principle would no longer be valid in statistical mechanics.

        What was never contemplated classically was the existence of a non-null spatitemporal

interval between lightlike related events in spacetimes with Lorentz signature. If non-null

spatiotemporal separation is regarded as a necessary condition for individuating two systems, then

two events lying on a lightlike trajectory will not be endowed with separate identities. However

widely separated in space or time two such events may appear to some observer, if they represent

two points on the world-line of a photon they would not then qualify as separable systems.

        In general relativistic spacetime, there is one other circumstance under which two systems

find themselves separated by a null interval, namely, when their worldlines intersect, as when a

neutral particle scatters from another particle, a particle-antiparticle pair is produced by pair

creation, or a particle decays, yielding two or more offspring particles as decay products. So here

too, if the presence of a non-null spatiotemporal interval is supposed to be a necessary condition for
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 33

individuating physical systems, two systems whose world-lines intersect would not be capable of

being individuated, at least at the point where their world-lines intersect. But that means that if we

discount purely gravitational interactions (and ignore, for the moment, strong and weak nuclear

interactions), general relativistic spacetime already has within it structure that to some extent

mimics the pattern of individuation typical of quantum mechanics for all interacting systems.

       Can we build upon this insight in such a way as to elicit from general relativistic spacetime

itself enough structure so as to reproduce the characteristic quantum mechanical pattern of

individuation? I think that the answer may be yes, and this is the second respect in which I want to

pursue here a more “Einsteinian” approach to spacetime and individuation.

       Let me give a provisional formulation of the idea that I have in mind as a principle that I will

dub the QM-GR principle of individuation:

       I. Any two systems, A and B, that were anywhere separated by a non-null spatiotemporal
       interval in their causal pasts are to be regarded as separable systems at all points in their
       causal futures unless (1) their world-lines intersect, or (2) their world-lines are both
       intersected by the world-line of a photon. In either of these cases, systems A and B are to
       be regarded as nonseparable at all points in the causal future(s) of the intersection(s), unless
       condition II obtains.




                         Figure 2 Ways of Engendering Nonseparability
                                                            Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 34

       II. Any two nonseparable systems, A and B, are to be regarded as separable systems at all
       points in the causal futures of any intersection of either A or B with a third system C, as in
       I. (1) above, or with a photon emitted by a third system C, as in I. (2) above.




                         Figure 3 Ways of Breaking the Nonseparability


       Notice how this principle of individuation differs from Einstein’s way of using the point

structure of the manifold. For Einstein, any non-null spatiotemporal interval was a sufficient

condition for individuating two physical systems. Thus, even if the world lines of two systems

intersected, from the moment after their intersection Einstein’s spatiotemporal individuation

principle would count them as once again as separable systems. The proposal under consideration

here would not.

       At the root of the difference between Einstein’s spatiotemporal principle of individuation

and the QM-GR principle of individuation is the fact that Einstein in effect wants to allow the

individuation of physical systems in spacetime to be induced by the underlying individuation of the

points of the manifold itself, each point corresponding to a separate physical system. By contrast,

I am trying to tease a quantum mechanical scheme of individuation out of the worldline structure.

That Einstein wanted to proceed as he did should come as no surprise. Newtonian space tacitly

individuated systems in the same way, every point of space being, at least potentially, if God wills
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 35

it, a point particle.11 The concept of the topological manifold is the descendent of Newtonian space,

its more immediate ancestor being the n-dimensional Riemannian manifold ún. One can take away

from ún all remnants of the idea of individuation via coordinatization, but that still leaves a bare

manifold with a built-in notion of the individuation of its points via their separations, albeit not in

any metrical sense, from their neighbors. Thus, Einstein’s wanting to use the point structure of the

spacetime manifold as the basis for his scheme of individuation means that he is just being true to

the Newtonian tradition on individuation, which I mentioned above had been passed on to Einstein

through Kant and Schopenhauer.

       The QM-GR principle of individuation, however, uses not the point structure of the

manifold, but the worldline structure. It would therefore be desirable, perhaps, to try to free the

formulation of that principle from all vestiges of notions borrowed from the point structure, such

as talk of non-null spatiotemporal interval between two systems during their history prior to some

interaction of interest, as in clause (I). Though I will not attempt such an explicit reformulation

here, there should be no obstacle to our doing so, since all that we need from the point of view of

the QM-GR principle of intervention is a more basic notion of non-coincidence. The reference to

the metrical notion of the null interval between two events that are lightlike related, which led to

our conferring special status on photon worldlines, can be replaced by a definition of photon

worldlines that turns upon their role in determining the lightcone structure of general relativistic

spacetime. We need the lightcone structure also to ground the notions of causal past and causal

future. Thus, we should be able to succeed in the attempt to construct a QM-GR principle of

individuation with nothing more than world lines, the concept of the intersection of world lines, and

the lightcone structure.
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 36

       There are independent reasons for trying to free ourselves from reliance on the point

structure of the manifold in favor of the world line structure, reasons stemming from Einstein

himself. They are to be found in the so-called point-coincidence argument that Einsetin developed

in the effort to get around the error of the “hole argument,” the fallacious argument that contributed

the three-year delay in Einstein’s affirmation of the correction general relativistic field equations.

Einstein realized that the problem at the root of the hole argument was a confusion over the

individuation of the points of the spacetime manifold. In 1912, at the time of the hole argument,

Einstein wrongly believed that a coordinatization of the manifold was sufficient for individuating

its points, overlook the fact that coordinatizations are not invariant.          When he rejected

coordinatization as a principle of individuation in late 1915, he proposed that we instead take the

points of the manifold to be defined implicity, and thus individuated as points of intersection of

world lines. This is, to be sure, not the only way around the error of the hole argument, as John

Norton has shown using the notion of “Leibniz equivalence” to construct equivalence classes of

isomorphic physical spacetimes (see, for example, Norton 1989). On the other hand, John Stachel

has taken the central idea of the point-coincidence argument as a reason for urging that we replace

the point manifold with fiber bundles as the appropriate and natural framework within which to do

general relativity (see Stachel 1986a, 1986b).12

       Following up Einstein’s idea of defining spacetime events as points of intersection of world

lines leads us to another feature of relativistic spacetime that turns out to have peculiar and

surprising relevance to our worries about individuation and thus to provide yet another point of

purchase for a “Pauli program” for fundamental physics. The central insight is, again, Einstein’s.

In his 1920 lecture, Äther und Relativitäts-Theorie (Einstein 1920), Einstein came up with what at
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 37

the time he believed was a relativistic argument agains any residual notion of substance in physics.

He argued that the electromagnetic field (and the gravitational field, for that matter) could not be

viewed as being carried by a sea of material particles, because such particles, having trackable

identities, would therefore possess trajectories that would, in effect, define a privileged frame of

reference, somewhat like an ether frame. Thus, covariance considerations ruled out the field’s being

carried by material field particles.

       As best I can tell, Einstein let this idea drop, never returning to in later publications or

correspondence. That he did so is unfortunate, because had he taken the idea up again after the

discovery in 1924 of the fundamental significance of the statistics of indistinguishable particles, he

might have realized that the argument could be run in a different direction. For one can turn

Einstein’s original insight around in the following way. One can argue that if there are to be

material particles acting as carrier of electromagnetic (or any other species of) field energy, then

covariance considerations alone require them to be indistinguishable particles as the only way to

guarantee that their presence in spacetime does not pick out a privileged frame of reference. Their

being indistinguishable means that there is no one uniquely correct way of connecting up different

“photon- events,” if you will, into photon trajectories.
                                                            Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 38

       Curiously, this idea was taken up by Hans Reichenbach in his 1928 Philosophie der Raum-

Zeit-Lehre. Reichenbach also failed to see that Einstein’s insight could be turned into a covariance

argument for indistinguishability, or at least that is not how he presented the argument. His concern

was to show merely that the existence of “material fields” carried by indistinguishable particles

created problems for the concept of genidentity as the appropriate notion of identity for systems

characterized by world lines in spacetime. This is because the indistinguishability of the field

particles induces an underdetermination in the way we lay world lines into spacetime, an

underdetermination that Reichenbach dubbed the “arbitrariness of striations” (“Willkürlichkeit der

                                                          Zerspaltung”) (Reichenbach 1928, pp.

                                                          270-271). Reichenbach illustrated this

                                                          arbitrariness with a diagram that makes

                                                          vivid the way indistinguishability blocks

                                                          any univocal of photon-events into photon

                                                          world lines.

                                                                  An argument for the indistinguish-

                                                          ability of photons (or the particle-like

                                                          carriers of any other species of field

         Figure 4 Arbitrariness of Striations             energy) from covariance considerations
          (After Reichenbach 1928, p. 271)
                                                          alone is remarkable. But for all that it

promises new insights into the relation between spacetime structure and the individuation of

physical systems, it also raises many new questions. Foremost among these would have to be the

following: If there is no unique way of laying photon trajectories into spacetime, on pain of
                                                            Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 39

privileging an “ether frame,” then what happens to the notion of conformal or light cone structure?

It may have been worries such as this that deterred Einstein from pursuing the argument himself.

Instead of being deterred, however, we might ask whether or not an underdetermination of the

causal structure of spacetime, as required for the purpose of accommodating indistinguishable

particles in spacetime in a covariant way, might not itself offer yet deeper glimpses into the

connection between spacetime structure and individuation. Thus one idea might be to try to

interpret the multiplicity of different possible “striations,” as Reichenbach called them, as

corresponding to a set of virtual trajectories.

       Rather than follow this daunting line of thinking any further at the moment, let us return to

a consideration of the consequences of taking the worldline and lightcone structure, as opposed to

the point structure of the manifold, as ontologically basic in fundamental physics. Were we to do

this, how might we begin to build the rest of our physics into this framework? Let’s confine our

attention for the moment to the quantum mechanics of charged and chargeless, massive and

massless particles and their interactions via electromagnetic forces. There is no reason why we

could not associate quantum mechanical states with systems thus individuated in standard quantum

mechanical fashion. What might be more difficult will be building gravitation back into this

framework, the question being how to get something like a metrical notion of curvature in this

scheme. One might conjecture that the right approach would be to let something like spatiotemporal

probability densities, defined now on the worldlines, do the work formerly done by the stress-energy

tensor, since, after all, the former are a kind of measure of the mass-energy content of regions of

spacetime. But if we let something like the metrical structure be evolved out of the structure of the

probability densities, then, in a sense, we would have a quantum theory of spacetime, rather than
                                                               Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 40

having a quantum theory that naively presupposes a spacetime background that, as we have seen,

is not intrinsically congenial to having a quantum theory implanted within it, owing to the problem

of the inherently different quantum mechanical and spatiotemporal modes of individuating physical

systems.

        Mention of the spatiotemporal probability densities brings to mind a possible worry, which

is that worldlines as understood in general relativity represent definite trajectories, which would

seem to be incompatible with Heisenberg indeterminacy. But if one were to take the worldlines

themselves as ontologially basic, without regarding them as one-dimensional sets of spacetime

points, then when would not be begging any questions about spatiotemporal definiteness. From the

point of view of the worldlines themselves, there is no reason why they might not be taken to

represent something that would look like a “fuzzy” path from the point of view of the spacetime

structure we eventually evolve from quantum mechanical probability densities. In other words, to

say that a worldline represents the career of a system is not, in and of itself, to say that that career

corresponds to a definite trajectory in the classical sense.

        I am not prepared to say anything at the moment about how the strong and week nuclear

forces would be integrated into this picture, except to observe that the bosonic carriers of these other

forces should be expected to play in this newly conceived quantum spacetime a role not unlike that

of the photon, their mediation of interactions inducing connections between otherwise separate

systems.

        Finally, is there any sense in which the scheme being developed here represents a unification

of gravity and electromagnetism? Pehaps so if one can get curvature from probability densities.

That there should be a unification emerging here follows from the fact that we are taking as our
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 41

ontological starting point the pattern of individuation that seems necessary to explain the peculiar

statistics that emerge in the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and ponderable, that is,

gravitational matter. This scheme of individuation was not necessary for either electromagnetism

or gravitation considered alone. But it is the salient characteristic of what I called above “mixed

interactions.”



5. Conclusion

       Twenty years ago, when talking with me about the puzzles of the quantum, Abner Shimony

once ventured the observation that the ultimate solution to those puzzles might well require a radical

revision in our understanding of spacetime structure. At the time, I had no idea what he might mean

by that conjecture. Perhaps he had no definite idea in mind himself; it may have been just an idle

Bieridee. But the remark has haunted me ever since. I would like to think that our understanding

at least the fundamental difference in the way quantum mechanics and spacetime theories naturally

individuate physical systems and states might give us a clue as to where, finally, we might look for

new view of spacetime that could solve the quantum puzzles. I doubt that my musings here will lead

directly to such a new view, their being, in the end, little more than Bierideen themselves. I hope,

however, to have persuaded you that there is a deep and important problem to be explored in the

cluster of issues surrounding spacetime and individuation.



Acknowledgments. In other publications I have recorded many debts to many individuals whose

conversation, criticism, friendship, and sometimes just logistical support have left their mark in my

work. Many of them deserve mention here. But on this occasion I want to record just one, namely,
                                                             Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 42

to Abner Shimony himself, who has helped my work along in all the mentioned ways but who has

also been for me an example of what it is to be a philosopher of science, especially one for whom

the quest for understanding is the polestar of one’s professional life. In particular, I want to thank

Abner for helpful comments on the present essay, while noting that such mistakes as there may be

are still all mine.

        I wish also to thank the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which holds the copyright, for

permission to quote from Einstein’s unpublished writings and correspondence. Quotations from

unpublished material in the Einstein Archive are cited by their control number in the Archive, after

the fashion: EA xx-xxx.

                                             ENDNOTES

1. See Pauli 1985, pp. 402-406. Heisenberg did write the suggested reply, enclosing a copy with his
letter to Pauli of 2 July 1935; see Pauli 1985, pp. 409-418. Another copy is in the Einstein Archive,
EA 5-207.

2. For further details on the history that is summarized in this section, see Howard 1984 and 1990.

3. For a thorough account of Einstein’s “Bestimmt” manuscript, including an interesting account
of the historical background to the mathematical methods that it employs, but with a somewhat
different reading of its place in the development of Einstein’s thinking about the quantum from the
one suggested here, see Belousek 1996.

4. That Einstein was trying to make a point about separability and not indeterminacy emerges from
a letter from Paul Ehrenfest to Bohr of 9 July 1931, written immediately after Ehrenfest had visited
with Bohr in Berlin. For more on the letter and the interpretation of the photon box thought
experiment, see Howard 1990, pp. 98-101.

5. For more detail on Einstein’s thinking about separability and locality from 1935 to 1955, see
Howard 1984.

6. The following discussion recapitulates an argument that I first published, in extenso, in Howard
1992; see also Howard 1989. I borrow the especially lucid notation from James Cushing’s
introductory essay (Cushing 1989) to the volume in which the latter is contained.
                                                            Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 43

7. Jarrett’s original formulation of the “locality” and “completeness” conditions was more
complicated than that give here, taking into account the complete state of the analyzers. Only in
reponse to criticism from Shimony (1984, section 2) did Jarrett adopt the present formulation.

8. Interpreting states as physical propensities and thus according propensities a fundamental
ontological status is not uncongenial to Shimony’s regarding “potentialities” as ontologically
fundamental (see, for example, Shimony 1986, sections 2 and 5). But, in my opinion, something
more than a simple distinction between “potentiality” and “actuality” is needed to make sense of
the curiously complicated way in which, in quantum mechanics, what may or may not be accounted
a definite property of a system can be argued to depend upon the experimental context in which the
system finds itself; for more on the issue of context dependence, see Howard 1994.

9. In other settings it proves helpful to think of a context as a set of comeasurable observables for
the joint system. For a discussion of the role played by such a notion of context in Bohr’s thinking
about the classical/quantum distinction and the concept of a “phenomenon” proper to the quantum
domain, see Howard 1994.

10. For a rather different reading of the bearing of this analysis on the choice between orthodox,
Cophenhagen quantum mechanics and Bohm-type hidden variable theories, see Cushing 1994,
which questions the usefulness of the distinction between locality and separability in the context of
Bohmian hidden variable theories.

11. As Newton explains in his unpublished manuscript, De Gravitatione et æquipondio fluidorum
(Hall and Hall 1962, pp. 89-156), God can, by an act of will momentarily render and region of space
a bounded atom, continuous motion coming about by his successively so rendering immediately
adjacent regions thus so bounded. For more detail on this aspect of Newton’s theory of space, see
Howard 1993 and the further references found there.

12. See Stachel 1980 for more details on the history of the hole and point-coincidence arguments
in Einstein’s work on general relativity.
                                                         Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 44

                                         REFERENCES

Ballentine, L.E. and Jarrett, Jon (1987). “Bell’s Theorem: Does Quantum Mechanics Contradict
               Relativity?” American Journal of Physics 55: 696-701.

Belousek, Darrin (1996). “Einstein’s Unpublished 1927 Hidden-Variable Theory: Its Background,
              Context, and Significance.” Typescript.

Bohr, Niels (1935). “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered
              Complete?” Physical Review 48: 696-702.

Born, Max (1949). Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Born, Max, ed. (1969). Albert Einstein—Hedwig und Max Born. Briefwechsel, 1916-1955. Munich:
               Nymphenburger.

Cushing, James T. (1989). “A Background Essay.” In Cushing and McMullin 1989, pp. 1-24.

)))) (1994). “Locality/Separability: Is this Necessarily a Useful Distinction?” In PSA 1994:
              Proceedings of the 1994 Biennial meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association.
              David Hull, Micky Forbes, and Richard Burian, eds. East Lansing, Michigan:
              Philosophy of Science Association, pp. 107-116.

Cushing, James T. and McMullin, Ernan, eds. (1989). Philosophical Consequences of Quantum
             Theory: Reflections on Bell's Theorem. Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre
             Dame Press

Einstein, Albert (1905). “Über einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden
               heuristischen Gesichtspunkt.” Annalen der Physik 17: 132-148.

)))) (1909a). “Zum gegenwärtigen Stand des Strahlungsproblems.” Physikalische Zeitschrift 10:
              185-193.

)))) (1909b). “Über die Entwickelung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die
              Konstitution der Strahlung.” Deutsche Physikalishe Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen 11:
              482-500; rpt. Physikalische Zeitschrift 10 (1909): 817-825.

)))) (1916a). “Strahlungs-emission und -absorption nach der Quantentheorie.”          Deutsche
              Physikalishe Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen 18: 318-323.

)))) (1916b). “Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung.” Physikalische Gesellschaft Zürich.
              Mitteilungen 47-62; rpt. Physikalische Zeitschrift 18 (1917): 121128.
                                                          Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 45

)))) (1924). “Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases.” Preussische Akadamie der
              Wissenschaften. Physikalish-mathematische Klasse. Sitzungsberichte 261-267.

)))) (1925a). “Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases. Zweite Abhandlung.” Preussische
              Akadamie der Wissenschaften. Physikalish-mathematische Klasse. Sitzungsberichte
              3-14.

)))) (1925b). “Quantentheorie des idealen Gases.” Preussische Akadamie der Wissenschaften.
              Physikalish-mathematische Klasse. Sitzungsberichte 18-25.

)))) (1916). “Ernst Mach.” Physikalische Zeitschrift 17: 101-104.

)))) (1919). “Time, Space, and Gravitation.” Times (London). 28 November, p. 13.

)))) (1920). Äther und Relativitäts-Theorie. Rede gehalten am 5. Mai 1920 an der Reichs-
              Universität zu Leiden. Berlin: Julius Springer.

Einstein, Albert; Podolsky, Boris; and Rosen, Nathan (1935). “Can Quantum-Mechanical
              Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?” Physical Review 47: 777-
              780.

Hall, A. Rupert, and Hall, Marie Boas, eds. and trans. (1962). Unpublished Scientific Papers of
              Isaac Newton: A Selection from the Portsmouth Collection in the University Library,
              Cambridge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Howard, Don (1985). “Einstein on Locality and Separability.” Studies in History and Philosophy
             of Science 16: 171-201.

)))) (1989). “Holism, Separability, and the Metaphysical Implications of the Bell Experiments.”
              In Cushing and McMullin 1989, pp. 224-253.

)))) (1990). “‘Nicht sein kann was nicht sein darf,’ or the Prehistory of EPR, 1909-1935:
              Einstein's Early Worries about the Quantum Mechanics of Composite Systems.” In
              Sixty-two Years of Uncertainty: Historical, Philosophical, and Physical Inquiries
              into the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Arthur I. Miller, ed. New York:
              Plenum Press, pp. 61-111.

)))) (1991). “‘And I Shall not Mingle Conjectures with Certainties.’ On the Intellectual
              Background to Einstein's Distinction between Principle Theories and Constructive
              Theories.” Paper delivered to the conference on “Albert Einstein: The Early Years,”
              North Andover, Massachusetts, October 1991.
                                                          Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 46

)))) (1992). “Locality, Separability, and the Physical Implications of the Bell Experiments.” In
              Bell’s Theorem and the Foundations of Modern Physics. A. van der Merwe, F.
              Selleri, and G. Tarozzi, eds. Singapore: World Scientific, pp. 306-314.

)))) (1994). “What Makes a Classical Concept Classical? Toward a Reconstruction of Niels
              Bohr’s Philosophy of Physics.” In Niels Bohr and Contemporary Philosophy. Jan
              Faye and Henry J. Folse, eds. Dordrecht, Boston, and London: Kluwer, pp. 201-229.

)))) (1996). “A Peek behind the Veil of Maya: Einstein, Schopenhauer, and the Historical
              Background of the Conception of Space as a Ground for the Individuation of
              Physical Systems.” In The Cosmos of Science: Essays of Exploration. John Earman
              and John Norton, eds. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. Forthcoming.

Jarrett, Jon (1983). “Bell’s Theorem, Quantum Mechanics, and Local Realism.” Ph.D. Dissertation.
                University of Chicago.

)))) (1984). “On the Physical Significance of the the Locality Conditions in the Bell Arguments.”
              Noûs 18: 569-589.

Norton, John D. (1989). “Coordinates and Covariance: Einstein’s View of Space-Time and the
             Modern View.” Foundations of Physics 19: 1215-1263.

Pauli, Wolfgang (1985). Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel mit Bohr, Einstein, Heisenberg
             u.a./Scientific Correspondence with Bohr, Einstein, Heisenberg a.o. Vol. 2, 1930-
             1939. Karl von Meyenn, ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Reichenbach, Hans (1928). Philosophie der Raum-Zeit-Lehre. Berlin: Julius Springer. Page
             numbers and quotations from the English translation: The Philosophy of Space &
             Time. Maria Reichenbach and John Freund, trans. New York: Dover, 1957.

Shimony, Abner (1984). “Controllable and Uncontrollable Non-Locality.” In Foundations of
            Quantum Mechanics in the Light of New Technology. S. Kamefuchi, et al., eds.
            Tokyo: Physical Society of Japan, pp. 225-230. Reprinted in Shimony 1993, pp. 130-
            139.

)))) (1986). “Events and Processes in the Quantum World.” In Quantum Concepts in Space and
              Time. R. Penrose and C. Isham, eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 182-203.
              Reprinted in Shimony 1993, pp. 140-162.

)))) (1993). Search for a Naturalistic World View. Vol. 2, Natural Science and Metaphysics.
              Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                                                                      Howard/Shimony Festschrift—Page 47

            Stachel, John (1980). “Einstein's Search for General Covariance, 1912-1915.” Paper delievered at
                           the Ninth International Conference on General Relativity, Jena, German Democratic
                           Republic, 17 July 1980. First published in Einstein and the History of General
                           Relativity. Don Howard and John Stachel, eds. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1989, pp. 63-100.

            )))) (1986a). “What a Physicist Can Learn from the History of Einstein's Discovery of General
                           Relativity.” In Proceedings of the Fourth Marcel Grossmann Meeting on General
                           Relativity. Remo Ruffini, ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1857-1862.

            )))) (1986b). “How Einstein Discovered General Relativity: A Historical Tale with Some
                           Contemporary Morals.” In General Relativity and Gravitation: Proceedings of the
                           11th International Conference on General Relativity and Gravitation, Stockholm,
                           July 6-12, 1986. M. A. H. MacCallum, ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                           1987, pp. 200-208.

            Wolfke, Mieczsy³aw (1914a). “Welche Strahlungsformel folgt aus der Annahme der Lichtatome?”
                         Physikalische Zeitschrift 15: 308.

            )))) (1914c). “Antwort auf die Bemerkung Herrn Krutkows zu meiner Note: ‘Welche
                           Strahlungsformel folgt aus den Annahme der Lichtatome?’” Physikalische Zeitschrift
                           15: 463.




View publication stats
