Physica A 153 (1988) 97-113
North-Holland, Amsterdam




    TEN THEOREMS ABOUT QUANTUM MECHANICAL
    MEASUREMENTS

    N.G. VAN KAMPEN
    Institute for Theoretical Physics of the University, Utrecht, The Netherlands



    Received 1 July 1988




       The aim of quantum mechanics is to explain macroscopic, objectively recorded phenomena.
    Microscopic objects are measured by enabling them to interact with a macroscopic measuring
    apparatus prepared in a metastable state. Macroscopic objects, such as cats, are not above the
    laws of quantum mechanics, but owing to their enormously dense level spectrum other aspects
    than single eigenvalues and eigenfunctions are prominent. These aspects can be described in
    classical terms, such as probabilities instead of probability amplitudes. The measuring act is
    fully described by the Schrodinger equation for object system and apparatus together. The
    collapse of the wave function is a consequence rather than an additional postulate. A model is
    constructed to demonstrate these statements. It also appears that the entropies of the object
    system and the apparatus increase by the same amount, namely the entropy difference
    between the metastable initial state and the stable final state of the apparatus.



1. Formulation of the problem

   Many a theory in physics makes use of mathematical entities that do not
correspond to an intuitively understandable physical object. Of course intuition
can be educated; as a consequence some of these entities, for instance energy,
become so familiar as to be regarded as concrete objects. Others, such as the
coordinates xF in general relativity, remain abstract without anybody worrying
about it. A third class, however, of which entropy is an example, remains a
source of bewilderment and controversy. The most notorious member of this
class is the wave function #. It is an indispensable tool for quantum mechanical
calculations, but its connection with actually observed phenomena is remote.
This connection is the subject of the continuing debate about the foundations
of quantum mechanics and the theory of measurement [l-4]. A huge literature
has been provoked by the question: How exactly does the wave function $
relate to the phenomena that I can observe and measure?
   Meanwhile quantum mechanics is in daily use and is extremely successful in
understanding, predicting, and computing these same phenomena. One knows

037%4371/88/$03.50 0 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.
(North-Holland Physics Publishing Division)
98       N.G.   van Kampen   I Ten theorems   about quantum   mechanical   measurements


how to handle $ so as to get concrete, observable conclusions about the
physical world. Apparently the problem is solved in practice; the difficulties
enter only when one starts philosophizing. This philosophizing has given rise to
a number of “interpretations”,      in which (I/ is endowed with more physical
significance than is needed for the actual calculation of the phenomena. There
are a number of schools with different views, including such mind-boggling
fantasies as the many-world interpretation [5], which go far beyond the world
of physical phenomena.
   My question is: How is it possible that, in spite of these differences of
opinion, quantum mechanics is used in practice to obtain uncontroversial
results? The purpose of this article is not to defend some interpretation, but to
analyze what happens when quantum mechanics is used to obtain results that can
be compared with experiments. This is a matter of physics; what I say is true or
false - not the expression of a philosophical view about the deeper meanings of
reality.
   It is not surprising that some of my conclusions are the same as those of
Bohr [6] inasmuch as his aim too was to understand how the quantum
mechanical formalism works. Yet in some crucial points the present description
of the theory of measurement differs from what is usually regarded as the
Copenhagen interpretation. A great help in elucidating the measuring process
is the explicit model constructed in section 6. I repeat that I shall avoid all
philosophical extrapolations of the physical facts. Znterpretationes non @fingo.



2. Preliminary remarks about quantum mechanics


Theorem I: Quantum mechanics           works.

   It describes and computes those phenomena for which it was invented, such
as black body radiation and spectra; and numerous others, such as specific heat
and superconductivity.  All these phenomena are macroscopic, objective, and
permanently recorded, for instance on a photographic plate or as a table in the
Physical Review. Hence

Theorem ZZ: Quantum mechanics is concerned               with macroscopic         phenomena,
which are not perturbed by observation.

   The familiar stories about the influence of the observer on the system do not
apply to real observations in a laboratory. They apply to a world of lilliputians,
where an observer is able to aim at a single gamma quantum at a preassigned
electron. Such stories may be helpful in exposing the difference with the
          N. G. van Kampen   I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements        99


classical picture of particles and waves, but they are irrelevant for the
observations as done in practice. Our purpose is merely to know how to deal
with actually observed phenomena.
   One example of such phenomena is the diffraction of a beam of electrons
passing through a crystal. In order to compute the observed diffraction pattern
one makes use of a quantity $, called the “wave function of a single electron”.
The value of [I)[ *, multiplied by the number N of electrons in the beam, is the
observed blackening of the photographic plate. The value of [$I* for a single
electron does occur in the calculation, but is not observed itself. One may call
it the probability density of the electron, but that is merely a name for the
observed blackening divided by N.

Theorem    ZZZ: The quantum mechanical probability            is not observed but merely
serves as an       intermediate    stage     in   the   computation   of   an   observable
phenomenon,

   The old question: Does $ refer to a single system or to an ensemble? - must
therefore be answered as follows. I,!Jis a mathematical object pertaining to a
single system; its square [$I2 may be called a single system probability.
However, in order to confront this quantity with reality one must do observa-
tions on a large number of similar systems, in such a way that the probability
density materializes as an actual density.
   Not only the probability I+/*, but also the wave function $ itself occurs
merely as a mathematical tool in the calculation of spectra, collision cross-
sections, etc. It does not occur in the result that can be handed to the
experimenter for comparison with the real world. This situation is similar with
the way in which the relativistic coordinates n’ are used, and also the vector
potential in Maxwell theory. For some reason, however, it is the wave function
that has been the object of numerous speculations concerning its “true
nature”. Everybody is free to speculate, but

Theorem     ZV: Whoever       endows    I,!I with more     meaning    than is needed   for
computing observable phenomena             is responsible for the consequences.

   He has the duty to show that his speculations do not lead to contradictions,
and preferably that they are of some use (other than agreement with precon-
ceived philosophical views). If he does not succeed he should not blame
quantum mechanics.
   Such theories are usually carefully constructed so as to reproduce the known
results of quantum mechanics; they can therefore neither be verified nor
falsified by experiments. One might hope that they are simpler or easier to
100      N.G.   van Kampen   I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements


handle but actually they are usually complicated and contrived. This is
particularly so when they fail to respect the superposition principle and as a
result lose the tool of transforming in Hilbert space. But I digress: our purpose
is merely to see how quantum mechanics works in practice.



3. The measuring     process according to von Neumann


  Any measuring arrangement        corresponds with the measurement   of an
observable quantity represented by a Hermitian operator A. Such an operator
has a complete set of eigenfunctions x,, with eigenvalues h,,

      AX, = Ax,, .

For convenience we suppose that the eigenvalues are discrete and nondegener-
ate and that the x, are normalized. Von Neumann gives the following abstract
description of the measuring process [7].
   (i) As long as no measurement occurs the system is described by a wave
function G(t), which evolves according to the Schrodinger equation for the
system.
   (ii) Suppose at t, the system is brought into contact with an apparatus for
measuring A. Then the possible outcomes are the values A,. The probability
for finding h, is

      pm= I(xmlv4t,>)l”~
(In this connection the measurement is always taken to be instantaneous, i.e.,
short on the time scale of the Schrodinger evolution.)
   (iii) If the value A, has been found by the measurement the wave function
changes abruptly from $(t,) into x,,. This sudden reduction or collapse of the
wave function is to be added as a new postulate to the Schrodinger quantum
mechanics. (Incidentally, this collapse can be used to prepare a system in a
certain state x,.)
   (iv) It is necessary that the measuring apparatus is left in a state from which
the observer can see that the result was Am: a pointer on a dial must point at m.
However, to read this result I need another apparatus, which by a second
measuring process determines the position of the pointer. And this process is
repeated and gives rise to a chain of measurements, which can end only in the
brain of the observer, where in some mysterious way it becomes a part of the
“gedankliche Innerleben des Individuums”.
   This is actually the conclusion of von Neumann and others [7,8]. I find it
          N.G.   van Kampen     I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements     101


hard to understand that someone who arrives at such a conclusion does not
seek the error in his argument. Quantum mechanics is not a theory of the mind
of an observer, but of physical, objectively recorded phenomena, see theorem
II. The question is how $ relates to spectra or specific heats; the mind of the
observer is irrelevant. Moreover the answer was already known to Bohr: the
quantum    mechanical     measurement        is terminated when the outcome        has been
macroscopically     recorded.



4. Macroscopic      systems

   A macroscopic system, such as a certain amount of a gas, a crystal, or a
pointer on a volt meter, is composed of a huge number of particles. As a
consequence its energy levels lie inordinately dense on any energy scale used in
the laboratory. The typical distance SE between two successive levels is much
and much smaller than the inaccuracy AE of the best energy measurement by
the best experimenter. Hence such a system can never be prepared in a single
eigenstate of the energy operator. (In fact, if it were in a single eigenstate it
would behave as one big molecule in a stationary state; no particle could be
seen to move!) Rather, the wave function $ of a macroscopic system is always
a superposition of an enormous number (namely AE/6E)            of eigenstates. A
macroscopic system does obey the laws of quantum mechanics, but the familiar
picture of individual eigenvalues and eigenstates is no longer adequate. Other
features become prominent; they constitute the subject matter of macroscopic
physics [9, lo]. (A loose analogy within the realm of classical theory is formed
by statistical mechanics: A many-body system has features, such as pressure
and temperature, which do not exist for a few particles; they are the subject
matter of thermodynamics.)
   The wave function Cc,of a macroscopic system describes all its individual
particles and their movements. It obeys a gigantic Schrodinger equation as long
as the system is not perturbed, not even by a measuring apparatus. This $,
however, is the “microstate” of the system. When an experimenter prides
himself that he has prepared the system in a well-defined state, he refers to the
macrostate. He does not pretend to know its Hilbert vector @, he only knows
that it lies in a certain subspace of Hilbert space with BE/SE dimensions.
   When a macroscopic pointer indicates a macroscopic point on a dial the
number of microscopic eigenstates involved has been estimated by Bohm [ll]
to be 105’. When the observer shines in light in order to read the position of the
pointer, the photons do perturb the $ of the pointer, but the perturbation does
not affect the macrostate. The vector $ is moved around a bit in these 10”
dimensions but its components outside the subspace remain negligible. That is
102       N.G.   van Kampen   i Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements


the reason why macroscopic observations can be recorded objectively, in-
dependently of the observations and the observer, and may therefore be the
object of scientific study. The lilliputian measurements of Heisenberg [12] and
von Neumann do not apply to experiments with macroscopic systems.
   A typically macroscopic feature is the existence of thermodynamic equilib-
rium states. Those are macrostates which the system, when left alone, will
reach sooner or later. Certain systems possess metastable states as well, for
example supersaturated vapor. A metastable state is a macrostate in which the
system can reside for a long time before its ultimate transition into the stable
equilibrium state. In many cases, however, this transition can be triggered by a
minute perturbation, even a single microscopic particle. That is the way in
which microscopic particles can be recorded macroscopically, as in the Wilson
chamber, the Geiger counter and the AgBr crystals of the photographic plate.

Theorem V: A quantum mechanical measuring apparatus consists of a macro-
scopic system prepared in a metastable state.

   The transition from the metastable into the stable macrostate provides the
free energy needed to make the microscopic phenomena macroscopically
visible. It is also the reason why the measuring process is irreversible (camp.
theorem X) and therefore permanently recorded.



5. Schriidinger’s cat


   This much discussed paradox [13] consists of a cat locked in a black box
together with a radioactive sample. Moreover there is a Geiger counter, which
on being triggered by an emitted alpha particle activates a device that kills the
cat. The argument runs as follows. After some time the whole system is in a
superposition of two states: one in which no decay has occurred that triggered
the mechanism and one in which it has occurred. Hence the state of the cat
also consists of a superposition of two states.

      Icat) = allife) + bldeath)    .                                                (4

There are two coefficients a, b (in general complex), which depend on the time
elapsed. The state remains a superposition until an observer looks at the cat.
Then, according to section 3, the wave function (2) collapses into either (life)
or [death) with respective probabilities 1aI2 and 1b12.
   If this is not sufficiently paradoxical one may consider an observer who has a
friend who does the experiment for him [S]. At which moment does the wave
        N. G. van Kampen I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements   103


function collapse, when the friend looks at the cat or when he communicates
his finding to the observer? This quandary must be resolved by anybody who
regards JI as a physical object rather than a tool for computing macroscopic
phenomena.
   To make the paradoxical nature of (2) more explicit suppose that the
observer decides to observe another quantity than the question of life and
death, for instance the temperature of the cat (i.e., the total kinetic energy of
its molecules). The expectation value of such a quantity G is

     (G) = ~cz~~G,,+ lb12Gdd+ a*bGpd + ab*G,,         ,

where G,, etc. are the matrix elements of G. This expectation value is not a
statistical average of the value G,, and G,, with probabilities 1aI2and 1b12, but
contains cross terms between life and death.
   The answer to this paradox is again that the cat is macroscopic. Life and
death are macrostates comprising an enormous number of eigenstates 18) and
Id) respectively. Any wave function of the cat has the form

     Icat) =   c a,lC) + c b,ld) .
               e           d



The cross terms in the expression    for ( G) are

     ,c,a*,b,G,, + 2 a,b:G,, .
                     e,d
                                                                                (3)


As there is such a wealth of terms, all with different phases and magnitudes,
they mutually cancel and (3) practically vanishes. This is the way in which the
typical quantum mechanical interference become inoperative between macro-
states. As a result (G) now does appear as a statistical average.

Theorem VI: The wave function of a system of a macroscopic number of
particles gives, on measuring macroscopic quantities, results that can be de-
scribed in terms of classical probabilities. [9]

   One remark concerning microscopic systems, such as a single elementary
particle, must be added. In the region of high quantum numbers such a system
behaves with respect to measurements as a macroscopic system. The reason is
again that there are many eigenstates within the margin AE of macroscopic
accuracy. Readers who think that they have found a counterexample           to
theorem V, for instance the Cerenkov counter, have made use of this fact. A
particle that betrays its position through Cerenkov radiation thereby changes
104         N.G.     van Kampen    1 Ten theorems      about quantum     mechanical     measurements


its microscopic $ but not its macrostate.                   Its energy changes by an amount 6E
but not AE.



6. A model for a measuring                 apparatus


    We shall construct a measuring apparatus for observing the position of an
 electron. More precisely, our apparatus will be able to tell whether the electron
has passed through some preassigned region U in space. It could be used for
instance in the double slit experiment to decide through which slit the electron
has passed. We shall find that such an observation does indeed destroy the
interference pattern. All this is a consequence of the Schriidinger equation for
the total system, which consists of the object system, in this case the electron,
together with the apparatus. There is no need to supplement the Schrodinger
evolution with an additional postulate, as in the theory of von Neumann.
    Our apparatus [14] consists of an atom together with the electromagneticfield.
The apparatus is macroscopic because of the many degrees of freedom
embodied in the normal modes of the field*. We label the modes by their wave
vector k and for simplicity ignore polarization. The Hilbert space of the
apparatus is the direct product of the Hilbert space of the atom and the space
of all possible excitations of the field modes. The stable equilibrium is the state
with the atom and all modes in their ground states. A metastable state can be
made by putting the atom in an excited state, for instance 2S, from which no
transition to the ground state through emission of a photon is allowed. When,
however, an electron appears in the neighborhood of the atom its Coulomb
interaction distorts the 2s state so as to create a dipole moment, which makes
the transition possible. Such a transition is irreversible and leaves a permanent
record of the passage of the electron. For instance the emitted photon can be
caught on a photographic plate or in a counter. One may regard the plate or
the counter as part of the measuring apparatus if one wishes, but the crucial
point is that, once the photon has been emitted, the presence of the electron
has been permanently recorded.
   The only states of the apparatus that we need for our purpose are I+ ; 0)
(atom excited, no photons) and I- ; k) ( a t om in ground state, one photon k).
The wave function ?P of the total system (electron + apparatus) is a linear
superposition, whose coefficients are elements of the Hilbert space of the
electron:

      q(t) = cp(r,t)l+; 0) + C $k(r, 41-i k) .
                                       k


   * In the model    of Peres [15] the measuring    apparatus   is not explicitly   macroscopic,   but instead   a
noisy perturbation     is put in by hand.
         N.G.     van Kampen    I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements     105


  The photon states are orthogonal            to each other and normalized.       Hence the
normalization of !P takes the form




P, is the probability that the atom is excited and no photon present; Pk is the
probability that the atom has emitted the photon k; and C Pk = 1 - PO is the
probability that the atom is deexcited by emission of an unspecified photon.
The functions cp and $k do not have unit norm, nor are they orthogonal. The
absence of cross terms in (5) is due to orthogonality of the eigenfunctions of
the apparatus.



7. The collapse of the wave function

  The Schrodinger         equation for the total system is

    @@, ‘) = (’ - iv2)(P@, t, - i”(r) T U,@k(rYt, ,                                     (6)

    i$k(r, t) = (k - $V2)rCl,(r, t) + iu(r)u,cp(r,       t) .                           (7)
Here 6 = 1, 0 is the energy of the excited level of the atom, k = Ikl is the
energy of the field modes, and - iv’ represents the kinetic energy of the
electron, its mass being set equal to unity. Furthermore uk is the product of a
coupling constant, a normalization factor of the field mode k, and a damping
factor that prevents interaction with modes whose wavelength is shorter than
the diameter of the atom. Finally, U(T) is the dipole matrix element created by
an electron at distance r, the atom being located at r = 0. The function U(T) is
appreciable only in some neighborhood U of the atom, and practically zero
outside.
   The coupled equations (6), (7) h ave to be solved with the initial condition
for t+ - 03: first Gk(t) = 0 for all k; and secondly rp(r, t) is in this limit a given
incident wave packet,

     (P(I-,t) =       c(p) eiP’r-iE’ dp ,     E=ip2+t.                                  (8)
                  I

We want to know the functions cp and t+Qk
                                        after the passage of the electron, i.e.
for t+ + 00. We shall then know
106      N.G.   van Kampen   I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements


1cp(r, t)l* = probability for finding the electron at r without having triggered
              the measuring apparatus;
I&(‘, t)j2 = probability for finding the electron at r having triggered the atom
              into emitting a photon k.
  The collapse of the wave function can be deduced without actually solving
eqs. (6), (7). For that purpose write (7) in the form




It appears that the function eikt&(r, t) obeys a Schrodinger equation with a
source term. Since & vanishes for t-+ - 00 it follows that the solution of (9)
consists of a wave emanating from the source. This source is confined to the
neighborhood U. Hence +Gk(r,t) is a Schrodinger wave that fans out from the
neighborhood where the electron has betrayed its presence by triggering the
measuring apparatus. This is the collapse of the wave function: when the
apparatus has observed the electron to be in U the electron wave function is no
longer the initial cp but is replaced by a J/k. Thus the collapse is not an
additional postulate and has nothing to do with a change of my knowledge or
some such anthropomorphic consideration.

Theorem VII: The collapse of the wave function of the object system is a
consequence of the Schrtidinger equation for the total system (i.e., object system
and measuring apparatus together).

   When a measurement has occurred the total wave function P has obtained
components outside the original subspace of the apparatus (which consisted of
the single vector I+; 0)). The coefficients of these new components are
functions of the electron variables and constitute the new electron wave
function. If one looks at the electron by itself rather than as a part of the total
system one gets the impression that its wave function cp has miraculously
collapsed into ICI,.
   Consider the two-slit experiment and put the observing atom in the upper
slit. If it is not triggered into emitting a photon, the electron is still described
by the function cp, which goes through both slits. The electron is not observed
and the interference pattern is undisturbed. If, however, a photon k is emitted
by the atom, the electron is described by the wave function &, which fans out
from the upper slit and therefore produces no interference pattern. In this case
the electron has betrayed its passage through the upper slit and the interfer-
ence is destroyed - in agreement with the famous discussion by Bohr [6].
   In discussing this example I have used the traditional language of a single
        N.G.   van Kampen   I Ten theorems   about quantum   mechanical   measurements   107


electron and its probability distribution. The same result can be formulated
operationally in agreement with theorem III. The actual experiment consists in
shooting a succession of electrons at the two slits. For each single electron I
write down its position on the receiving screen and record whether or not a
photon has been emitted. After finishing the experiment I sit down at my desk
with my notes, collect the events without photon and mark their positions on a
piece of paper. The marks will produce an interference pattern. When I do the
same for the events that were accompanied by a photon no interference
appears on the paper.
   If the atom were absent the wave function of the electron would be the cp
given by (8), modified by the boundary conditions on the two-slit screen. In the
presence of the atom cp is the solution of the coupled equations (6), (7) with
the same boundary conditions and with (8) as initial condition. These two
functions cp are not quite the same; the apparatus influences the electron even
without detecting it. The interference pattern we obtained by selecting the
undetected electrons is not quite the same as the one obtained when no
attempt is made to detect them. The physicist says that the atom is polarizable,
or that it makes a virtual transition to the ground state. If one wants the
electron to be able to act on the measuring apparatus one cannot avoid a
reaction. Yet the fact that an apparatus affects the wave function of the object
system even when the measurement is not successful has caused some debate
W921.


8. Probability and density matrix

   The classical probability of some feature of a system is defined as the number
of elementary states that have that feature, divided by the total number of
possible elementary states. The elementary states are supposed to have equal
probabilities, or else to have given a priori probabilities. Probability calculus is
merely the technique of transforming one probability distribution into another.
The physical input is the specification of the elementary states and their a priori
probabilities. This input depends on my knowledge - or rather lack of knowl-
edge - because actually the system can be in no more than one state. If I have
cast two dice without looking, the probability that the total number of points
equals 10 is &; the moment I look at one die the probability jumps to either 0
or a, depending on what I see; and once I have looked at both the probability
is 0 or 1.
   Quantum mechanical probabilities, however, are equal to I~/J[’ by definition,
see section 2. They are not defined by means of an underlying set of possible
states (which, by the way, would also require a postulate about a priori
108      N.G.   van Kampen   I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements


probabilities). There is no cogent reason to insist that it should be possible to
interpret them in this classical way. Obstinate attempts to construct such a
“stochastic interpretation” have not met with success [17]. At any rate they are
irrelevant for our purpose of understanding how quantum mechanics works in
practice.
   Both kinds of probability distibutions are needed to describe an ensemble of
quantum systems. For convenience take an ensemble of particles. Each particle
is supposed to be in a state described by one of the wave functions of a set
x,(r) (normalized but not necessarily orthogonal).       Let the fraction of all
particles in each x, be P,,. Then if I pick at random one of the particles the
probability to find it at r is




More generally, if A(rlr’) represents a one-particle             operator   the ensemble
average of its quantum expectation value is


      (A) = c P, /I      xE(r)A(rlr’)x,(r’)       dr dr’ .                           (10)
                n

To write this in a more convenient            way one defines the density matrix

      drlr’) = F P,x,(r)xE (4 .                                                      (11)

Then (10) can be written as an operator            equation,

      (A)=TrpA.

The density matrix is a convenient way to express the properties of a quantum
ensemble, but it conceals the separate roles of the classical and quantum
mechanical probabilities.

Theorem VIII: Density matrices are classical probability distributions over
quantum mechanical states; they therefore depend on the available knowledge.

  Incidentally, some authors regard p as the true quantum mechanical state.
The special density matrices that can be written as a product

      drlr’) = +WlCr*W                                                                (12)

are then called pure states. They correspond            to our states I,!J.All other p are
         N.G.    van Kampen   I Ten theorems    about quantum   mechanical   measurements     109


mixed states, that is what we would call the states of an ensemble. These
authors should not be surprised that their quantum systems have states that
depend on the author’s knowledge.



9. Application     to the measurement          process

   Suppose the measurement process of section 3 is applied to a particle in a
state +(r). Before measurement the density matrix has the form (12). After the
measurement is performed, but before I look at the result, the density matrix is




P, being given by (1). After I have looked and found a certain result A, the
density matrix is reduced to p2(rlr’) = x,(r)xz(r’). This reduction of p1 to p2 is
classical and not more mysterious than the reduction of the probability
distribution of the dice upon looking at them.
   The reduction of p into pl, however, is due to the collapse of the wave
function caused by the interaction with the measuring apparatus. This can be
shown explicitly for the model in section 6. Let A be an operator acting on the
electron alone. Its expectation value in the state (4) is

                                                                                            (13)

This cannot be written as the expectation value of A in an electron                         wave
function, but only by means of a density matrix in the electron space:

     (WA1W) = Tr 0,
where




This shows that after a measurement the object system cannot be described by
a 1(1but only by a p, as if it were an ensemble. The reason is that it is still part
of the total system, which includes the apparatus whose state is here left
unspecified.
   If one does look at the apparatus and finds that no photon has been emitted,
the electron does have a wave function, namely q(r); or properly normalized,
camp. (5)
110       N. G. van Kampen    I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements




If one looks and finds a photon k the wave function and density matrix of the
electron are




   However, our measurement consisted in determining the position of the
electron. This is done by determining whether or not a photon is produced,
regardless of the k of the photon. If one sees no photon the electron is
described by (15), as before. But if one sees an unspecified photon the electron
density matrix is

                                                                                     (17)


In our model the large number of photon states k served to simulate the
macroscopic nature of the measuring apparatus. It is therefore an essential
feature that one cannot distinguish between different photons k. (Even if one
can experimentally determine their directions within a certain margin there is
still a practically infinite number of them.) Hence (17) is the proper description
of the electron after it has been observed to pass through U.



10. Entropy

  Classical probability      theory associates with a distribution     {P,}   a number

      s=-CPJogP,,                                                                    (18)
            n

called the entropy of the distribution.      Similarly quantum mechanics associates
with every density matrix an entropy

      S=-Trplogp.

This expression is the same as (18) in the case that p has the form (11) with
orthonormal x,. By construction S is nonnegative and zero only if p is a pure
state as in (12). We emphasize that entropy is defined as a property of
probability distributions and therefore depends on our knowledge. Only in
statistical mechanics is the entropy a state function, because every macroscopic
equilibrium state is identified with a prescribed distribution.
                 N.G.    van Kampen   I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements          111


  We apply the entropy concept to our model for the measuring process. First
of all one sees immediately:

Theorem           IX: The total system is described         throughout   by the wave vector W and
has therefore            zero entropy    at all times.

   This ought to put an end to speculations about measurements being respons-
ible for increasing the entropy of the universe. (It won’t, of course.)
   Secondly, before the measuring operation the electron itself is described by a
vector in its own Hilbert space, viz. (S), and has therefore also zero entropy.
The apparatus has zero entropy as well since it is in the pure state I+ ; 0). (This
is a special feature of our simple example; usually one does not have complete
knowledge of the prepared state of the apparatus.)
   After the measurements, if I do not look at the outcome, the entropy is the
one associated with the density matrix (14). If I do look and find no photon the
electron is in the pure state 9 with zero entropy. If I look and find an
unspecified photon the entropy is the one associated with (17).
   To compute this entropy we note that it can be expressed in the eigenvalues
pu, of the matrix (17) by

       s=-Cf-Ql~gPv.
           Y
                                                                                                (19)

The equation              for the eigenvalues     p and corresponding       eigenfunctions   t(r)   is


       d(r) = _/ p,(rlr’)S(r’) dr’ = Cl-                 pJ1 T rclk(r)1Icr:(r’)Kr’> dr’ .       (20)

Multiply this equation with @i,(r) and integrate


                                                                                                (21)

Here


       ffk   =          rLi(Mr) dr

and

       Mkfk = (1 - P,-,)r _/ $,,*,(r)ek(r)          dr .


Thus the eigenvalues of (20) are also eigenvalues of M,.,.                    (This is not true for
112      N.G.   van Kampen     I Ten theorems about quantum mechanical measurements


those s(r) for which all (Yevanish, but in that case the eigenvalue p of (20) is
also zero and does not contribute to the entropy (10) anyway.) Hence the CL,in
(19) may be taken to be the eigenvalues of M. Incidentally, it follows that one
might write S = -Tr M log M.
   We shall now prove that this is equal to the increase of the entropy of the
measuring apparatus. We start from the density matrix of the total system after
the emission of an unspecified photon has been observed:




The density matrix of the apparatus              is obtained by taking the trace over the
electron states,




This is an operator in the space of one-photon states. Its eigenvalues are easily
obtained with the aid of the orthonormality of the photon states (- ; k) . They
turn out to be identical with the eigenvalues p,, of the matrix M found in (21).

Theorem X: The measurement operation increases the entropies of the object
system and of the apparatus by equal amounts.

   This increase is due to the incomplete specification of their final states. It is
equal to the thermodynamic entropy difference between the stable and meta-
stable macrostates of the apparatus.



References

[l] M. Jammer,      The Philosophy     of Quantum       Mechanics   (Wiley, New York, 1974), chap. 11.
    B. d’Espagnat,     Conceptual   Foundations    of Quantum     Mechanics,  2nd ed. (Benjamin,   Read-
    ing, MA, 1976), part 4.
[2] Quantum Theory and Measurement,           a collection of reprints edited by J.A. Wheeler and W.H.
    Zurek (Princeton     University  Press, Princeton,     NJ, 1983).
    L.E. Ballentine,    Am. J. Phys. 55 (1987) 785.
[3] K. Baumann       and R.U. Sexl, Die Deutungen          der Quantentheorie   (Vieweg, Braunschweig,
    1984).
[4] J. Gribbin,   In search of Schrodinger’s     Cat. (Corgi Books, Transworld       Publishers, London,
    1984).
    E. Squires, The Mystery of the Quantum            World (Hilger, Bristol, 1986).
[5] H. Everett, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 (1957) 454.
    J.A. Wheeler,     Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 (1957) 463.
    B.S. de Witt, Physics Today 20, No. 9 (Sept., 1970) 30.
          N.G.   van Kampen    I Ten theorems   about quantum   mechanical   measurements       113


 [6] N. Bohr, in: Albert Einstein,   Philosopher-Scientist, I. P.A. Schilp, ed. (Harper and Row,
      New York, 1949).
      W. Heisenberg, in: Niels Bohr and the Development of Physics, W. Pauli, L. Rosenfeld and
      V. Weisskopf, eds. (Pergamon, London, 1955).
      H. Stapp, Am. .I. Phys. 40 (1972) 1098.
  (71 J. von Neumann, Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantentheorie (Springer, Berlin, 1931).
      F. London and E. Bauer, La thtorie de l’observation en mecanique quantique (Hermann,
      Paris, 1939).
      C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu and F. Laloi, Mecanique quantique I (Hermann, Paris, 1973),
      p. 216.
  [8] E.P. Wigner, Symmetries and Reflections (Indiana Univ. Press, Bloomington, 1967), p. 171.
      Reprinted in ref. [2].
  [9] N.G. van Kampen, Physica 20 (1954) 603; Fortschritte der Physik 4 (1956) 405.
[lo] G. Ludwig, Z. Phys. 150 (1958) 346; 152 (1958) 98.
      A. Daneri, A. Loinger and G.M. Prosperi, Nucl. Phys. 33 (1962) 297.
[ll] D. Bohm, Quantum Theory (Prentice-Hall, New York, 1951), chap. 4.
[12] W. Heisenberg, Die physikalischen Prinzipien der Quantentheorie (Hirzel, Leipzig, 1930),
      chap. II.
[13] E. Schriidinger, Naturwissenschaften 23 (1935) 807, 823, 844. Reprinted in ref. [3], translated
      in ref. [2].
      A. Peres, Found. of Phys. 14 (1984) 1131.
      L.E. Ballentine, Am. J. Phys. 54 (1986) 947.
[14] N.G. van Kampen, Philips Res. Repts. 30 (1975) p. 65*; in: Quantum Measurement and
      Chaos,E.R. Pike and S. Sarkar, eds. (Plenum, New York, 1987).
[15] A. Peres, Am. J. Phys. 54 (1986) 688.
[16] M. Renninger, Z. Phys. 136 (1953) 251; 158 (1960) 417.
[17] D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 166, 180.
      D. Bohm, B.J. Hiley, and P.N. Kaloyerou, Phys. Rep. 144 (1987) 321.
      L. de Broglie and J.P. Vigier, La theorie quantique restera-t-elle indeterministe? (Gauthier-
      Villars, Paris, 1953).
      E. Nelson, Quantum Fluctuations (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1985).
      F.J. Belinfante, A. Survey of Hidden-Variables Theories (Pergamon, Oxford, 1973).
