                     Molecular Theory.                    301

 kind of action, there is another, depending on the evapora-
tion from the surface of the little drops. The vapour of
water is much rarer than air, and damp air is lighter than
dry air at the same temperature and pressure. Hence the
little drops make the air of the cloud damp, and if the
mean density of the cloud is by this means made less than
that of the surrounding air, the cloud will ascend.




                    CHAPTER XXII.
  ON THE MOLECULAR THEORY OF THE CONSTITUTION OF
                           BODIES.

 WE have already shown that heat is a form of energy—that
 when a body is hot it possesses a store of energy, part at
 least of which can afterwards be exhibited in the form oi
visible work.
    Now energy is known to us in two forms. One of these
is Kinetic Energy, the energy of motion. A body in motion
has kinetic energy, which it must communicate to some
other body during the process of bringing it to rest. This
is the fundamental form of energy. When we have acquired
the notion of matter in motion, and know what is meant by
the energy of that motion, we are unable to conceive that
any possible addition to our knowledge could explain the
energy of motion, or give us a more perfect knowledge of it
than we have already.
   There is another form of energy which a body may have,
which depends, not on its own state, but on its position
with respect to other bodies. This is called Potential
Energy. The leaden weight of a clock, when it is wound
up, has potential energy, which it loses as it descends. It
is spent in driving the clock. This energy depends, not on
the piece of lead considered in itself, but on the position of
302                  Molecular     Theory.

 the lead with respect to another body—the earth—which
 attracts it.
      In a watch, the mainspring, when wound up, has poten-
 tial energy, which it spends in driving the wheels of the
 watch. This energy arises from the coiling up of the
 spring, which alters the relative position of its parts. In
 both cases, until the clock or watch is set agoing, the
 existence of potential energy, whether in the clock-weight
 or in the watch-spring, is not accompanied with any visible
 motion. We must therefore admit that potential energy can
 exist in a body or system all whose parts are at rest.
      It is to be observed, however, that the progress of science
 is continually opening up new views of the forms and
  relations of different kinds of potential energy, and that
  men of science, so far from feeling that their knowledge of
  potential energy is perfect in kind, and incapable of essential
  change, are always endeavouring to explain the different
  forms of potential energy; and if these explanations are in
  any case condemned, it is because they fail to give a suffi-
  cient reason for the fact, and not because the fact requires
  no explanation.
       We have now to determine to which of these forms of
  energy heat, as it exists in hot bodies, is to be referred. Is
  a hot body, like a coiled-up watch-spring, devoid of motion
  at present, but capable of exciting motion under proper
   conditions ? or is it like a fly-wheel, which derives all its
   tremendous power from the visible motion with which it is
   animated?
       It is manifest that a body may be hot without any motion
   being visible, either of the body as a whole, or of its parts
j relatively to each other. If, therefore, the body is hot
    in virtue of motion, the motion must be carried on by parts
    of the body too minute to be seen separately, and within
    limits so narrow that we cannot detect the absence of any
     part from its original place.
        The evidence for a state of motion, the velocity of which
                     Heat is Motion.                     303
 must far surpass that of a railway train, existing in bodies
which we can place under the strongest microscope, and in
which we can detect nothing but the most perfect repose,
must be of a very cogent nature before we can admit that
heat is essentially motion.                                     4
   Let us therefore consider the alternative hypothesis—that
the energy of a hot body is potential energy, or, in other
words, that the hot body is in a state of rest, but that this
state of rest depends on the antagonism of forces which
                                                                 %
are in equilibrium as long as all surrounding bodies are
of the same temperature, but which as soon as this equi-
librium is destroyed are capable of setting bodies in
motion. With respect to a theory of this kind, it is to be
observed that potential energy depends essentially on the
relative position of the parts of the system in which it exists,
and that potential energy cannot be transformed in any
way without some change of the relative position of these
parts. In every transformation of potential energy, therefore,
motion of some kind is involved.
   Now we know that whenever one body of a system is
hotter than another, heat is transferred from the hotter to
the colder body, either by conduction or by radiation. Let
us suppose that the transfer takes place by radiation.
Whatever theory we adopt about the kind of motion which
constitutes radiation, it is manifest that radiation consists of
motion of some kind, either the projection of the particles
of a substance called caloric across the intervening space, or
a wave-like motion propagated through a medium filling that
space. In either case, during the interval between the time
when the heat leaves the hot body and the time when it
reaches the cold body, its energy exists in the intervening
space in the form of the motion of matter.
   Hence, whether we consider the radiation of heat as
effected by the projection of material caloric, or by the
undulations of an intervening medium, the outer surface of
a hot body must be in a state of motion, provided any cold
     304                  Molecular    Theory.

     body is in its neighbourhood to receive the radiations which
     it emits. But we have no reason to believe that the pre-
J    sence of a cold body is essential to the radiation of heat by
     a hot one. Whatever be the mode in which the hot body
     shoots forth its heat, it must depend on the state of the hot
     body alone, and not on the existence of a cold body at a
      distance, so that even if all the bodies in a closed region
     were equally hot, every one of them would be radiating
     heat; and the reason why each body remains of the same
      temperature is, that it receives from the other bodies exactly
      as much heat as it emits. This, in fact, is the foundation of
      Prevost's Theory of Exchanges. We must therefore admit
      that at every part of the surface of a hot body there is a
      radiation of heat, and therefore a state of motion of the
      superficial parts of the body. Now this motion is certainly
      invisible to us by any direct mode of observation, and
      therefore the mere fact of a body appearing to be at rest
/     cannot be taken as a demonstration that its parts may
      not be in a state of motion.
         Hence part, at least, of the energy of a hot body must be
      energy arising from the motion of its parts, or kinetic energy.
         The conclusion at which we shall arrive, that a very
      considerable part of the energy of a hot body is in the form
     of motion, will become more evident when we consider the
     thermal energy of gases.
         Every hot body, therefore, is in motion. We have next
     to enquire into the nature of this motion. It is evidently
     not a motion of the whole body in one direction, for how-
     ever small we make the body by mechanical processes, each
     visible particle remains apparently in the same place, how-
    i ever hot it is. The motion which we call heat must there-
     fore be a motion of parts too small to be observed separately;
     the motions of different parts at the same instant must be
     in different directions; and the motion of any one part must,
     at least in solid bodies, be such that, however fast it moves,
     it never reaches a sensible distance from the point from
     which it started.
                  Kinetic   Theory of Gases.               305
   We have now arrived at the conception of a body as
consisting of a great many small parts, each of which is in
motion. We shall call any one of these parts a molecule of
the substance. A molecule may therefore be denned as a
small mass of matter the parts of which do not part com-
pany during the excursions which the molecule makes when
the body to which it belongs is hot.
   The doctrine that visible bodies consist of a determinate
number of molecules is called the molecular theory of matter.
The opposite doctrine is that, however small the parts may
                                                                  A
be into which we divide a body, each part retains all the
properties of the substance. This is the theory of the
infinite divisibility of bodies. We do not assert that there
is an absolute limit to the divisibility of matter : what we
assert is, that after we have divided a body into a certain
finite number of constituent parts called molecules, then
any further division of these molecules will deprive them
of the properties which give rise to the phenomena ob-
served in the substance.
   The opinion that the observed properties of visible bodies
apparently at rest are due to the action of invisible mole-
cules in rapid motion is to be found in Lucretius.
— Daniel Bernoulli was the first to suggest that the pressure
of air is due^ to the impact of its particles on the sides of
the vessel containing it; but he made very little progress in
the theory which he suggested.
   Lesage and Prevost of Geneva, and afterwards Herapath
in his ' Mathematical Physics/ made several important appli-
cations of the theory.
   Dr. Joule in 1848 explained the pressure of gases by the
impact of their molecules, and calculated the velocity which
they must have to produce the observed pressure.
   Kronig also directed attention to this explanation of the
phenomena of gases.
   It is to Professor Clausius, however, that we owe the recerj
development of me dynamical theory of gases.
     3°6                Molecular    Theory.

   took up the subject a great advance has been made by
   many enquirers. I shall now endeavour to give a sketch of
   the present state of the theory,
 ^i All bodies consist of a finite number of small parts called
& molecules. Every molecule consists of a definite quantity
   of matter, which is exactly the same for all the molecules of
   the same substance. The mode in which the molecule is
   bound together is also the same for all molecules of the
   same substance. A molecule may consist of several distinct
   portions of matter held together by chemical bonds, and
   may be set in vibration, rotation, or any other kind of
   relative motion, but so long as the different portions do
   not part company, but travel together in the excursions
   made by the molecule, our theory calls the whole connected
   mass a single molecule.
      The molecules of all bodies are in a state of continual
   agitation. The hotter a body is, the more violently are its
   molecules agitated. In solid bodies, a molecule, though in
   continual motion, never gets beyond a certain very small
   distance from its original position in the body. The path
   which it describes is confined within a very small region
   of space.
      In fluids, on the other hand, there is no such restriction
   to the excursions of a molecule. It is true that the mole-
   cule generally can travel but a very small distance before
   its path is disturbed by an encounter with some other mole-
   cule ; but after this encounter there is nothing which deter-
   mines the molecule rather to return towards the place from
   whence it came than to push its way into new regions.
   Hence in fluids the path of a molecule is not confined
   within a limited region, as in the case of solids, but may
   penetrate to any part of the space occupied by the fluid.
      The actual phenomena of diffusion both in liquids and
   in gases furnish the strongest evidence that these bodies
   consist of molecules in a state of continual agitation.
      But when we apply the methods of dynamics to the
              Encounters between Molecules.              3°7
investigation of the properties of a system consisting of a
great number of small bodies in motion the resemblance
of such a system to a gaseous body becomes still more
apparent.
   I shall endeavour to give some account of what is known
of such a system, avoiding all unnecessary mathematical
calculations.

            ON T H E KINETIC THEORY OF GASES.

     A gaseous body is supposed to consist of a great number
of molecules moving with great velocity. During the greater
 part of their course these molecules are not acted on by any
sensible force, and therefore move in straight lines with
 uniform velocity. When two molecules come within a
 certain distance of each other, a mutual action takes place
 between them, which may be compared to the collision of
 two billiard balls. Each molecule has its course changed,
 and starts on a new path. I have concluded from some
 experiments of my own that the collision between two hard
 spherical balls is not an accurate representation of what
 takes place during the encounter of two molecules. A
 better representation of such an encounter will be obtained
> by supposing the molecules to act on one another in a more
 gradual manner, so that the action between them goes on for
 a finite time, during which the centres of the molecules first
 approach each other and then separate.
     We shall refer to this mutual action as an Encounter
 between two molecules, and we shall call the course of a
 molecule between one encounter and another the Free Path
 of the molecule. In ordinary gases the free motion of a
 molecule takes up much more time than that occupied by an
 encounter. As the density of the gas increases, the free path
 diminishes, and in liquids no part of the course of a molecule
 can be spoken of as its free path.
     In an encounter between two molecules we know that,
  since the force of the impact acts between the two bodies,
    308                  Molecular    Theory.

    the motion of the centre of gravity of the two molecules
    remains the same after the encounter as it was before. We
    also know by the principle of the conservation of energy that
    the velocity of each molecule relatively to the centre of
    gravity remains the same in magnitude, and is only changed
    in direction.
       Let us next suppose a number of molecules in motion
    contained in a vessel whose sides are such that if any
    energy is communicated to the vessel by the encounters of
    molecules against its sides, the vessel communicates as
    much energy to other molecules during their encounters
    with it, so as to preserve the total energy of the enclosed
    system. The first thing we must notice about this moving
    system is that even if all the molecules have the same velo-
    city originally, their encounters will produce an inequality
/   of velocity, and that this distribution of velocity will go on
    continually. Every molecule will then change both its
    direction and its velocity at every encounter; and, as we
    are not supposed to keep a record of the exact particulars
    of every encounter, these changes of motion must appear to
    us very irregular if we follow the course of a single molecule.
    If, however, we adopt a statistical view of the system, and
    distribute the molecules into groups, according to the
    velocity with which at a given instant they happen to be
    moving, we shall observe a regularity of a new kind in the
    proportions of the whole number of molecules which fall into
    each of these groups.
       And here I wish to point out that, in adopting this
    statistical method of considering the average number of
    groups of molecules selected according to their velocities, we
    have abandoned the strict kinetic method of tracing the
    exact circumstances of each individual molecule in all its
    encounters. It is therefore possible that we may arrive at
    results which, though they fairly represent the facts as long
    as we are supposed to deal with a gas in mass, would cease
    to be applicable if our faculties and instruments were so
                                             FXfoMJWqAt
                                                   f<rtr\
                 Distribution   of Energy.                 309

sharpened that we could detect and lay hold of each mole-
cule and trace it through all its course.
   For the same reason, a theory of the effects of education
deduced from a study of the returns of registrars, in which no
names of individuals are given, might be found not to be
applicable to the experience of a schoolmaster who is able
to trace the progress of each individual pupil.
   The distribution of the molecules according to their veloci-
ties is found to be of exactly the same mathematical form as
the distribution of observations according to the magnitude of        f
their errors, as described in the theory of errors of observation. V\
The distribution of bullet-holes in a target according to their     *
distances from the point aimed at is found to be of the same
form, provided a great many shots are fired by persons of
the same degree of skill.
   We have already met with the same form in the case of
heat diffused from a hot stratum by conduction. Whenever
in physical phenomena some cause exists over which we
have no control, and which produces a scattering of the
particles of matter, a deviation of observations from the truth,
or a diffusion of velocity or of heat, mathematical expressions    ^A
of this exponential form are sure to make their appearance.        ^T
   It appears then that of the molecules composing the
system some are moving very slowly, a very few are moving
with enormous velocities, and the greater number with inter-
mediate velocities. To compare one such system with
another, the best method is to take the mean of the squares
of all the velocities. This quantity is called the Mean Square
of the velocity. The square root of this quantity is called
the Velocity of Mean Square.                    /icref ^^ts S<AACU^C
                                                             f
    DISTRIBUTION OF KINETIC ENERGY BETWEEN TWO
              DIFFERENT SETS OF MOLECULES.

  If two sets of molecules whose mass is different are in
motion in the same vessel, they will by their encounters
326                 Molecular    Theory.

be considered as depending on the coefficient of diffusion of
the components through each other.
           MOLECULAR THEORY OF RADIATION.

   The phenomena already described are explained on the
molecular theory by the motion of agitation of the molecules,
a motion which is exceedingly irregular, the intervals between
successive encounters and the velocities of a molecule
during successive free paths not being subj ect to any law
which we can express. The internal motion of a single
molecule is of a very different kind. If the parts of the
molecule are capable of relative motion without being
altogether torn asunder, this relative motion will be some
kind of vibration. The small vibrations of a connected sys-
tem may be resolved into a number of simple vibrations, the
law of each of which is similar to that of a pendulum. It is
probable that in gases the molecules may execute many of
such vibrations in the interval between successive encounters.
At each encounter the whole molecule is roughly shaken.
During its free path it vibrates according to its own laws,
the amplitudes of the different simple vibrations being deter-
mined by the nature of the collision, but their periods
depending only on the constitution of the molecule itself.
If the molecule is capable of communicating these vibrations
to the medium in which radiations are propagated, it will
send forth radiations of certain definite kinds, and if these
belong to the luminous part of the spectrum, they will be
visible as light of definite refrangibility. This, then, is the
explanation, on che molecular theory, of the bright lines
observed in the spectra of incandescent gases. They repre-
sent the disturbance communicated to the luminiferous
medium by molecules vibrating in a regular and periodic
manner during their free paths. If the free path is long,
the molecule, by communicating its vibrations to the ether,
will cease to vibrate till it encounters some other molecule.
  By raising the temperature we increase the velocity of
                         Radiation.                       327

the motion of agitation and the force of each encounter.
The higher the temperature the greater will be the ampli-
tude of the internal vibrations of all kinds, and the more
likelihood will there be that vibrations of short period will
be excited, as well as those fundamental vibrations which
are most easily produced. By increasing the density we
diminish the length of the free path of each molecule, and
thus allow less time for the vibrations excited at each
encounter to subside, and, since each fresh encounter dis-
turbs the regularity of the series of vibrations, the radiation
will no longer be capable of complete resolution into a
series of vibrations of regular periods, but will be analysed
into a spectrum showing the bright bands due to the regular
vibrations, along with a ground of diffused light, forming a
continuous spectrum due to the irregular motion introduced
at each encounter.
   Hence when a gas is rare the bright lines of its spectrum
are narrow and distinct, and the spaces between them are
dark. As the density of the gas increases, the bright lines
become broader and the spaces between them more
luminous.
   There is another reason for the broadening of the bright
lines and the luminosity of the whole spectrum in dense
gases, which we have already stated at p. 245. There is
this difference, however, between the effect there mentioned
and that described here. At p. 245 the light from a
certain stratum of incandescent gas was supposed to pene-
trate through other strata, which absorbed the brighter rays
faster than the less luminous ones. This effect depends
only on the total quantity of gas through which the rays
pass, and will be the same whether it is a mile of gas at
thirty inches pressure, or thirty miles at one inch pressure.
The effect which we are now considering depends on the
absolute density, so that it is by no means the same whether
a stratum containing a given quantity of gas is one mile or
thirty miles thick.
      328                 Molecular    Theory.

         When the gas is so far condensed that it assumes the
      liquid or solid form, then, as the molecules have no free
      path, they have no regular vibrations, and no bright lines
      are commonly observed in incandescent liquids or solids.
      Mr, Huggins, however, has observed bright lines in the
      spectrum of incandescent erbia and lime, which appear to
      be due to the solid matter, and not to its vapour.

       LIMITATION OF THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

         Before I conclude, I wish to direct attention to an aspect
      of the molecular theory which deserves consideration.
          One of the best established facts in thermodynamics is
      that it is impossible in a system enclosed in an envelope
      which permits neither change of volume nor passage of heat,
      and in which both the temperature and the pressure are every-
      where the same, to produce any inequality of temperature or
      of pressure without the expenditure of work.       This is the
^     second law of thermodynamics, and it is undoubtedly true
 ©    as long as we can deal with bodies only in mass, and have
      no power of perceiving or handling the separate molecules
      of which they are made up. But if we conceive a being
^
      whose faculties are so sharpened that he can follow every
j     molecule in its course, such a being, whose attributes are still
vJ    as essentially finite as our own, would be able to do what is
  v   at present impossible to us. For we have seen that the
J     molecules in a vessel full of air at uniform temperature are
^      moving with velocities by no means uniform, though the
 \     mean velocity of any great number of them, arbitrarily
      selected, is almost exactly uniform. Now let us suppose
      that such a vessel is divided into two portions, A and B, by
      a division in which there is a small hole, and that a being,
      who can see the individual molecules, opens and closes this
       hole, so as to allow only the swifter molecules to pass
       from A to B, and only the slower ones to pass from E to A.
       H e will thus, without expenditure of work, raise the tern-
               Statistical Knowledge of Bodies.            329
   perature of B and lower that of A, in contradiction to the
   second law of thermodynamics.
      This is only one of the instances in which conclusions
   which we have drawn from our experience of bodies con-
   sisting of an immense number of molecules may be found
   not to be applicable to the more delicate observations and
   experiments which we may suppose made by one who can
   perceive and handle the individual molecules which we deal
   with only in large masses.
      In dealing with masses of matter, while we do not perceive
   the individual molecules, we are compelled to adopt what I
   have described as the statistical method of calculation, and
   to abandon the strict dynamical method, in which we follow      1*
   every motion by the calculus.
       It would be interesting to enquire how far those ideas
   about the nature and methods of science which have been
   derived from examples of scientific investigation in which
   the dynamical method is followed are applicable to our
   actual knowledge of concrete things, which, as we have seen,
-^ is of an essentially statistical nature, because no one has
   yet discovered any practical method of tracing the path
   of a molecule, or of identifying it at different times.
       I do not think, however, that the perfect identity which
   we observe between different portions of the same kind of
   matter can be explained on the statistical principle of the
    stability of the averages of large numbers of quantities
    each of which may differ from the mean. For if of the
    molecules of some substance such as hydrogen, some were        *
    of sensibly greater mass than others, we have the means
    of producing a separation between molecules of different
    masses, and in this way we should be able to produce two
    kinds of hydrogen, one of which would be somewhat denser
    than the other. As this cannot be done, we must admit that
    the equality which we assert to exist between the molecules    ^
    of hydrogen applies to each individual molecule, and not
    merely to the average of groups of millions of molecules.



                                                                   v
          33°                  Molecular Theory.

                     NATURE AND ORIGIN OF MOLECULES.

             We have thus been led by our study of visible things to a
          theory that they are made up of a finite number of parts or
          molecules, each of which has a definite mass, and possesses
          other properties. The molecules of the same substance are
j?        all exactly alike, but different from those of other substances.
          There is not a regular gradation in the mass of molecules
          from that of hydrogen, which is the least of those known to
          us, to that of bismuth ; but they all fall into a limited
          number of classes or species, the individuals of each
          species being exactly similar to each other, and no inter-

T
 \f
      1   mediate links are found to connect one species with
          another by a uniform gradation.
             We are here reminded of certain speculations concerning
          the relations between the species of living things. We find
          that in these also the individuals are naturally grouped into
          species, and that intermediate links between the species are
          wanting. But in each species variations occur, and there is
          a perpetual generation and destruction of the individuals of
          which the species consist.
              Hence it is possible to frame a theory to account for the
          present state of things by means of generation, variation,
          and discriminative destruction.
_v            In the case of the molecules, however, each individual is
 '         permanent; there is no generation or destruction, and no
          variation, or rather no difference, between the individuals of
          each species.
              Hence the kind of speculation with which we have
          become so familiar under the name of theories of evolution
          is quite inapplicable to the case of molecules.
              It is true that Descartes, whose inventiveness knew no
          bounds, has given a theory of the evolution of molecules.
           He supposes that the molecules with which the heavens
           are nearly filled have received a spherical form from the
           long-continued grinding of their projecting parts, so that,
        Equality and Permanence of Molectdes.               331

like marbles in a mill, they have ' rubbed each other's angles
down.' The result of this attrition forms the finest kind of
molecules, with which the interstices between the globular
molecules are filled. But, besides these, he describes another
elongated kind of molecules, the particula striata, which
have received their form from their often threading the
interstices between three spheres in contact. They have thus
acquired three longitudinal ridges, and, since some of them
during their passage are rotating on their axes, these ridges
are not in general parallel to the axis, but are twisted like
the threads of a screw. By means of these little screws
he most ingeniously attempts to explain the phenomena of
magnetism.
    But it is evident that his molecules are very different from
ours. His seem to be produced by some general break-up
of his solid space, and to be ground down in the course of
ages, and, though their relative magnitude is in some degree
 determinate, there is nothing to determine the absolute
magnitude of any of them.
    Our molecules, on the other hand, are unalterable by any
 of the processes which go on in the present state of things,
and every individual of each species is of exactly the same
magnitude, as though they had all been cast in the same
 mould, like bullets, and not merely selected and grouped
 according to their size, like small shot.
    The individuals of each species also agree in the nature of
 the light which they emit—that is, in their natural periods of
 vibration. They are therefore like tuning-forks all tuned to
concert pitch, or like watches regulated to solar time.
    In speculating on the cause of this equality we are debarred
from imagining any cause of equalization, on account of the
immutability of each individual molecule. It is difficult, on the
other hand, to conceive of selection and elimination of inter-
mediate varieties, for where can these eliminated molecules
have gone to if, as we have reason to believe, the hydrogen,
&c, of the fixed stars is composed of molecules identical in
       332                     Molecular    Theory.

       all respects with our own ? The time required to eliminate
       from the whole of the visible universe every molecule whose
       mass differs from that of some one of our so-called elements,
       by processes similar to Graham's method of dialysis, which
       is the only method we can conceive of at present, would
       exceed the utmost limits ever demanded by evolutionists
       as many times as these exceed the period of vibration of a
       molecule.
 or^       But if we suppose the molecules to be made at all, or if
y-
       we suppose them to consist of something previously made,
       why should we expect any irregularity to exist among them ?
       If they are, as we believe, the only material things which
       still remain in the precise condition in which they first
       began to exist, why should we not rather look for some
       indication of that spirit of order, our scientific confidence
       in which is never shaken by the difficulty which we expe-
        rience in tracing it in the complex arrangements of visible
        things, and of which our moral estimation is shown in all
        our attempts to think and speak the truth, and to ascertain
        the exact principles of distributive justice ?

                                                          1
                                  APPENDIX.

       Table of the Coefficients of Interdiffusion of Gases, from the Memoir oj
          Professor Loschmidt {see p. 279), in square centimetres per second


             Carbonic acid           . Air.                       •1423
                 —                     Hydrogen                   •S6i4
                 —-                    Oxygen .                   •1409
                 —                     Marsh gas                  •1586
                 —                     Carbonic oxide .           •1406
                 —                     Nitrous oxide .            •0982
             Oxygen                    Hydrogen                   •7214
                 —                     Carbonic oxide .       ,   -1802
             Carbonic oxide          . Hydrogen                   •6422
             Sulphurous acid           Hydrogen                   •4800
