Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That

Nicolas Gisin




Abstract Today’s science provides quite a lean picture of time as a mere geometric
evolution parameter. I argue that time is much richer. In particular, I argue that
besides the geometric time, there is creative time, when objective chance events
happen. The existence of the latter follows straight from the existence of free-will.
Following the French philosopher Lequyer, I argue that free-will is a prerequisite for
the possibility to have rational argumentations, hence can’t be denied. Consequently,
science can’t deny the existence of creative time and thus that time really passes.


1 Introduction

What is free-will for a physicist? This is a very personal question. Most physicists
pretend they don’t care, that it is not important to them, at least not in their
professional life. But if pressed during some evening free discussions, after a few
beers, surprising answers come out. Everything from “obviously I enjoy free-will”
to “obviously I don’t have any free-will” can be heard. Similarly, questions about
time lead to vastly different, though general quite lean discussions: “Time is a mere
evolution parameter”, “Time is geometrical” are standard claims that illustrate how
poorly today’s physics understands time. Consequently, a theory of quantum gravity
that will have to incorporate time in a much more subtle and rich way will remain a
dream as long as we don’t elaborate deeper notions of time.
   I like to argue that some relevant aspect of time is not independent of free-will
and that free-will is necessary for rational thinking, hence for science. Consequently,
this aspect of time, that I’ll name creative time—or Heraclitus-time—is necessary
for science. For different arguments in favor of the passage of time, see, e.g., [1, 2].
   The identiﬁcation of time with (classical) clocks is likely to be misleading (sorry
Einstein). Clocks do not describe our internal feeling of the passage of time, nor
the objective chance events that characterize disruptive times—the creative time—



N. Gisin ()
Group of Applied Physics, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
e-mail: nicolas.gisin@unige.ch

© Springer International Publishing AG 2017                                           1
R. Renner, S. Stupar (eds.), Time in Physics, Tutorials, Schools,
and Workshops in the Mathematical Sciences,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68655-4_1
2                                                                                             N. Gisin


when something beyond the mere unfolding of a symmetry happens. Indeed, clocks
describe only one aspect of time, the geometric, boring, Parmenides-time.
    But let’s start from the beginning. Before thinking of time and even before
physics and philosophy, we need the possibility to decide what we’ll consider as
correct statements that we trust and believe and which statements we don’t trust and
thus don’t buy. Hence:
    Free-Will comes ﬁrst, in the logical order; and all the rest follows from this
premise.
    Free-will is the possibility to choose between several possible futures, the
possibility to choose what to believe and what to do (and thus what not to believe
and not to do). This is in tension with scientiﬁc determinism,1 according to which,
all of today’s facts were necessary given the past and the laws of nature. Notice that
the past could be yesterday or the big-bang billions of years ago. Indeed, according
to scientiﬁc determinism, nothing truly new ever happens, everything was set and
determined at the big-bang.2 This is the view today’s physics offers and I always
found it amazing that many people, including clever people, do really believe in this
[3]. Time would merely be an enormous illusion, nothing but a parameter labeling
an extraordinary unraveling of some pre-existing initial (or ﬁnal) conditions, i.e. the
unfolding of some symmetry. What is the explanatory power of such a view? What
is the explanatory power of the claim that everything was set at the beginning—
including our present day feelings about free-will—and that there is nothing more to
add because there is no possibility to add anything. Clearly, I am not a compatibilist
[4], i.e. not among those who believe that free-will is merely the fact that we always
happen to “choose” what was already pre-determined to occur, hence that nothing
goes against our apparently free choices.3 I strongly believe that we truly make
choices among several possible futures.
    Before elaborating on all this, let me summarize my argument. The following
sections do then develop the successive points of my reasoning.




1
  For physicists, scientiﬁc determinism is an extraordinarily strong view: everything is determined
by the initial state of the atoms and quanta that make-up the work, nothing beyond that has any
independent existence.
2
  Equally, one may claim that everything is set by tomorrow; a fact that illustrates that time in such
a deterministic world is a mere illusion [3].
3
  Compatibilism is quite fashionable among philosophers. They argue that it is our character,
reasons and power that determine our actions [4]. But for a physicist, there is nothing like
characters, reasons or power above the physical state of the atoms and quanta that make up our
brain, body and all the universe. Hence, if the physical state evolves deterministically, then there is
nothing left, everything is determined. In such a case the difference between a human and a laundry
machine would only be a matter of complexity, nothing fundamental.
Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That                                                      3


2 The Logic of the Argument

1. Free-Will comes ﬁrst in the logical order. Indeed, without free-will there is no
   way to make sense of anything, no way to decide which arguments to buy and
   which to reject. Hence, there would be no rational thinking and no science. In
   particular, there would be no understanding.
2. Since free-will is the possibility to choose between several possible futures, point
   1 implies that the world is not entirely deterministic.
3. Non-determinism implies that time really exists and really passes: today there
   are facts that were not necessary yesterday,4 i.e. the future is open.
4. In addition to the geometrical time, there is also creative time. One may like to
   call the ﬁrst one Parmenides-time, and the second concept of time Heraclitus-
   time [5]. Both exist.
5. The tension between free-will and creative time on one side and scientiﬁc
   determinism on the other side dissolves once one realizes that the so-called real
   numbers are not really real: there is no inﬁnite amount of information in any
   ﬁnite space volume, hence initial conditions and parameters deﬁning evolution
   laws are not ultimately deﬁned, i.e. the real numbers that theories use as initial
   conditions and parameters are not physically real. Hence, neither Newtonian, nor
   relativity, nor quantum physics are ultimately deterministic.
6. Consequently, neither philosophy nor science nor any rational argument can ever
   disprove the existence of free-will, hence of the passage of time.



3 Free-Will Comes First, Free-Will as a Prerequisite
  for Understanding and for Science

As already mentioned in the introduction, free-will comes ﬁrst. Indeed, free-will
is the possibility to choose between several possible futures, like the possibility to
choose what to believe and what to do, hence also to choose what not to believe and
not to do.
    Accordingly, without free-will one could not distinguish truth from false, one
could not choose between different views. For example, how could one decide
between creationism and Darwinism, if we could not use our free-will to choose
among these possibilities? Without free-will all supporters of any opinion would be
equally determined (programmed) to believe in their views.
    In summary, without free-will there would be no way to make sense of anything,
there would be no rational thinking5 and no science. In particular, there would be no


4
  Admittedly, I use the primitive concepts of today and yesterday to get the direction of time, but
the existence of creative time is a direct consequence of non-determinism.
5
  Some may believe that a computer can think rationally, possibly that computers are optimal in
terms of rationality. But, even if one limits oneself to mathematics, a highly rational ﬁeld, how
4                                                                                       N. Gisin




Fig. 1 Jules Lequyer was born in 1814 in the village Quintin (see inset), in Brittany, France, in
this house. He died in 1862, probably committing suicide by swimming away in the sea


understanding. Furthermore, without free-will one could not decide when and how
to test scientiﬁc theories. Hence, one could not falsify theories and science, in the
sense of Popper [7], would be impossible.
   I was very pleased to learn that my basic intuition, expressed above, was
shared and anticipated by a poorly known French philosopher, Jules Lequyer in the
nineteenth century, who wanted to simultaneously validate Science and free-will [8],
Fig. 1. As Lequyer emphasized: “without free-will the certainty of scientiﬁc truths
would become illusory”. And (my addition) the consistency of rational arguments
would equally become illusory. Lequyer continues: “Instead of asking whether free-
will is certain, let’s realize that certainty requires free-will” [8].6


could a computer decide to add or not the axiom of choice to the basic Zermolo-Fraenkel axioms
of mathematics? Consistency doesn’t help, as both assuming the axiom of choice and assuming
its negation lead to consistent sets of axioms. Hence, a choice has to be made, a choice that has
consequences, hence impacts what makes sense to us. Most mathematicians accept the axiom of
choice because it allows them to prove more theorems. Why not. But I reject this axiom because
some of its consequences are absurd to me [6]. This is an example where free-will is necessary to
make a sensible decision. Note that one’s decision may evolve over time.
6
  Au lieu de nous demander si la liberté est une certitude, prenons conscience que la certitude a
pour condition la liberté.
Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That                                           5


   Lequyer also emphasized that free-will doesn’t create any new possibilities, it
only makes some pre-existing potentialities become actual, a view very reminiscent
of Heisenberg’s interpretation of quantum theory. However, Lequyer continues,
free-will is also the rejection of chance. For Lequyer—and for me—our acts of
free-will are beginnings of chains of consequences. Hence, the future is open,
determinism is wrong; a point on which I’ll elaborate in the next two sections.
   Lequyer didn’t publish anything. But, fortunately, had an enormous inﬂuence
on another French philosopher, a close friend, Charles Renouvier who wrote about
Lequyer’s ideas and published some of Lequyer’s notes [8, 9]. In turn, Renouvier
had a great inﬂuence on the famous American philosopher and psychologist William
James who is considered as one of the most inﬂuential American psychologists.
William James wrote “After reading Renouvier, my ﬁrst act of free-will shall be to
believe in free-will”. This may sound bizarre, but, in fact, is perfectly coherent: once
one realizes that everything rests on free-will, then one acts accordingly.



4 Hence, the World Is Not Deterministic: Reconciling
  Free-Will with Scientiﬁc Determinism

The existence of genuine free-will, i.e. the possibility to choose among several
possible futures, naturally implies that the world is not entirely deterministic. In
other worlds, today there are facts that were not necessary, i.e. facts that were not
predetermined from yesterday, and even less from the big-bang.
   Recall that according to scientiﬁc determinism everything was set at the begin-
ning, let’s say at the big-bang, and since then everything merely unfolds by
necessity, without any possible choice. Philosophers include in the initial state not
only the physical state of the universe, but possibly also the character of humans—
and living beings. Hence, let’s recall that according to physical determinism
everything is fully determined by the initial state of all the atoms and quanta at
any time (or time-like hypersurface) and the laws of physics. For example, given the
state of the universe a nanosecond after the big-bang, everything that ever happened
and will ever happen—including the characters, desires and reasons of all humans—
was entirely determined by this initial condition. In other words, nothing truly new
happens, as everything was already necessary a nanosecond after the big-bang.
   But how can one reconcile ideas about free-will, such as summarized in the
previous sections, with scientiﬁc determinism? Or even with quantum randomness?
This difﬁculty led many philosophers and scientists to doubt the very existence
of free-will. These so-called compatibilist changed the deﬁnition of free-will in
order to make it compatible with determinism [4]. Free-will, they argue, is merely
the fact that we are determined to never choose anything that doesn’t necessary
happen. Nevertheless, compatibilists argue, we have the feeling that our “necessary
choices” are free. This sounds to me like a game of words, some desperate tentative
to save our inner feeling of free-will and scientiﬁc determinism. But, as Lequyer
6                                                                                            N. Gisin


anticipated, free-will comes ﬁrst, hence there is no way to rationally argue against
its existence, for rational arguing requires that one can freely buy or not buy the
argument: genuine compatibilists must freely decide to buy the compatibilists’
argument, hence compatibilists must enjoy free-will in Lequyer’s sense. Moreover,
and this is my main point, scientiﬁc determinism is wrong, hence there is no need
to squeeze free-will in a deterministic world-view.
    Let me emphasize that since free-will comes ﬁrst, i.e. the possibility to choose
between several possible futures comes ﬁrst, and since this is incompatible with
scientiﬁc determinism, the latter is necessarily wrong: the future has to be open, as
we show in the next section.
    Before explaining why physics, including classical Newtonian physics, is not
deterministic, let me ﬁrst address two related questions: When do random (undeter-
mined) events happen? What triggers random events?
    Already when I was a high school student, long before thinking seriously about
free-will, the concept of randomness and indeterminism puzzled me a lot [10]. When
can a random event happen? What triggers its occurrence? If randomness is only a
characteristic of long sequences, as my teachers told me, then what characterizes
individual random events? What is the probability of a singular event? Aren’t long
sequences merely the accumulation of individual events7 ?
    The only interesting answer to the question “when do random events happen?”
I could ﬁnd was given by yet another nineteenth century French philosopher
(there is no way to escape from one’s cultural environment), Antoine A. Cournot
[11]. His idea was that chance happens when causal chains meet. This is a nice
idea, illustrated, e.g., by quantum chance which happens when a quantum system
encounters a measuring device.8
    This idea can be illustrated by everyday chance events. Imagine that two persons,
Alice and Bob meet up by chance in the street (taken from [12]). This might happen,
for example, because Alice was going to the restaurant further down the same street
and Bob to see a friend who lives in the next street. From the moment they decide
to go on foot, by the shortest possible path, to the restaurant for Alice and to see
his friend for Bob, their meeting was predictable. This is an example of two causal
chains of events, the paths followed by Alice and Bob, which cross one another and
thus produce what looks like a chance encounter to each of them. But that encounter


7
  A long sequence of pseudo-random bits is entirely given at once, because it is entirely determined
by the initial condition, i.e. by the seed. In such a case I have no problem with the idea that the
pseudo-randomness is a characteristic of the entire sequence. But what about long sequences of
truly random bits, produced one after the other, let’s say one per second? Each one is a little act of
creation and the sequence nothing but an accumulation of individual random bits. Accordingly,
randomness of truly random bits must be a characteristic of the individual events, not of the
sequence [10]. Notice that in the case of pseudo-randomness only the geometric-boring-time is
relevant, but in the case of true randomness that concept of time is insufﬁcient, as the creative-time
is at work (but without any free-will).
8
  Note that this doesn’t solve the quantum measurement problem, i.e. doesn’t answer the question
“which conﬁgurations of atoms constitute a measurement device?”.
Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That                                                        7


was predictable for someone with a sufﬁciently global view. The apparently chance-
like nature of the meeting was thus only due to ignorance: Bob did not know where
Alice was going, and conversely. But what was the situation before Alice decided to
go to the restaurant? If we agree that she enjoys the beneﬁts of free-will, then before
she made this decision, the meeting was truly unpredictable. True chance is like
this. True chance does not therefore have a cause in the same sense as events in a
deterministic world. A result subject to true chance is not predetermined in any way.
But we need to qualify this assertion, because a truly chance like event may have a
cause. It is just that this cause does not determine the result, only the probabilities
of a range of different possible results are determined. In other words, it is only the
propensity of a certain event to be realised that is actually predetermined, not which
event obtains [10].
   Let’s have a more physicist look at that. First, consider two colliding classical
particles, see Fig. 2. Next, consider a unitary quantum evolution in an arbitrary
Hilbert space, see Fig. 3. Look for a while at the latter one; it is especially
boring, nothing happens, it is just a symmetry that displays itself. Possibly the
symmetry is complex and the Hilbert space very large, but frankly, nothing happens
as the equivalence between the Schrödinger and the Heisenberg pictures clearly
demonstrates. Likewise, for a bunch of classical harmonic oscillators nothing
happens. Somehow, there is no time (or only the boring geometric time that merely
labels the evolution). Similarly, as long as the classical particles of Fig. 2 merely
move straight at a constant speed, nothing happens: in another reference frame they
are at rest. It is only when the classical particles collide, or when the quantum system
meets a measuring apparatus, that something happens, as Cournot claimed.
   But one may object that in phase space the point that represents the two particles
doesn’t meet anything. In phase space, there is no collision, as collisions require
at least two objects and in phase space there is only one object, i.e. one point.




Fig. 2 Sketch of two colliding classical particles. Initially they merely move along straight lines,
nothing happens. Next, they collide, the very detail of this process depends on inﬁnitesimal digits
of the initial conditions and of their shapes. Finally, the two particles continue again along boring
straight lines
8                                                                             N. Gisin




Fig. 3 Illustration of a unitary evolution in an arbitrary Hilbert space


Moreover, the collision in real space and the consequence of that collision is
already entirely determined by the initial conditions: in phase space it’s again only
a symplectic symmetry that displays itself.
   And even if one assumes that each particle is initially “independent”, whatever
that could mean, after colliding the two particles get correlated. Hence, for
Cournot’s idea to work, one would need a “correlation sink”. This is a bit similar
to the collapse postulate of quantum theory which breaks correlations, i.e. resets
independence (separability).
   In summary, Cournot’s idea is attractive, but not entirely satisfactory; it doesn’t
seem to ﬁt with scientiﬁc determinism. It took me a very long time to realize what
is wrong with that claim.



5 Real Numbers Are Not Really Real: Mathematical Real
  Numbers Are Physical Random Numbers

Consider a ﬁnite volume of space, e.g. a one millimeter radius ball containing
ﬁnitely many particles. Can this ﬁnite volume of space hold inﬁnitely many bits
of information? Classical and quantum theories answer is a clear “yes”. But why
should we buy this assertion? The idea that a ﬁnite volume of space can hold but
a ﬁnite amount of information is quite intuitive. However, theoretical physics uses
Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That                                             9


real numbers (and complex numbers, but let’s concentrate on the reals, this sufﬁces
for my argument). Hence the question: are so-called real numbers really real? Are
they physically real?
    For sure, it is not because Descartes (yet another French philosopher, but this
time a well-known one) named the so-called real numbers “real” that they are really
real.
    Actually, the idea that real numbers are truly real is absurd: a single real number
contains an inﬁnite number of bits and could thus, for example, contain all the
answers to all questions one could possibly formulate in any human language [13].
Indeed, there are only ﬁnitely many languages, each with ﬁnitely many letters or
symbols, hence there are only countably many sequences of letters. Most of them
don’t make any sense, but one could enumerate all sequences of letters as successive
bits of one real number 0:b1 b2 b3 : : : bn : : :, ﬁrst the sequences of length 1, next of
length 2 and so on. The ﬁrst bit after each sequence tells whether the sequence
corresponds to a binary question and, if so, the following bit provides the answer.
Such a single real number would contain an inﬁnite amount of information, in
particular, as said, it would contain the answer to all possible questions one can
formulate in any human language. No doubt, real numbers are true monsters!
    Moreover, almost all so-called real numbers are uncomputable. Indeed, there are
only countably many computer programs, hence real numbers are uncomputable
with probability one. In other words, almost all real numbers are random in the
sense that their sequences of digits (or bits) are random. Let me emphasize that they
are as random as the outcome of measurements on half a singlet,9 the archetype
of quantum randomness. And these random numbers (a better name for “real”
numbers) should be at the basis of scientiﬁc determinism? Come on, that’s just not
serious!
    Imagine that at school you would have learned to name the so-called real
numbers using the more appropriate terminology of random numbers. Would you
believe that these using the terminology numbers are at the basis of scientiﬁc
determinism? To name “random numbers” “real numbers” is the greatest scam and
trickery of science; it is also a great source of confusion in the philosophy of science.
    Note that not all real numbers are random. Some, but only countably p       many, are
computable, like all rational numbers and numbers like  and 2. Actually, all
numbers one may explicitly encounter are computable, i.e. are exceptional.
    The use of real numbers in physics, and other sciences, is an extremely efﬁcient
and useful idealization, e.g. to allow for differential equations. But one should
not make the confusion of believing that this idealization implies that nature is
deterministic. A deterministic theoretical model of physics doesn’t imply that nature
is deterministic. Again, real numbers are extremely useful to do theoretical physics
and calculations, but they are not physically real.




9
    That is, on a spin 12 maximally entangled with another spin 12 .
10                                                                                         N. Gisin


    The fact that so-called real numbers have in fact random digits, after the few ﬁrst
ones, has especially important consequences in chaotic dynamical systems. After
a pretty short time, the future evolution would depend on the thousandth digit of
the initial condition. But that digit doesn’t really exist.10 Consequently, the future
of classical chaotic systems is open and Newtonian dynamics is not deterministic.
Actually most classical systems are chaotic, at least the interesting ones, i.e. all
those that are not equivalent to a bunch of harmonic oscillators. Hence, classical
mechanics is not deterministic, contrary to standard claims and widely held beliefs.
    Note that the non-deterministic nature of physics may leave room for emerging
phenomena, like e.g. phenomena that could produce top-down causes, in contrast to
the usual bottom-up causes we are used to in physics [14]. A well-known example
of a set of phenomena that emerges from classical mechanics is thermodynamics
which can be deduced in the so-called thermodynamical limit. But, rather than going
to inﬁnite systems, it sufﬁces to merely understand that classical mechanics is not
ultimately deterministic, neither in the initial condition, nor in the set of boundary
conditions and potentials required to deﬁne the evolution equations.
    What about quantum theory? Well, if one accepts that the measurement problem
is a real physics problem—as I do, then this theory is also clearly not deterministic
[12]. If, on the contrary, one believes in some form of a many worlds view, then
the details of the enormously entangled wave function of the Universe depends
again on inﬁnitesimal details, as in classical chaotic systems. Note that although
quantum dynamics has no hyper-sensitivity to initial conditions, it shares with
classical chaotic systems hyper-sensitivity to the parameters that characterize
that dynamics, e.g. the Hamiltonian. Furthermore, open quantum systems recover
classical trajectories also in the case of chaotic systems, see Fig. 4. Hence, quantum
dynamics is not deterministic. Finally, Bohmian quantum mechanics is again hyper-
sensitive to the initial condition of the positions of the Bohmian particles; hence,
like chaotic classical systems, Bohmian mechanics is not deterministic.
    Admittedly, one may object that now we have an analog of the measurement
problem in classical physics, as it is unclear when and how the non-existing
digits necessary to deﬁne the future of chaotic systems get determined. This is
correct and, in my opinion, inevitable. First, because free-will comes ﬁrst, next
because mathematical real numbers are physical random numbers. Finally, because
physics—and science in general—is the human activity aiming at describing and
understanding how Nature does it. For this purpose one needs to describe also
how humans interact with nature, how we question nature [16]. Including the
observer inside the description results, at best, in a tautology without any possible
understanding: there would result no way to freely decide which description
provides explanations, which argument to buy or not to buy.




10
     It’s not that there is a sharp limit on the number of digits, they merely fade off.
Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That                                                 11


                           Duffing surface of section, beta=10 (Noiseless QSD)
      20




      15




      10
<P>




       5




       0




       -5




      -10
         -20    -15        -10         -5          0           5           10    15         20
                                                  <X>

Fig. 4 Poincaré section of the forced and damped quantum Dufﬁng oscillator in the chaotic
regime, described by the Quantum State Diffusion model of open quantum systems [15]. Note that
the axes represent quantum expectation values of position and momentum. This strange attractor
is essentially identical to its classical analog




Fig. 5 The real or physical world versus Pythagoras’ mathematical world should not be confused


    To summarize this section, claiming that classical mechanics is deterministic, or
that quantum theory implies a many-world view, is like elevating “real” numbers, the
determinism of Newton’s equations and the linearity of the Schrödinger equation,
to some sort of ultimate religious truth. It is confusing mathematics with physics. It
is a common but profound epistemological mistake, see Fig. 5.
12                                                                                        N. Gisin


6 Hence, Time Really Passes: Geometric-Boring Time Versus
  Creative Time

So far we saw that free-will comes ﬁrst in the logical order, hence all its con-
sequences are necessary. In particular one can’t argue rationally against free-will
and its natural consequence, namely that time really passes. We also saw that
this is not in contradiction with any scientiﬁc fact. Actually, quite the opposite,
it is in accordance with the natural assumption that no ﬁnite region of space can
contain more than a ﬁnite amount of information. The widely held faith in scientiﬁc
determinism is nothing but excessive scientism.
    This can be summarized with the simple chain of implications:

              FreeWill ) NonDeterminism ) Time Really Passes

    Let us look closer at the implications for time. There is no doubt that time as an
evolution parameter exists. To get convinced it sufﬁces to look at a bunch of classical
harmonic oscillators (like classical clocks), or the unitary evolution of a closed
quantum system, or at the inertial motion of a classical particle as in Fig. 2. This time
is the boring time, the time when nothing truly new happens, the time when things
merely are, time when what matters is being, i.e. Parmenides-time. One could also
name this Einstein’s time.11 But let’s look at the collision between the two particles
of Fig. 2. The detail of the consequences of such a collision depends on non-existing
inﬁnitesimal digits, i.e. on mathematically real but physically random numbers. To
get convinced just imagine a series of such collisions; this leads to chaos, hence
each collision is the place of some indeterminism, that is of some creative time,
time when what matters is change. Hence we call this creative time Heraclitus-time
[5]. This creative time is extraordinarily poorly understood by today’s science, in
particular by today’s physics. This doesn’t mean that it doesn’t exist, or that it is
not important. On the contrary, it means that there are huge and fascinating open
problems in front of us, scientists, physicists and philosophers.
    Notice that this is closely related to Cournot’s idea that random events happen
when independent causal chains meet, e.g. when two classical particles meet. The
two particles are independent, at least not fully correlated, because their initial
conditions are not fully determined. And their future, after the collision, is not
predetermined, but contains a bit of chance.
    Similarly, quantum chance happens when a quantum system meets a measure-
ment apparatus, as described by standard textbooks. Admittedly, we don’t know
what a measurement apparatus is, i.e. we don’t know which conﬁgurations of atoms
constitute a measurement apparatus. This is the so-called quantum measurement
problem. According to what we saw, there is a similar problem in classical



11
  Einstein identiﬁed time with classical clocks, i.e. with classical harmonic oscillators. But what
about clocks based on Heraclitus’ creative time? i.e. clocks based on chaotic or quantum systems?
Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That                                         13


mechanics: despite the indeterminism in the initial conditions and evolution param-
eters, things get determined as creative time passes (as discussed near the end of the
previous section).



7 Conclusion

Neither philosophy nor science can ever disprove the existence of free-will. Indeed,
free-will is a prerequisite for rational thinking and for understanding, as emphasized
by Jules Lequyer. Consequently, neither philosophy nor science can ever disprove
that time really passes. Indeed, the fact that time really passes is a necessary
consequence of the existence of free-will.
   The fact that today’s science—including classical Newtonian mechanics—is not
deterministic may come as a huge surprise to many readers (including the myself
of 20 years ago). Indeed, the fact that Descartes named real numbers that are
actually physically random had enormous consequences. This together with the
tendency of many scientists to elevate their ﬁndings to some sort of quasi-religious
ultimate truth—i.e. scientism—lead to great confusion, as illustrated by Laplace
famous claim about determinism and by believers in some form of the many-world
interpretation of quantum mechanics, based respectively on the determinism of
Newton’s equation and on the linearity of Schödinger’s equation.
   Once one realizes that science is not entirely deterministic, though it clearly
contains deterministic causal chains, one faces formidable opportunities. This might
seem frightening, though I always prefer challenges and open problems to the claim
that everything is solved.
   Non-determinism implies that time really passes, most likely at the junction of
causal chains, i.e. when creative time is at work. This leaves room for emerging
phenomena, like thermodynamics of ﬁnite systems. It may also leave room for
top-down causality: the initial indeterminism must become determined before
indeterminism hits large scale, much in the spirit of quantum measurements.
   As a side conclusion, note that robots based on digital electronics will never leave
room for free-will, hence the central thesis of hard artiﬁcial intelligence (the claim
that enough sophisticated robots will automatically become conscious and human-
like) is fundamentally wrong.
   So, am I a dualist? Possibly, though it depends what is meant by that. For
sure I am not a materialist. Note that today’s physics already includes systems
that are not material in the sense that they have no mass, like electro-magnetic
radiation, light and photons. What about physicalism? If this means that everything
can be described and understand by today’s physics, then physicalism is trivially
wrong, as today’s theories describe at best 5% of the content of the universe. More
interestingly, if physicalism means that everything can be understood using the tools
of physics, then I adhere to this view, though the fact that free-will comes ﬁrst
implies that, although physics will make endless progress, it will never reach a ﬁnal
14                                                                                       N. Gisin


point. We will understand much more, in particular about time and about free-will,
though we’ll never get a full rational description and understanding of free-will.
Just imagine this debate a century ago. How naive anyone claiming at that time
that physics provides a fairly complete description of nature would appear today.12
Similarly, for anyone making today a similar claim.
   Let me make a last comment, a bit off-track. Free-will is often analyzed in
a context involving human responsibility, “How could we be responsible for our
actions if we don’t enjoy free-will?”. There is another side to this aspect of the
free-will question: “How could we prevent humans from destroying humanity if
we claim we are nothing more than sophisticated robots?”, and “How could one
argue that human life has some superior value if we pretend we are nothing but
sophisticated robots?”.

Acknowledgements This work proﬁted from numerous discussions, mostly with myself over
many decades during long and pleasant walks. I should also thank my old friend Jean-Claude
Zambrini for introducing me to Cournot’s idea, when we were both students in Geneva. Thanks are
due to Chris Fuchs who introduced me to Jules Lequyer and to many participants to the workshop
on Time in Physics organized at the ETH-Zurich by Sandra Rankovic, Daniela Frauchiger and
Renato Renner.




References

 1. J. Norton, J. Philos. Stud. 13, 23–34 (2010). www.pitt.edu/~jdnorton/Goodies/passage. www.
    humanamente.eu/index.php/pages/36-issue13
 2. L. Smolin, Time Reborn (Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt, Boston, 2013)
 3. J. Barbour, The End of Time (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1999)
 4. R. Kane, A Contemporary Introduction to Free Will (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005)
 5. C.H.S. Temann, C.H. Sötemann, Heraclitus and Parmenides - An Ontic Perspective (GRIN
    Verlag GmbH, Munich, 2013); K. Jaspers, Anaximander, Heraclitus, Parmenides, Plotinus,
    Laotzu, Nagarjuna (Mariner Books, Indianapolis, 1974)
 6. C. Hardin, A. Taylor, A peculiar connection between the axiom of choice and predicting the
    future. Am. Math. Mon. 115, 91–96 (2008); A. George, A proof of induction? Philosopher’s
    Imprint 7–2, 1–5 (2007); J.P. Delahaye, Une folie Mathématique, Pour la Science 384, 86
    (2009)
 7. K.R. Popper, Logik der Forschung (1934); The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (Hutchinson,
    London, 1959)
 8. J. Lequier, Comment trouver, comment chercher une vérité première (Edition de L’Eclat, Paris,
    1985); see also D.W. Viney Translation of Works of Jules Lequyer. Studies in the History of
    Philosophy, vol. 48 (The Edwin Mellen Press, New York, 1998); J. Grenier, La philosophie de
    Jules Lequier, Calligrammes, 1983 (ISBN 2 903258 30 9); J. Wahl, Jules Lequier (Editions des
    Trois Collines, Genève-Paris, 1948)



12
  Remember a few decades ago, when biology was claiming that genes fully determine all living
beings. This was considered as a major and ﬁnal ﬁnding. It was a major ﬁnding, indeed, but clearly
not a ﬁnal one. Today, epigenetics proves that there is much more than genes that inﬂuences living
beings.
Time Really Passes, Science Can’t Deny That                                                      15


 9. W. Logue, Charles Renouvier, Philosopher of Liberty (Louisiana State University Press,
    Louisiana, 1993)
10. N. Gisin, Propensities in a non-deterministic physics. Synthese 98, 287 (1991)
11. A. Cournot, Exposition de la théorie des chances et des probabilités, Librairie Hachette (1843).
    Reprinted in part in Etudes pour le Centenaire de la mort de Cournot, ed. by A. Robinet,
    Edition Economica (1978)
12. N. Gisin, Quantum Chance, Nonlocality, Teleportation and Other Quantum Marvels (Springer,
    Berlin, 2014)
13. G. Chaitin, The Labyrinth of the Continuum. Meta Math! (Vintage, New York, 2008)
14. G.F.R. Ellis, Downward Causation and the Neurobiology of Free Will, ed. by N. Murphy, G.
    Ellis, T. O’Connor (Springer, Berlin, 2009)
15. T.A. Brun, N. Gisin et al., Phys. Lett. A 229, 267 (1997)
16. E. Schrödinger, Mind and Matter (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1958)
