IV6 • Parmenides and Q uantum Theor)
Written in 1970 and unpublished until now. According to
Platonic doctrine, the “Ideas o f things” discussed in the
preceding essay must refer back to the higher Ideas and, in
the end, to the One. The prelude, which deals with a
critique of the Ideas, is therefore followed by a fugue that
criticizes the opinions concerning the One. In modern
science, the organic forms refer back to the universal laws of
nature; i.e., in the end to the unity o f nature. We encounter
this unity in quantum theory. The confrontation of the first
hypothesis in the Parmenides Dialogue with quantum
theory is therefore the natural next step. This confrontation
is the subject of sections d and e of this essay, the first three
sections being introductory in nature. It turns out that a
relationship exists between Bohr’s complementarity and
Plato’s dialectic.



a) What D oes the Unity of Nature Mean ?

   We begin by recapitulating the facts and conjectures in which the
idea of the unity of nature has presented itself.1
   The unity o f the law comes first. This is merely another expression
for what physicists call the universal validity ofa fundam ental theory.
A “theory” of this type consists of a number of terms, as well as of
fundamental propositions which connect these terms and from which
additional propositions can logically be deduced. Further, it must be
sufficiently clear for practical purposes how the theoretical terms are
to be applied in experience, and thus also how the theoretical proposi­
tions can be put to the test. A theory has “validity” only if these
procedures are available, and if the propositions thus tested agree with
experience. We will not recapitulate the methodological problems
implicit in these requirements but will rely for the moment on the fact
that, in general, physicists agree on these matters among themselves.
The validity is “universal” if it extends to all possible objects of a
theory; i.e., to all objects covered by the terms of the theory. Here, too,
we are satisfied for the moment with practical universality, leaving
open the discovery of exceptions or of still more universal laws. We
will call a theory “fundamental” if it extends to all possible objects of
nature. The universal validity of a fundamental theory means that all
  'Cf. II.ldK and II.5b.
objects of nature are subject to one and the same lawful scheme; it is
in this sense that we term this validitydie “unity of the jaw.” Let me
emphasize that all these terms are merely descriptive. They formulate
the approximate ^elf-interjT/etation of contemporary physics, and the
following recapitulating reflections will clarifv or revise them.
   We do have such a fundamental, theory—n imely, quan*um theory.
Let us examine in more detail wha>. demarvc s should be imposed on
a fundamental theory, and in what sense quantum theory fulfill? them.
   The theory is to apply to arbitrary objects of nature. To this end, it
must be capable of characterizing an arbitrary object. It does so by
specifying the totality of its possible (“formally possible”) states. The
theory must also specify how these states can change in time. 1 hese
two requirements can be stated from the point of view of classical
physics; quantum theory supplements the requirements in its own
characteristic way—namely, by fulfilling them.
   According to quantum theory, every object possesses, mathemati­
cally speaking, the same manifold of possible states;2 these can be
characterized as the one-dimensional subspaces of a Hilbert space.
Quantum theory also specifies a universal rule for the composition of
two objects into a single object: the Hilbert space of the composite
object is the Kronecker product of the Hilbert spaces of the two
part-objects. The theory subdivides the question as to the temporal
change of the states into two questions. If the state changes without
being observed, it does so in accordance with, a unitary transforma­
tion of Hilbert space. A particular species o f objects (e.g., helium
atoms) is characterized by its formally possible unitary transforma­
tions, which are mathematically specified by their infinitesimal ele­
ment, the Hamilton operator H. The Hamilton operator of an isolated
object characterizes its internal dynamics and thereby designates cer­
tain of its states (for example) as eigenstates of H with particular eigen­
values of the energy. The interaction of the object with other objects
is described in terms of the Hamilton operator of the composite object
constituted by these objects; this operator can, within certain approxi­
mations, be reduced to the Hamilton operator of the original object
taken as situated alone in a fixed environment. If, on the other hand,
the state is observed, then the state changes in another manner. A
particular observation admits of only a subset of the formally possible
states of the object as possible results of measurement; this subset is
constituted by the eigenstates of the Hamilton operator of the object
  ’We will not refer to the Postulate of Finitism (II.5dio) in the present description of
existing quantum theory. The theory sketched in II.5e will also not be considered.
when the instrument of measurement is specified as part of its envi­
ronment. If ij/ was the state prior to the observation, then the probabil­
ity of finding a particular state <pn among the manifold of possible
results of the observation equals the square of the magnitude of the
inner product of the unit vectors in the directions of states i)i and
<Pn-
   Because of the mathematical formalism that it requires, this descrip­
tion of quantum theory might seem a bit heavy-handed. From the
conceptual point of view, the theory may be said to achieve a certain
maximum in possible simplicity. The theory characterizes, in unique
terms and by means of universally valid prescriptions, arbitrary ob­
jects, their composition, changes in their state when not observed, and
the prediction of observations. And yet quantum theory, even if we
assume it to be universally valid, does not yet express the full unity of
nature.
   For one can speak, secondly, of a unity of nature in the sense of a
 unitary character o f the species o f objects. This character expresses
itself in quantum theory in the existence of objects with particular
Hamilton operators. Today we believe that all species of objects can
in principle be explained as being composed of a small number of
species of elementary particles. In the case of inorganic nature, we all
believe this to be so; in the case of living organisms, it is the hypothesis
on which we have based this book. Finally, we hope to reduce the
species of elementary particles to a single basic lawful order, which
perhaps we ought not to describe as the existence of a single basic
species but rather as the law that specifies all of them.
   Thirdly, in the context of contemporary cosmology, it makes sense
to talk of the unity of nature as the totality o f objects. One speaks of
 the world as if it were a single object. Quantum theory does indeed
permit the composition of arbitrary objects into a new object. It even
requires this composition, in the sense that it regards the actual state
space of a number of coexisting objects as precisely the state space of
the total object they compose; the isolation of individual objects is, in
the eyes of quantum theory, always a mere approximation. If the
totality of objects in fhe world can, at least in principle, be enumer­
ated, then quantum theory obliges-as in principle to introduce the
additional object “world,”, which is composed of that totality. At this
point, however, certain conceptual problems that form a principal
theme of the present essay appoar. Let me merely name them for
now: If the object “world” is to exist, for whom is it an object? How
are we to conceive of an observation of this object? If, on the other
hand, the object “world” is inadmissible, how are we to describe the
coexistence of objects “in the world” quantum mechanical/? Or are
we to conclude that quantum theory meets its limits here?
   Fourthly, we have tried to base the unity of nature (as conceived
under the three preceding aspects) on the u.iity o f experience. We
talked, to begin with, of the preconditions of the possibility of experi­
ence, and understood “experience” to already be unified in the sense
that “every” experience may be thought of as -connected with every
other experience in a contexture of interactions that is free from
internal contradictions. This unity appears in Kant under the title of
“the unity of apperception.” In our own approach, which starts not
from subjectivity but from temporality, this unity appears as the unity
o f time. The unity of time (which in our presentation of course em­
braces space) is, most likely, the only adequate framework for the
problem of the totality of objects. With these latter reflections we have
delved into the midst of the fundamental problems of classical philoso­
phy. Before confronting these problems, we must still introduce our
last approach, the approach of cybernetics.
   Fifthly, the unity o f man and nature is part of our conception of the
unity of nature. Man, in whose experience the unity of nature is dis­
covered, is at the same time part of nature. We try to describe human
experience in terms of a cybernetics of truth, which is conceived of as
a process in nature. The philosophical problem that arises here is
obvious: if this program can be carried through, at least in principle,
then the unity of nature is somehow represented within nature as the
unity of the experience of man. What does this “somehow” mean? To
put it differently: the subjects, for whom the objects are objects, now
form part of the totality of objects. Furthermore, in a cybernetics of
truth, human consciousness stands apart from animal subjectivity as a
higher-level structure, but the two are also part of a genetic con­
tinuum. In the attempt to reduce matter and energy to information,
the subjectivity of all substance, if only implicitly and unclearly, is
presupposed.3 The classical formula that nature is spirit which does
not know itself as spirit urges itself upon us as a shorthand notation for
these problems; but this does not mean that we have understood this
formula in the least.                                             —
   As a next step, we therefore explicitly confront our complex of
problems with the ideas of classical philosophy, among which we in
fact already find ourselves. Aren’t we in the midst of the problems
 3Cf. III.3 and Ill.Sf.
faced by the Eleatic philosopher Parmenides? Hen to pan: One is the
totality. The totality is, first of all, the world, “comparable to a well-
rounded sphere.” But this world embraces experiencing as much as
what is experienced, consciousness as well as Being: To gar auto noein
ectin te kai einai, for it is the same to see and to be. I translated noein
with “to see” to avoid the abstract introversion of “to think.” What can
Parmenides teach us?


b) A D igression: How Can One Read the Philosophers?

   Anyone who turns to the contemporary secondary literature for
information on the Eleatic philosopher Parmenides, or on Plato’s
Parmenides Dialogue, can only fall into despair.
   How primitive was Parmenides? Was he an astronomical materialist
who believed in a spherically shaped universe? Did he suppose—as
determined materialists who came after him did—that matter can also
think? Was he a pantheist, to whom thinking matter appeared to be
God? Was he a spiritualist, for whom the spatial world of appearances
was a mere delusion? Is his philosophy the result of his not yet having
grasped the difference between consciousness and matter, or between
form and matter? Or does the esti with the infinitive mean “one can,”
so that he would simply be teaching us that reality can be known: “one
can think that which can be”? Does he assert that all movement is
mere appearance? If so, does he fail to notice that this teaching of his
is itself a movement? Is he the victim of a still immature logic? Does
he confuse logic and ontology? Is it his reward that he began the
search for a rigorous logic? Or was it, rather, that he discovered sub­
stance, as the permanent element amidst change? He seems, in any
case, to have been a forerunner; but whose forerunner?
   And as to Plato’s Parmenides: does the “prelude” relinquish the
theory of Ideas, or is it a self-criticism on the road to an improved
theory of Ideas, or a preparation for the theory of Ideas? And concern­
ing the first hypothesis of the “fugue”: is it meant “merely negatively,”
or merely “positively,” or both? Is it merely a refutation of the Eleatic
philosopher Parmenides, which Plato most generously has Parmen­
ides himself deliver? Does it deal with any Idea whatever, insofar as
it is an Idea? Does it deal with Plato’s One, or with the One of the
Neoplatonists? Do these alternatives amount to the same, or are they
utterly different? Is the Parmenides a logical exercise, a bit of horse­
play, or is it Western theology on its highest level?
