                   Why There Are No People
                                 PETER UNGER




I   magine, if you will, a somewhat uncommonly shaped object, one whose shape is
    not very irregular o r bizarre, perhaps, but which is at least sufficiently so that
we have no common name or expression for an object with a shape of that sort.
Following this instruction, then, you have not imagined a pyramid, or cylindrical
object, for those are readily spoken of in available terms. I shall call your imagined
object a n u d n i c k , which term you are to apply also to such various other objects
as you deem suitably similar in shape t o the first. In this way, we have invented a
new word together: 1 have given you the form of the inscription, ‘nacknick’, and
some instructions which help to delimit the meaning. But only you have enough of
an idea of the word to put it to much use. That is because, according to this little
story, you have not revealed your imagined shape to me, o r done much else to give
me a useful idea of it.
       Let us change the story a bit. In this version, you d o not first imagine any
object. Rather, I now actually place before you an object of the sort which, we
have supposed, you imagined in the first version. Pointing to this uncommonly
shaped thing, I then say to you, “This object is a nacknick, as are various others
that are suitably similar in shape to it.” To be emphatic and explicit, in both ver-
sions I may go on to add these following words to my instructions: “Don’t think
that an object must be exactly the same as this one in shape to be a nacknick. Rath-
er, while such exact sameness is amply sufficient, any object that differs in shape
from a nacknick only minutely will also be a nacknick. There is, then, n o particular
limit o n shapes for nacknicks. A t the same time, however, many objects will differ
from nacknicks, as regards their shape, substantially and significantly, and these
will not be nacknicks. These remarks apply, of course, not only to actual objects,
which might b e found in reality, but also to such merely possible objects as might
be only imagined.” I d o not think that, in adding these explicit instructions, I
would be changing the learning situation in any substantial way. Rather, I would

                                         177
178       PETER UNGER

only be making explicit what would otherwise be learned implicitly. Except for this
rather minor matter, and the fact that we set out intentionally to invent a new ex-
pression, the word you have just come to understand is of a piece with much that
you learned a t your mother’s knee. The newness and t h e explicit character of this
experience with ‘nacknick’, however, let us reflect productively on what logical fea-
tures are common to both the invented terms and the expressions learned in child-
hood.


        1. THE ARGUMENT FROM INVENTED EXPRESSIONS
What reflection reveals, I suggest, is that a common feature of ‘nacknick’ and so
many other terms is that they are all logically inconsistent expressions. On a par
with ‘perfectly square triangle’, the supposition that anything satisfies ‘nacknick’
implies a logical contradiction. The instructions that served explicitly to introduce
‘nacknick’, and that now serve to govern the term, were so devised as to ensure this
surprising result. Because of this, we can bring out the inconsistency in the term by
reflecting o n those instructions, with n o need for us to enter into lengthy, complex
argumentation as to what t h e word really means.
       Our instructions endowed ‘nacknick’ with such a meaning that it is now gov-
erned by a t least these t w o conditions:’
      ( I n ) If some (actual or only possible) entity satisfies ‘nacknick’, then any (ac-
              tual o r only possible) entity that differs minutely, in shape, from that
              putative satisfier also satisfies the expression.
      (2n) If some (actual or only possible) entity satisfies ‘nacknick’, then there are
           some (actual o r only possible) entities each of which differs substantially,
           in shape, from that putative satisfier and each of which does not satisfy
           the expression.
 As stepwise reasoning shows, because it is governed by these two conditions, ‘nack-
nick’ is an inconsistent term.
       We may begin by considering some shaped object, if only a possible one, that
is not a nacknick; for, according to my instructions, and (2x1). if there are nack-
nicks, there must be some such. Having done this, we want now to reason that, ac-
cording t o these same instructions, t h e considered object also is a nacknick. Well,
let US now think about an alleged nacknick, perhaps even t h e object from which,
presumably, 1 taught you the expression. If this is a nacknick, then, according to
my instructions, and to ( I n ) , so too is an object only minutely different in shape
from it, in parricular, one that is minutely more alike in shape to t h e object that we
have agreed is n o t a nacknick. Now, as this new, minutely differing object is also a
nacknick, as my instructions have indicated, so too is another object that differs
from it, in the same direction, by at least roughly that same minute amount. I t is
not hard to see, then, that a sequence of reasoning takes us to the step where an ob-
ject, only minutely more alike in shape to our “paradigm” nacknick than is our
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                   179

considered non-nacknick, will be declared a nacknick. Then, finally, the object
that, we agreed, was not a nacknick will also be a nacknick. According t o my in-
structions, then, there are objects that both are nacknicks and are not. The word
‘nacknick’, the relevant aspects of which these instructions determine, is an incon-
sistent expression.
       I t might be objected against this reasoning that there are sequences of minute
differences that will not take us to our agreed non-nacknick, but rather will ap-
proach a limit that is safely within t h e range where proper nacknicks may be recog-
nized. If this is so, the objection continues, then we cannot draw the conclusion
that, as the instructions have it, there are objects that both are and are not nack-
nicks. But unfortunately for this objection, the existence of such limited sequences
will not prevent the inconsistent conclusion from being drawn. For our instructions
explicitly sqated that there is n o particular limit on shape f o r nacknicks, and so they
ensured troublesome sequences to be available for our stepwise reasoning. For ex-
ample, one available sequence is presented when we consider one billion roughly
equal steps of difference spanning the range from our paradigm to o u r considered
non-nacknick. This sequence means a long argument for us, if things are spelled o u t
in detail, but the inconsistent conclusion is forced upon us all the same. I t is pretty
clear, I suggest, that because of our devised instructions, our invented expression
‘nacknick’, despite its utility and natural appearance, is indeed a logically inconsis-
tent expression.
       I shall employ this observation of inconsistency as a premise in an argument,
the Argument from Invented Expressions:’
   (I) The invented expression ‘nacknick’ is logically inconsistent.
The conclusion of our argument is to be the proposition that there are no people.
To get it from our premise about ‘nacknick’, we need a good deal more. Most of
this remainder will be contained in this second premise:
   (11) The expression ‘person’ is logically on a par with ‘nacknick’; if the latter is
        inconsistent, then so is the former.
A great deal of this essay will be spent in supplying support for this crucial second
premise. There will be great resistance, of course, toward its acceptance. For it is
quickly quite obvious that, in conjunction with the eminently attractive first prem-
ise, it logically yields t h e startling conclusion:
   (A) The expression ‘person’ is logically inconsistent.
Before a lengthy discussion of the claimed logical parity is entered into, a few brief
remarks are in order to motivate (11), so that the lengthier, more analytical discus-
sion may appear worth the effort.
      Now, as I have set things u p here, the only thing important to an object’s be-
ing a nacknick is the shape it has, though even this matter, of course, evaporates in
inconsistency. So, in this regard, our invented word parallels certain ordinary ex-
pressions: for example, ‘cubical object’, in contrast to ‘perfect cube’. Further, while
180       PETER UNGER

I have specified only shape as important for nacknicks, I could have easily specified
additional requirements for our putative objects, for example, that a nacknick be a
certain sort of nicknack. Any such additional requirement could not, of course,
have rendered the word consistent: given the determinative instructions regarding
shape, nothing could have done that. With only shape in the picture, our example
has a certain purity and simplicity. But as regards the basic question, that of incon-
sistency, our invented word might be the same as expressions that cannot be SO
neatly described.
       Again, our learning situation involved just one paradigm nacknick, imagined
or presented, and this artifice also gives our examples a certain simplicity and pur-
ity, perhaps one not often found in the more ordinary course of things. But we
could have made things more ordinary without importantly altering our examples:
For example, originally, I could have asked you to imagine several shaped objects,
each to have a quite similar unfamiliar shape. In the second story, I could have pre-
sented you with several similarly shaped objects. And, then, when things were to be
made explicit, I could have altered my instructions, slightly, to suit. So, whether
we have a single paradigm or a multiplicity is not crucial to the logic of the expres-
sion learned.
       At this point, our second premise will have a certain plausibility at least. As
our first premise, (I), is so hard to deny, our conclusion from it and (111, that is, the
startling (A), will now also be at least plausible. But however surprising it may be,
(A) does not directly concern the existence, or nonexistence, of persons. It is, after
all, about an expression, ‘person’, and is not directly about any putative people. To
get a conclusion directly to concern our desired subject matter, however, is now
quite easy. We need only add to what we have, this final premise:
   (111) If the expression ‘person’ is logically inconsistent, then there are no people.
In conjunction with (III), our other premises validly yield our intended final con-
clusion :
   (B)   There are no people.
And, this final premise, (Ill), really is a logically unobjectionable proposition.
      To deny the idea that an inconsistent expression does not apply to anything,
one must be involved in a confusion. For what is inconsistent expression? I t is an
expression for which the supposition that it does apply leads to a contradiction.
But, then, that supposition cannot be true. Thus the expression does not apply. But
what confusion might be responsible for such an absurd denial?
       The chief culprit, I suppose, will be a failure to distinguish between, first, our
using an expression to refer t o certain objects and, on the other hand, an expression
actually applying to, or being true of, those objects. You and I, for example, may
agree to use the expression ‘perfectly square triangle’, even given what it now means,
to refer to such tomatoes as are both yellow and sweet. With normal suppositions
in force, including the existence of people, there may well be such tomatoes and we
may well usefully refer to them with that expression. But we may be confident that
                                          WHY THERE A R E NO PEOPLE                181

those tomatoes are not perfectly square triangles, even though we refer to them as
such, and that there are n o such triangles anywhere. We may be just as confident,
then, that whatever use we are putting i t to, our chosen expression, being inconsis-
tent, is true of n o existing entities a t all. So much, then, for denials of our final
prerni~e.~
       We have much to discuss, however, as regards o u r other two premises, in par-
ticular, premise (II), where logical parity is claimed for ‘person’ and ‘nacknick’. My
support for this idea, which will afford some support to o u r first premise as well,
will come largely in terms of an account of ’person’ as a vague discriminative ex-
pression. On this account, all such expressions, including the invented ‘nacknick’,
are logically inconsistent. Briefly and roughly, we may provide some idea of these
expressions: First, in that they are vague, these terms contrast with, say, ‘inch’,
which, we may allow, precisely purports to discriminate t h e inch from all other
lengths. Second, in that they are discriminative, these terms contrast with the vague
expression ‘entity’, which does n o t purport to discriminate anything from anything
else, supposing that we may allow that anything a t all is an entity. And, finally, the
vagueness of these terms is essentially involved in their purported discriminations.
So, they will contrast with ‘entity which is less than two’, supposing that this ex-
pression is about as vague as ‘entity’, but that this vagueness does not enter into its
purported discrimination (of some numbers from others).
       I am about to exhibit my account, which, while it is incomplete, should be
detailed enough t o indicate that its main lines are adequate. Before I d o so, let m e
remark that I am well aware of a flaw that my account of these expressions is
bound to have: If the account is right, then, as ‘person’ is inconsistent, there are
none of us, and so n o statements, accounts, o r arguments that we produce o r under-
stand. The account implies a paradoxical situation. But this paradox, I shall argue,
does not nullify the account. Rather, it bespeaks its comprehensiveness and that of
“an intellectual need to begin anew.”


   2. AN ACCOUNT OF SOME COMMON VAGUE EXPRESSIONS
The inconsistency of ‘nacknick’ may be crudely characterized as stemming from the
following two rough conditional statements:
      If something differs from a nacknick minutely, then it also is a nacknick (no
      matter in what w a y it thus differs).
      If something is a nacknick, then there are things that differ from it in certain
      ways by a lot, so much so that they are not nacknicks.

If someone, n o t a philosopher, were asked to express that inconsistency without
any specific reference to shape, I think h e would express it, well enough for his pur-
pose, in these terms or terms similar t o them. Now, if we want, as philosophers, to
give a general characterization of the inconsistency, we too shall avoid any refer-
ence to any specific property. But we shall try to be a bit clearer about the offend-
ing differences than the obscure reference to a w a y . Accordingly, the conditions we
182       PETER UNGER

should exhibit will not be the sort a typical learner would be likely to articulate.
Still, in learning the expression in question, he may learn such underlying condi-
tions.
        I shall endeavor, then, to present two conditional statements that character-
ize ‘nacknick’, as well as many ordinary vague expressions. T h e terms I mean t o
characterize may be regarded as forming an important, b u t n o t exhaustive, group
among the vague discriminative ones: those that are (purely) qualitative expres-
sions. To indicate these expressions, we may distinguish, well enough for the pur-
pose, between the qualitative o r internal properties of an entity and, in contrast, its
external properties, o r relations. Thus, we shall say that t w o blue rectangular solids
may be the same as regards all their qualitative properties but different as regards
certain of their relations, f o r example, as regards their spatial relations to other ob-
jects. Whether an expression is vague o r not, we shall say that i t is (purely) qualita-
tive just in case it is governed by this following condition: If an entity satisfies the
expression, then so too does any entity which shares that satisfier’s qualitative
properties, that is, which is qualitatively identical with t h e satisfier. Thus, the ex-
pression ‘perfect cube’, while not vague, is qualitative, as are also the vague expres-
sions ‘cubical object’ and ‘nacknick’.
        Among vague discriminative terms, the qualitative ones satisfy this stronger
condition: If an entity satisfies the expression, then so does any entity that either
(a) is qualitatively identical to that satisfier or else (b) is minutely different from it.
I t is to be understood, as is most natural, that the minute differences alluded to in
(b) are in respect of qualitative properties, rather than relations. As is evident from
our previous reasoning, t h e importanr problems with these expressions derive from
(b); thus, in our subsequent discussion we may in general safely ignore (a), and
focus o n this problematic aspect.
        Focusing on (b), w e may present our characteristic conditions as follows,
with t h e help of some terms to b e clarified later, namely, dimensions of difference
and directions along them, which are here to concern only the internal properties
of t h e entities involved, as opposed to their external relation^:^
   (1 1 With respect t o any qualitative vague discriminative expression, there are
      dimensions of difference, with directions along them, such that if some
      (actual o r only possible) entity satisfies the expression, then all minute dif-
      ferences from t h e entity with respect to any one of these dimensions will
      find other (actual o r only possible) entities that satisfy, and will find n o
      (such) entity that does not satisfy t h e expression, providing that such a
      found entity does n o t differ more than minutely in any other such regard.
   (2) With respect to any qualitative vague discriminative expression, if some
      (actual o r only possible) entity satisfies it, then among the dimensions and
      directions that suffice for satisfaction under (l), there is a t least one di-
      mension of difference and a t least one direction along it such that, with
      respect to these, there are (actual o r only possible) entities each of which
      differs substantially from that putative satisfier and each of which does
      not satisfy t h e expression.
                                        WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                   183

The conditions given in these two statements, along with such discussion as clari-
fies and supports them, form the heart of my account of vague discriminative ex-
pressions. Now this account would, of course, b e uninteresting should there be
many expressions, but none which are qualitative vague discriminative ones. But
this is not so. On the contrary, providing that there are any expressions a t all, there
are a significant number of this sort,including ‘bumpy’, ‘tall man’, ‘stone’, and ‘per-
son’.
       The second of these conditions, in (2), is to the purported effect that these
expressions are to discriminate their satisfiers f r o m other entities. This condition,
which indicates some objects as falling outside an expression’s range, we shall call
the discriminative condition. The first condition is to t h e effect that, supposing any
entity does, various ones together are to satisfy the expression, b u t n o definite
bound is to be placed o n those t o be included. Thus, we shall call this condition the
vagueness condition f o r the expression in question.
       While both of these two conditions are required to generate our noted incon-
sistency, it is the vagueness condition over which most discussion is likely to arise.
Accordingly, let us first try to get an idea of its import. To d o so, we may contrast
‘bumpy’, a qualitative vague discriminative term, with ‘flat’ (or with ‘absolutely
flat’) and ‘not flat’, which are relevantly precise. If a surface is bumpy, that is, sat-
isfies ‘bumpy’, and is not just n o t flat, then, just as our condition directs, so too is
any surface that is no more than minutely different from it, even as regards shape.
If a surface is (absolutely) flat, however, there will be minutely differing surfaces,
in shape, that will not be (absolutely) flat. They will have only a few tiny bumps o n
them, in some cases, but not so much as to be bumpy. Likewise, if a surface is not
(absolutely) flat, it will not follow that all minutely differing surfaces are also not
flat. Consider a nearly flat surface. There will be a (possible) surface whose shape,
while minutely different from it, is different in just such a way that it will be flat.
Intuitively, I suggest, of these expressions, only ‘bumpy’ would be regarded as a
vague term. The fact that only it is governed by our first condition, then, helps
show the intuitive point of that requirement.s
       To understand both of our conditions, we should explicate our talk of dimen-
sions of difference, for that is a somewhat technical expression whose connection
with our ordinary vague thinking cannot be evident. We may begin our explication
by noting that things d o not just differ as such, but always differ in one o r more
ways or respects. For example, a heavy red stone differs from things that are not
red in respect of color, and from things that are not heavy in respect of weight.
Now, with many such respects, we may, to a certain extent a t least, speak compara-
tively of how much things differ. In respect of color, for example, we say that our
red stone differs more from things that are blue than from those that are purple.
In respect of weight, it differs more from things, or a t least stones, that are very
light than from those of a moderate or intermediate weight. Thus, we think of a
dimension of color, and also a dimension of weight, as a dimension of difference.
All of this is quite ordinary to think. What is less common, but I think still quite
available, is the idea that many things vary, too, with regard to stoniness, that is,
184       PETER UNGER

with respect to how close they are to being a stone, in t h e case of a certain stretch,
o r with respect to how good an example of a stone, in t h e case of another one.
Thus, we may recognize such a more complex, less easily described dimension, ac-
cording to which a very light, blue pebble differs more from a similarly light, simi-
larly colored twig, o r piece of cloth, than i t does from a heavy red stone. And, with
regard to this same dimension, of stoniness, if you will allow that expression, the
pebble may differ less from the stone than it does from a boulder, even if the peb-
ble and boulder are in most other respects quite like each other and quite different
from the stone. Accordingly, we may say that along at least one dimension of dif-
ference a red stone differs more from a blue stone than i t does from a red pebble,
while along at least one other dimension, t h e differences run differently.
          What we count as a dimension may include other dimensions, b u t perhaps in
n o orderly way. Color, which we have taken as a dimension, is often said t o include
hue, saturation, and brightness. Perhaps where we spoke of our red stone differing
from a blue stone as regards the dimension of color, we might have more specifi-
cally said that they differ as regards t h e dimension of hue. But there is n o competi-
tion here, nor any need for us to think that there are any ultimate dimensions of
difference. Our ordinary thinking does n o t suggest that, b u t neither d o our two
conditions of typical vagueness. F o r our second condition says, not that there is
one dimension of difference along which a vague expression will n o t (any longer)
b e satisfied, but that there is at least one such dimension. Now, my talk of dimen-
sions may harbor a whole host of problems. But that is n o fault of i t here. For we
are trying to reflect the features of our common vague expressions, including what-
ever problems they may harbor.
          Our conditions speak, n o t only of dimensions of difference, but also of direc-
tions along these dimensions. What are these directions? In regards to any dimen-
sion, say, that of color, we can think of small differences accumulating until large
ones are reached. This thought of accumulation implies a direction in which the ac-
cumulation takes place. Without any direction, such as that f r o m red through
purple t o blue, there would n o t be the order among colored things which we sup-
pose there to be. Similarly, a stone differs from a boulder in one direction, while it
differs from a pebble o r grain in another. We d o not always have convenient expres-
sions to label these directions, just as with the dimensions along which they are
directions. But it must b e admitted, 1 think, that they d o have a place in our think-
ing with vague terms.
          We want our expressed conditions to explain t h e force of arguments that are
f o r c e f d 6 To d o this, we must notice that certain of our vague terms are meant to
discriminate those entities purportedly falling under them from others that lie
only in certain directions, and n o t in others. F o r example, t h e expression ‘tall man’
purports discrimination of its satisfiers from men who lie, with respect to the satis-
f i e s , only in the downward direction of height, and not in t h e upward direction.
How this means inconsistency for t h e expression is indicated by considering sorites
arguments against t h e existence of tall men.’
                                            WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                   185

        In respect of height, here the relevant dimension, two men may differ by a foot
and we deem the one a taII man and the other not. F o r example, one may be six
feet six, plus o r minus a thousandth of an inch, and t h e other five feet six, plus or
minus that. In the downward direction, this difference of a foot would be relevant-
ly substantia1;in line with oursecond condition, the man of five feet six would, thus,
not be a tall man. In the other, upward direction, n o discrimination of the satisfier
from anything is purported, and so n o problems arise. Just as a man of six feet six
is tall, so any man of greater height is a tall man, o r so we commonly believe. T h e
substantial difference of a foot, then, means nothing in the upward direction: un-
like a man of five feet six, a man of seven feet six is (supposed to be) a tall man.
        This purported discrimination in the downward direction is enough to pro-
vide an argument that turns o n the inconsistency of ‘tall man’. We choose a man
somewhere down there in height, for example, a man of five feet six, who is sup-
posed not to be a tall man. And, we can show, by t h e condition of ( l ) ,that he also
is a tall man (if any man is). For if the man of sixsix is tall, then so is a man min-
utely less in height, say, a thousandth of an inch less, plus or minus a small fraction
of that. And if he too, then also another, whose height is about a thousandth of an
inch less. And, so, by steps, if there is any tall man, then our man of five-six is one
of these. But, as we have supposed, he is not. And, while we might seek to avoid
the contradiction by saying that, contrary to what we supposed, t h e man of fivesix
is after all only a tall one, this is n o avoidance b u t only a futile postponement. For
according to o u r second condition, there must be some (actual o r only possible)
man down there who is not tall. But, whomever we choose, our first condition then
forces us t o draw the opposite conclusion about him as well. Thus, the purported
discrimination cannot b e made; the expression is a n inconsistent one.
        There is a potential source of ambiguity which, while I d o not think I have in-
vited it, can be placed beyond serious question rather quickly. I t might be thought
that, according t o our second condition, so long as the dimension and direction are
appropriate, any substantial difference from a satisfier will rake us to objects, actual
o r only possible, that d o n o t satisfy. This would be an unfortunate interpretation,
as the following example makes clear: If the difference between a six-six man and a
five-six one is substantial, then so is that between a man of eight feet and a sixsix
man. But, while t h e latter is, then, a substantial difference, and can be taken in the
right direction, it does n o t take us to a man who, by common judgment, is not tall.
But our condition does n o t say that just any entity that thus differs from a satisfier
will not satisfy t h e expression in question; rather, i t implies only that there must be
at least some such. In t h e present case, there is indeed a plenitude of relevant pos-
sible cases. For example, all the possible men with heights less than five feet six will
differ sufficiently from the eight foot man. Thus, these men, who are not tall, will
allow us to derive a contradiction from the assumption that the eight-footer is a tall
man.
        In disarming a potential source of ambiguity, we have entered upon the finer
points of our account. In this vein, we may notice t h e final, or ‘providing’, clause of
186       PETER UNGER

our vagueness condition. Now, that clause may seem to make matters complex, b u t
it is only a way of providing for what would usually b e understood anyway. For we
are to understand that such a minute difference, by itself, will not make the differ-
ence between sarisfier and nonsatisfier, not that the presence of one such small dif-
ference will ensure a second satisfier, n o matter how different from the original
that second entity might otherwise be. By t h e same token, even with this “provid-
ing” clause, our vagueness condition can b e applied, in stepwise fashion, any num-
ber of times. F o r while various other differences may add u p so that they are even-
tually more than minute ones, even by common-sense reckoning, in any one step n o
such large difference will ever b e encountered.8
        Because our conditions d o n o t specify o r mention any particular dimensions
of difference, o r directions along them, but,only require, for satisfaction, the exist-
ence of some, w e cannot state our conditions in a mutually independent form. Thus
our reference in (2) to what is required in (1). We need this to make sure that the
differences added u p by repeated applications of (1) are comparable to those for
which (2) indicates an opposite claim, so that a contradiction will arise, supposing
there is any satisfier. With ‘nacknick’, shape was specified as relevant; by specify-
ing it once in each, independently specified conditions could be given for the term.
A similar situation occurs with t h e ordinary vague expression ‘tall man’, where we
may mention height as the dimension, and specify t h e downward direction along it.
But oftentimes, we shall be in n o position to provide such specific, independently
specifiable conditions.
        Our conditions make reference to possible entities that may not be actual. By
this device, we may explain, f o r example, our ready judgment that six-inch men
would not be tall men, even supposing there are n o actual men of that height. F o r
we are very ready to withhold ‘tall man’ from such an imaginary case. Now, if such
an explanatory reference to possible entities is avoidable, then we may just consid-
e r it a convenience here, f o r brevity. If, o n t h e other hand, an implication of such
dubious objects is required, that should mean trouble for these vague expressions.
But even if such a problem means, all over again, t h e worst for these terms, 1 shall
not dwell on t h e matter now. F o r t h e same difficulty, if there is one, would appear
quite as damaging to various expressions that are not vague: if something satisfies
“is n o t a perfect cube,” then there are objects, actual o r only possible, that differ
from that satisfier in shape, and that, thus, d o not satisfy t h e expression. In other
words, such problems are n o t peculiar to o u r topic.
        Let us turn now to discuss some of t h e limits of our offered conditions, for
they arc n o t meant to cover every conceivable topic. We may begin by noting a
vague expression t h a t is n o t governed b y our second, o r discriminative, condition,
namely, the expression ‘part of physical reality’. Now, rhis term is, of course, a
qualitative one; if an entity is part of physical reality, then so too is any other qual-
itatively just like it. And, second, this expression is a vague one; if anything, it is
even more vague than ‘stone’. A t the same time, it is governed by our first, o r
vagueness, condition: If an entity is a part of physical reality, then so too is any
other that, with respect to any dimension of difference, is minutely different from
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                  187

it. And, third, the expression is, quite obviously, a discriminative one: it is not t o
apply to such a putative abstract entity as t h e number three. But, the discrimina-
tions it makes d o not appear to involve its vagueness, a t least not in the ordinary
way we have been noticing. F o r it does not seem that there is any dimension, or
spectrum, of graded differences, where parts of physical reality are somewhere to
leave off and other entities are t o be newly encountered. So, our expression ‘part of
physical reality’ does not seem to be of t h e sort we have called vague discrimina-
rive. A t the same time, it is not governed by our second condition.
        Finally, let us look a t some limits of our vagueness condition, and try to see
what they may, or may not, mean f o r us. Toward this end, we notice the contrast
between two kinds of vague discriminative expression: those that are (purely) qual-
itative and those that are not. Only the first of these will be governed by our vague-
ness condition, in ( l ) ,for the notion of dimension ofdifference there employed
concerned only differences as regards qualities, o r internal properties. Thus, for an
easy example, two men may be qualitatively t h e same, b u t only one may bear the
relation to a woman of being married. Thus, only the other of them is a bachelor.
The word ‘bachelor’, then, is not a qualitative term. As such, i t is not governed by
our vagueness condition: Scratch the married man alone, so that now h e is minute-
ly different from the bachelor as regards his internal properties. But though he is
minutely different from an entity that satisfies ‘bachelor’, this married man does
n o t satisfy t h e word.
        A less obvious example is provided by J o h n T i e n ~ o n .He
                                                                      ~ points to certain
expressions for artifacts, for example, ‘table top’ and ‘door’. Consider two quali-
tatively identical objects, each crafted in different areas by different people, quite
independently. The first is meant t o serve just as a door, and does so. The second is
meant to serve just as a table top, as it does. I t seems clear that, supposing there are
table tops, only one of these is that. Scratching one, which means a minute differ-
ence between them now, as regards internal properties, will, of course, not alter t h e
situation. Upon reflection, then, it appears that there will be many vague discrimin-
ative terms that are not qualitative ones, and that d o not satisfy the vagueness con-
dition for our qualitative expressions. Consequently, to have a general account of
discriminarive vagueness, we need a vagueness condition for these terms as well,
along with a matching discriminative condition. But, what does this mean for our
main topic?
        Even without much thought on the matter, it is quite clear that ‘person’, un-
like ‘bachelor’ and ‘door’, is indeed a purely qualitative term. Perhaps some creature
qualitatively identical to me, but very far away, might not b e a human being should
h e lack certain relations, causal or otherwise, to all (earthly) humans.” But h e
would still be a person for all that. Consequently, as our chief interest here is in
‘person’, and in putative persons, it is n o t much to present purposes to provide such
more general conditions f o r discriminative vagueness as we now, admittedly, d o
desire.
        Still, a suggestion o r two seems to be in order, t o give some idea of how our
account of vague terms might be extended from t h e purely qualitative ones to cover
188       PETER UNGER

vague discriminative expressions generally. For a start, we may alter our vagueness
condition so that the dimensions of difference involved, and so the minute differ-
ences with regard to them. will now concern external relations as well as internal
properties. With this alteration we may declare an entity obtained from an alleged
door to be a door, should the change be a suitably small one, such as will, in fact,
b e produced by the net removal of a peripheral atom. F o r this obtained object's
relations to other things will differ only minutely from those of the original satis-
fier, all things considered, whether o r not we regard it as the very same object as
that original. But while we thus achieve some added explanatory power, this altera-
tion provides only a rather weak, o r unambitious, vagueness condition: Another
door, far away from the original, and with internal properties only minutely differ-
ent, may well not be declared a door. For, all things considered, the external rela-
tions of this distant object may b e so different from the first, it seems, that no dec-
laration concerning i t will be available to us. To group these two doors together, a
stronger vagueness condition is needed. A suitable one might be obtained, I suggest,
if we d o not speak of external relations generally, b u t limit our reference to those
relations the bearing of which, by an object, are relevant to whether o r not the
object is (supposed to be) a satisfier, for example, a door. If these relevant relations
are just t h e same o r minutely different for the t w o objects, and their internal prop-
erties are also t h e same o r minutely different, then they shall be grouped together
as well. With these provisos, we may now have a suitable vagueness condition for all
discriminative vague terms, as we have been understanding this category of expres-
sions.
       F o r such a n extension of o u r account, I am inclined to think that our original
discriminative condition will prove adequate, with its reference to the dimensions
in the paired vagueness condition matching things u p appropriately. But, if that is
n o t quite right, a suitable matching condition should not be far t o seek. These are
m y suggestions, then, for extending my account from its present exclusive concern
with purely qualitarive terms to cover vague discriminative expressions generally.
Having made them, I shall not pursue t h e matter here, but will only note that most
o f the remarks to be made about the qualitative ones will apply as well to t h e
others. Hence, in what follows, I often shall speak indiscriminately of vague dis-
criminative terms, in general, and those of them that are qualitative vague expres-
sions.


             3. THE IDEA OF INCOMPLETE EXPRESSIONS
The main lines of o u r account are now before us. O n this account, vague discrimina-
tive expressions are inconsistent terms. Against o u r account, others may be pro-
posed. Perhaps t h e most common and appealing alternative will be t h e idea that
these vague terms are incomplete expressions. Typically, a t least, this idea will de-
rive from the thought that each of our vague expressions has borderline cuses, that
is, cases that neither definitely satisfy the term nor definitely d o not. T h e reason
f o r these cases, t h e idea will then go, is that the vague expression says nothing
                                             WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                    189

about them one way or the other. This lack of content o r commitment is owing to
t h e term’s being incomplete, that is, incompletely defined.” Now, even if there
were something in t h e idea of an incomplete term, its application to our typical
vague expressions would now seem to b e quite dubious. For these expressions seem
logically o n a par with ‘nacknick’, and that invented expression is (completely) in-
consistent, and SO is nor an incomplete one. But matters are worse than that for our
alleged alternative account. For, as I shall argue, this idea of incompleteness is inco-
herent, as is even the thought of borderline cases, on which it depends.
        Let us begin our discussion by seeing that our own account implies the result
I seek to establish. Now, on our account, typical vague expressions apply to n o
cases whatsoever, for they are each logically inconsistent. Hence, we may say all
cases are decided negatively by each such term. Thus, n o cases are borderline cases,
and no expression is incomplete. Here is another way of seeing that, on our ac-
count, there are no borderline cases: Any borderline case for an expression requires
positive cases, which satisfy t h e expression. For a case that is (on the) borderline is,
o n some relevant dimension, between positive cases and negative ones. On our ac-
count, there are n o positive cases; thus, no borderline ones either. So it is amply
clear that as our account has it, there are no vague discriminative expressions that
are incomplete. In that 1 shall b e arguing for this same conclusion, I shall be reason-
ing that this result is a virtue of our account.
        Let us focus on t h e notion of borderline cases. These are supposed to be cases
to which the expression in question does not definitely apply and does not defi-
nitely not apply. But what can be the proper force of this ‘definitely’ here? Imagine
a typical vague expression and an object. Consider t h e statement that (1) the ex-
pression neither definitely applies to t h e object nor definitely does not. And con-
sider as well the apparently simpler statement that (2) t h e expression either applies
to the object or does n o t apply t o it. Now, the former statement either is consistent
with the latter, simpler one or else it is not. Suppose it is consistent with the simp-
ler Statement. What t h e simpler statement says is that each case is one where the
expression applies o r else is one where it does not apply, and so i t leaves n o room
f o r any borderline cases. So, f o r all t h e statement with ‘definitely’ then says, there
will be no borderline cases. Thus, if our two statements are mutually consistent, t h e
one with ‘definitely’ cannot coherently indicate any borderline case. Well, then, let
us suppose the alternadve, that the first statement is not consistent with the sec-
ond. Now, we shall want to notice the logical status of that second statement: it is
necessarily true. For this statement is b u t a special consequence of a quite general
necessary truth: with regard t o any given object, any relation, and any entity, that
object either bears that relation t o that entity or does not bear the relation to the
entity.” Now, if the object is an expression, that cannot change matters; nor can
things be altered when the relation is that of application, whatever the entity in
question might be. T h e truth of our simpler statement, (2), then, cannot b e seri-
ously challenged. But, if ( l ) ,our ‘definitely’ statement, is not then consistent with
(2), (1) will not itself be true, and so it will not correctly indicate any borderline
cases. Thus, in either case, that is, in any case, there are n o borderline cases.
190       PETER UNGER

        Our statement with ‘definitely’, i t is true, a t first appears to suggest coherent-
ly some cases of a third logical kind, though this appearance cannot be borne out. I
should try to explain the illusory appearance here. T h e explanation, I think, falls
into two parts: first, talk with ‘definite’ can be used, coherently, we may allow, t o
describe certain behavioral situations. And, once that is managed, the description
can lead to the incoherent idea that, underlying the described behavior, there are
logically borderline cases. Let us discuss the first part, f o r that is where the trouble
starts.
        With regard to a typical vague expression, a normal person will sometimes be
in a state of hesitancy, uncertainty, and, perhaps, even confusion. With regard t o
certain (real o r only imagined) objects, which he may call “borderline cases,” he
will have n o definite disposition or tendency to apply the term nor any definite
tendency to withhold it. These objects will contrast with others, for which the per-
son has such a tendency to apply the term, as well as with still others, for which he
has a definite disposition to withhold the expression. And, these behavioral con-
trasts can hold, not just for a single individual a t a moment, but for a society dur-
ing a long period of time. Where such a broadly based pattern of dispositions exists,
we may give a certain currency to talk of “borderline cases.” But that talk, to re-
main coherent, must confine itself to reporting upon the behaviors in question; i t
cannot properly entail, to explain the behavior, situations where an expression does
n o t apply to an object and also does n o t n o t apply to it.
        The behavioral contrasts just remarked, i t may be appreciated, will hold just
as well for invented inconsistent expressions, like ‘nacknick’. A given individual will
b e ready to apply “nacknick” to certain objects, and to withhold i t from others,
but will be uncertain about still a third group. And, should the term gain currency,
a more general behavioral pattern to t h e same effect would doubtless ensue. Objects
in the third group might well be regarded, quite generally, as borderline cases. So
long as nothing of much logical import is thus implied, such parlance may be al-
lowed. But, clearly, nothing much more than reportage upon these dispositions
could be coherently conveyed by such talk of borderlines. For, clearly, ‘nacknick’ is
an inconsistent expression, and actually applies to n o cases whatsoever. So i t is with
all vague discriminative expressions, both invented and inherited.
        Except in the irrelevant behavioral sense of the expression, then, there can be
n o borderline cases. Thus, there are none to threaten our account; there is n o com-
petition for us from the idea of vague expressions as incomplete. For any incom-
pleteness will arise only over logically borderline cases, and so the suggestion of in-
complete expressions is n o t a coherent idea. Though we have just made short work
of the idea of incomplete expressions, there will be some, n o doubt, who will b e
loathe to part with it. T h e reason for their reluctance is simple: the idea can be
made to appear very attractive. For our reasonings to have maximum effect here,
we must consider t h e motivation from which such an appearance can derive.
        T h e motivation underlying t h e idea of incomplete expressions is due primar-
ily , I think, to a misplaced analogy between linguistic expressions and mathemati-
cal functions. F o r a mathematical function to yield a value for an object, that func-
                                             WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                    191

tion must be defined for, o r with respect t o , t h a t object. Typically, it will be so de-
fined only if someone, a mathematician, does something, only if he defines i t for
the object. If nothing is done, then the function is undefined for the object, and it
yields no particular value in the case. If one thinks of a linguistic expression as
yielding a positive value for those objects it applies to, and a negative one for those
it does not, one is well o n his way toward applying this analogy.
        Like the functions of mathematics, i t may then b e thought, an expression will
yield a value only in the case of those objects f o r which it is defined. And, i t will
be defined for an object only if some people have defined the expression for the
object. Now, this thinking continues, the people may have defined i t positively with
regard to a certain object: in that case, t h e value there will be positive, and the ex-
pression will apply to the object. Or, they may have defined i t negatively: then, the
value there will be negative, and the expression will n o t apply. Or, as in mathemat-
ics, they may not have defined i t with regard to the object. In this last case, t h e ex-
pression will be undefined with respect to t h e object, i t will yield n o value there,
neither positive nor negative; and, so, i t will neither apply to the object nor not ap-
ply to it. Rather, i t will find a borderline case in the object, thus being an incom-
plete expression.
       According t o one way of viewing the matter, a mathematical function that is
defined for certain objects but n o t for others may b e completed, so that it is then
defined for those others as well. Analogously, t h e idea of incomplete expressions
may be further developed: A vague discriminative expression may be made more
precise by completing its definition. So long as the previously positive cases remain
as such, and so with the previously negative ones, a completion will be admissible.
Thus, f o r a typical vague expression, there will be a great, perhaps an infinite, vari-
ety of admissible completions, none of which violates t h e meaning with which the
expression had been endowed. Any such completion will decide, whether positive-
ly or negatively, each of the expression’s borderline cases. And, what can deter-
mine which completion we fix upon, if ever we desire to make precise a certain
vague expression, will be the purposss we then wish i t to serve. So, the accept-
able completion we choose need n o t be an arbitrary choice.
       The idea of incomplete expressions is thus a very attractive idea. According to
it, our expressions are each consistent and more: through their already defined
cases, they provide us with stable contrasts, with a n intellectual anchor. A t t h e
same time, through their borderline cases, they provide us with t h e opportunity for
crea’tive conceptual choice. But, in addition to resting o n an incoherent notion of
borderline cases, this appealing picture rests upon a weak o r misplaced analogy be-
tween mathematical functions and the expressions of our language.
       What is it, in the special sense intended, f o r an expression to be defined? Of
course, it is not for it to be defined in t h e usual sense, where a statement is made
that elucidates the term’s meaning. For,many precise terms, completely defined in
our special sense, have never had their meaning thus elucidated and, o n t h e other
side, certain vague words have had their meaning m a d e tolerably plain. O n t h e con-
trary, what is here alluded to is simply this: the expression has been endowed with
192       PETER UNGER

such meaning that, with respect to some objects a t least, that meaning determines
whether o r n o t the term applies to those objects. Once we realize that this is what
this talk of definition comes to, we can see that the idea of incomplete definition
amounts to nothing. For, with respect to any expression, and any object, unless we
define that expression with respect to that object, that is, unless society has endowed
it with such meaning as determines whether o r not i t applies t o the object, t h e ex-
pression will not apply to the object. If we insist that t h e term’s not applying to an
object means that it yields a (negative) value for that object, then a (negative) value
will be yielded even if nothing has been done to produce such a result. Consider the
expression ‘ouch’. I t has not been defined with respect to the Empire State Build-
ing. Yet, it does not apply to that entity. If we insist t h a t this means ‘ouch’ yields a
negative value f o r t h e Building, then so be it. Of course, one might not insist that
‘ouch’ yields a value here. But, still, i t does n o t apply to the Building. So, however
we describe matters, we cannot coherently apply t h e offered analogy.
        A function, then, if n o t suitably defined, may yield n o value with regard to
a certain object, neither positive nor negative. But, whether owing to what is dic-
tated by its meaning o r not, an expression will apply to a given object o r else i t will
n o t d o so. Unlike the function, with its values, there is n o further course for t h e ex-
pression to take.
        The idea of incomplete expressions is itself inconsistent. I t can offer n o genu-
ine alternative to our account of vague expressions as inconsistent terms. Let us in-
quire somewhat more deeply now as to the nature of their i n c o n ~ i s t e n c y . ’ ~


        4. VAGUENESS AND GROUNDLESS INCONSISTENCY
I t is easy to assume that any inconsistent expression results from a clash between
ideas each of which is itself quite consistent. O u r by now familiar expression ‘per-
fectly square triangle’ may be reckoned an example of this. As such, that expres-
sion may be regarded as governed by two quite precise conditions, which may be
expressed as follows:
      (It) If some (actual o r only possible) entity satisfies t h e expression ‘perfectly
           square triangle’, then (since that putative satisfier is a perfectly square
           object) the satisfier has exactly four interior angles.
      (2t) If some (actual o r only possible) entity satisfies t h e expression ‘perfectly
           square triangle’, then (since that putative satisfier is a triangle) t h e satis-
           fier has exactly three interior angles.
T h e clash here is between t h e idea of having exactly four such angles, which implies
having more than three, and that of having exactly three, which implies not having
more than three. We might say that the inconsistency in ‘perfectly square triangle’
is grounded in t h e clash between these t w o consistent conceptions. I t is easy to as-
sume, then, that every inconsistent expression must be grounded in a t least one
such clash as that. O n the contrary, however, it is a feature of vague discriminative
terms that their inconsistency is not thus grounded, b u t is relevantly groundless.
                                          WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                 193

And, it is a virtue of our two conditions for such expressions that they serve to
bring o u t this groundlessness.
       The differences that figure in our vagueness condition are referred to as mi-
nute ones, and those of our discriminative condition as substantial in amount o r
size. Whatever the meaning of ‘minute’ and ‘substantial’, we may take i t that noth-
ing satisfies both of these a t once, whether the thing in question be a slice of meat,
a number, or a difference. T h e terms ‘minute’ and ‘substantial’, then, purport to b e
mutually exclusive in their application; if they have any application, it must respect
this condition. I t is in virtue of this exclusivity that these terms might appear to
underlie successful discriminations purported by our vague discriminative expres-
sions. But ‘minute’ and ‘substantial’ are themselves discriminative vague terms. So,
both of them are inconsistent expressions; neither has any real application a t all,
thus none which is exclusive of the other’s. Even so, t h e inconsistency of other
discriminative vague terms may be understood in terms of t h e inconsistency of each
of these two expressions. A t the same time, their own inconsistency may also be
understood in terms of themselves. While these two terms are thus rather deeply
placed, they provide n o clash between consistent conceptions. Accordingly, the
inconsistencies they serve to explain are relevantly groundless.
       What is it, after all, for one object to differ minutely from another, in a cer-
tain respect, for that difference between them to b e a minute one? If that differ-
ence is minute, then so is a difference, along the same dimension, which is only mi-
nutely greater than it. This leads to the conclusion that a certain difference, deemed
substantial, and so not minute, must be deemed as well a minute one. Thus, there is
n o minute difference in the first place.
       Let us reconsider our paradigm nacknick and t h e object we agreed to be so
different from it as to be not a nacknick. The difference between these two, we
supposed, was a substantial one, and so n o t a minute difference. But an object that
was about a billionth of the way from the paradigm to the non-nacknick differed
minutely from the paradigm. If it did, then so did t h e next object in the considered
sequence, for the extra billionth of t h e way thus added will not mean the difference
between a minute difference here and one that is not. But, then, the difference be-
tween the paradigm and the still next object will also be a minute one, o n the same
principle. By stepwise reasoning, we shall thus conclude that the difference between
the paradigm and the considered non-nack is a minute difference. This lets us, in
turn, conclude two things: first, we may conclude that t h e supposed non-nacknick
is also a nacknick, which helps show how the quantitative term ‘minute’ underlies
‘nacknick’. And, second, we deduce the related contradiction: that the supposed
substantial difference, between the paradigm and t h e agreed non-nacknick, is also a
minute one.
       In general, we may say that when adding a minute difference to another, the
result is a larger difference that is still a minute one. Suppose someone took excep-
tion to this generality, thinking that there might be t w o big differencesfor minute
ones, so that when they were added t h e result failed to b e a minute difference. Let
us consider one of these: i t is supposed to be large f o r a minute difference. Let us
194        PETER UNGER

consider as well a difference, the same in dimension and direction, that is only one
millionth of its magnitude. This latter difference will not be a large one, even for a
minute difference; it will be minute for a minute difference. But if it is minute for a
minute difference, then so is one that is only two millionths the magnitude of the
large minute difference, f o r the extra millionth cannot mean that we have gotten to
a minute difference of some other sort. By stepwise reasoning, we may eventually
conclude that our original minute difference, supposedly large for such a difference,
is also minute for a minute difference. And, we may d o as much for the large mi-
nute difference to which it might b e added. Adding two such differences, each of
which may thus be reckoned minute even for minute differences, cannot, then,
yield a difference that is n o t m i n ~ t e . ’ ~
        The idea of a substantial difference is relevantly on a par with that of a mi-
nute one. If a given difference is substantial, then so is one that is only minutely
less. But however small we require a difference to b e so that i t fail to be substantial,
we may eventually reach it. Thus, any such difference will be declared substantial,
as well as n o t substantial.
        The points we have made about ‘minute’ and ‘substantial’ can also be made
about other pairs of similar terms, a b o u t ‘small’ and ‘large’, for example. Each
member of such a pair will b e a quantitative vague discriminative expression; one of
them will purport to denote things whose magnitude is less than any to which t h e
other can properly apply, the other to denote to opposite effect. Of course, a term
may be quantitative in this sense and also be a purely qualitative expression in the
sense we previously defined. In every case, I hypothesize, the inconsistency of
vague discriminative expressions may be understood in terms of some such quanti-
tative pair o r pairs. When a pair is suitable f o r such understanding, we may call it an
underlying pair for the expression in question. So, each typical vague expression has
a t least one such underlying pair.
        In giving my conditions, in (1) and ( 2 ) , f o r qualitative vague terms, I em-
ployed t h e term ‘minute’. This was a measure in t h e direction of caution. For while
a more common word like “small” appears suitable to underlie many such expres-
sions, for which of course “minute” will also serve, there may be some for which
only the latter term will prove adequate. I t is worth noting, I think, that with many
vague terms thesorites arguments thar spell trouble can be quite short. F o r example,
I think we regard a man of six-two as tall, b u t one of five-eleven as not a tall man.
But half a n inch will not mean t h e difference between a tall man and not. So, an ex-
plicit b u t quite short argument will yield n o tall men a t all. I suggest that this help-
ful shortness is due largely to t h e fact that ‘small’ is enough to underlie t h e first
condition for ‘talI man’. Consequently, ‘minute’ here gives us, with a longer argu-
ment, a luxury of caution.
        This groundless inconsistency, characteristic of vague discriminative terms,
is n o t to b e conflated with the fact t h a t t h e noted stepwise reasoning exposes t h e
inconsistency of t h e expressions in question. To clarify this point, we may invent
expressions whose inconsistency is exposed in that stepwise manner, but that d o
not have the feature of groundless inconsistency. In one respect, that of having
                                           WHY THERE A R E N O PEOPLE                195

their inconsistency grounded in precise, consistent concepts, such expressions will
be like ‘perfectly square triangle’. In another, that associated with the stepwise rea-
soning, they will be unlike such an obviously inconsistent expression, and will be
like our typical vague terms. Because of this latter likeness, such an invented term
would, under suitable circumstances, prove useful to many normal people. Let me
proceed to invent such a useful expression.
       A tinkergrid, we might say, is something that one might endeavor to build out
of the most typical items found in a tinkertoy set. These items are of two kinds:
sticks and wheels. Now, the term ‘stick’, as well as ‘wheel’, is a vague discriminative
one, and so it has groundless inconsistency. Thus, we d o not want our invented
’tinkergrid’ t o be defined in terms of sticks and wheels, f o r then the invented term
would also have groundless inconsistency. Let us better say, then, that what one
would endeavor to build with a tinkertoy set would be, n o t a tinkergrid itself, bur a
physical realization of a tinkergrid. T h e tinkergrid itself would be a mathematical
entity, composed of other mathematical entities, which are its basic parts: line seg-
ments of unit length, which one might use sticks to endeavor to realize, and nodes,
where line segments can connect a t right angles, f o r which a wheel might be used.
The idea of a tinkergrid, then, is that of a certain mathematical structure. But, of
course, there might be n o more possibility of such a structure than of a structure
that is a perfectly square triangle.
       Now, to define the general conception of a tinkergrid, we begin with the
more particular idea of a paradigm tinkegrid. A paradigm tinkergrid, we shall say,
is in the form of a cube, with ten-unit line segments to each of its twelve edges;
each edge, then, contains eleven nodes, two a t its ends and nine internally. This
tinkergrid is composed of a thousand unit cells, each in the form of a cube com-
posed of twelve segments and eight nodes. The cells are arranged in such a way that
they d o not overlap, b u t are suitably adjacent, so that t h e whole tinkergrid is per-
fectly constituted of them: ten layers each with ten columns and ten rows of unit
cells. I t should appear clear how, using the standard tinkertoy items, one would try
to realize a paradigm tinkergrid. So much for paradigm tinkergrids; what of those
that are n o t paradigms?
       As our definition is to have it, a paradigm tinkergrid is b u t one sort of tinker-
grid; related to it are other sorts, which are all suitably related to each other. We
shall not put this by means of any quantitive vague discriminative expression for
that would involve ‘tinkergrid’ in groundless inconsistency, which we are to avoid.
Thus, we d o not have as a second clause of our definition any such conditional as
this one: If something is a tinkergrid, then anything that differs from i t by a fittle
bit is also a tinkergrid. Rather, we shall p u t o u r second clause more suitably in some
such terms as these: If something is a tinkergrid, then anything t h a t differs from it
by the removal or addition of one or t w o basic parts is also a tinkergrid.
       While we thus move to avoid groundless inconsistency, we have not yet en-
sured any inconsistency a t all for our invented term, b u t only a certain bizarreness.
F o r without any further clause in our definition, our term allows a tinkergrid to
have n o basic parts a t all. Such a “null rinkergrid” would b e a most peculiar entity,
196        PETER UNGER

of course; still, according to the definition’s progress SO far, there they will be. But
insofar as null tinkergrids are claimed by our invented expression, and no claim is
made in the opposite direction, ‘tinkergrid’ will be quite unlike most ordinary terms.
To make it more like them, we add this last clause to our definition: Any tinkergrid
is composed of a finite positive number of basic parts. Now, our invented expres-
sion will have it that there are n o “null tinkergrids,” and it will indeed be much
more like our ordinary terms. For, with this last clause, we have ensured that our
invented expression will be an inconsistent one.
       The inconsistency of ‘tinkergrid’ may be exhibited as follows: First, a para-
digm tinkergrid is a tinkergrid, indeed, one having a certain finite positive number
of basic parts, say, N of them. But, then, so will b e an entity that, may be obtained
from it by the removal of one part, which will have N-1 basic parts. By stepwise
reasoning, we must conclude that there will be a tinkeigrid with N-Nbasic parts,
that is, with none a t all. But our expression also requires that any tinkergrid have
some positive number of such parts. Thus, this last item, with n o basic parts, both is
a tinkergrid and also is n o t one.
       While this invented term is thus inconsistent, I have little doubt that it could
b e easily learned and put to use by many normal people, in various suitable circum-
stances. In the first place, few would notice that there was any inconsistency here.
Indeed, few would notice rhat, without the final clause, there would b e null tinker-
grids. Despite the term’s having grounded inconsistency, most people would get the
idea that a tinkergrid was available only a t levels “well above” that where no basic
parts remain. So lirtle, then, will these ideas be related to our expression’s meaning.
And, perhaps more important, even once the inconsistency is pointed out, as we did
here, the problem is shunted aside.
       Insofar as I have been successful, ‘tinkergrid’, while inconsistent, has not been
defined by using any discriminative vague term in an essential role. Accordingly, the
inconsistency thus generated is n o t relevantly groundless; it is not like that observed
with typical vague expressions. Like the inconsistency in ‘square triangle’, the in-
consistency in ‘tinkergrid’ involves a clash between ideas that are each precise, con-
sistent ones. But of t h e two, only ‘tinkergrid’ has grounded inconsistency of a sort
that allows f o r a quite useful expression, potentially, as useful as typical vague ones.


                      5 . PARADIGMS IN PERSPECTIVE
We began with a putative paradigm of a nacknick, imagined o r real, with something
that was to satisfy t h e expression. B u t as further imposed conditions determined
matters, the beginning object could n o t possibly satisfy t h e invented term. For, as
that expression was thus determined to be logically inconsistent, n o object a t all
could satisfy it. By parity of reasoning, we have suggested that a logically similar
situation holds f o r o u r ordinary vague discriminative expressions. Against this sug-
gestion, one might try to strengthen t h e role of paradigms in t h e learning situations,
n o t only as regards our ordinary expressions, b u t also as concerns such explicitly
invented ones as ‘nacknick’. The objection to our reasoning would then proceed
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                   197

along some such lines as these: When I instructed you that any object minutely dif-
fering from a nacknick (as regards shape) would also be a nacknick, what you really
accepted, and had as a determinant of your new useful expression, was n o t quite
what I instructed you. Instead, it was this rather similar sounding, b u t logically
quite different, condition: If something is (not just any old nacknick, but) a paru-
digm nacknick. then any object differing from i t minutely (in shape) is a nacknick.
But, the objection continues, this “paradigmatic” condition, even in conjunction
with other learned conditions f o r t h e term, causes n o troublesome inconsistency.
As this was the true situation even with ‘nacknick’, we may b e quite confident that
chis sort of thing occurs with our typical vague inherited expressions. Consequent-
ly, the objection concludes, they may be satisfied by their paradigm cases, as .well
as by various other objects.”
       A good deal later on, in Section 9 , 1 shall discuss the question of “what you
really got out of my instructions.” And I shall there argue that whatever else you
may have gotten, one thing you got was the vagueness condition, with n o reference
to paradigms, that I actually offered to you. And, so, 1 shall argue, that trouble-
some condition helped t o determine ‘nacknick’ f o r you, whatever else may also
have played such a determining role. If this is so, then your ‘nacknick’ will be an
inconsistent expression, since you were given our other, discriminative condition
for it. For once those two conditions govern a term, that term will b e an inconsis-
tent one, however many further conditions may also govern it. But for now, realiz-
ing that our recent objection may possibly b e deficient in some such other respects
as w e have just indicated, let us focus only on the condition that it claims is so read-
ily learned. Is this paradigmatic condition quite free from difficulties, and suitable
for an objection to our account? I shall argue that, f o r a t least three reasons, i t is
not: first, it is unlikely that we learn it (unlikelier still that we learn i t without
learning the simpler offered condition); second, i t would involve us in inconsis-
tency anyway, and, third, should the first two reasons be discounted, the condition
would have our apparently vague terms be precise and not vague a t all.
       The Erst argument proceeds from t h e recognition that ‘paradigm nacknick’
will be just as much a vague discriminative term as ‘nacknick’ itself. Suppose that
we have an alleged paradigm nacknick before us. After a while, even less than a
second, the object loses some atoms, generally more than any it might have then
gained. This will have various effects upon the object. As regards various dimen-
sions, generally including that of shape, the object will be minutely different from
the way it was. But despite these minute differences, we regard the object now be-
fore us as being a paradigm nacknick. Now, as relevant expressions with the word
‘paradigm’ will thus also be vague discriminative ones, the sort of condition that is
to govern ‘nacknick’mustgovern them as well. To deny this is to impose an entirely
ad hoc restriction on the situation, and one which, we have just seen, runs counter
even to c o m m o n ~ e n s ejudgments. So, we must now have this condition as well: if
something is a paradigm paradigm nacknick, then any object that differs from i t mi-
nutely (in shape) is a paradigm nacknick. But, of course, matters d o not rest here,
for the expression ‘paradigm paradigm nacknick’ is also a vague discriminative one.
198       PETER UNGER

Thus, an infinite chain is established. Do we learn, with ‘nacknick’, such an infinity
of governing conditions? I find the Suggestion quite incredible.
         O n the view I a m advocating, each of these infinite conditions does hold true.
Indeed, in each case, a Stronger condition holds true, from which one of these for-
mer may be deduced. For example, I advocate that this condition holds: If an ob-
ject is a paradigm nacknick, then any object that differs from it minutely (in shape)
is also a paradigm nacknick (and so, of course, it is a nacknick). But, on my view, a
person, a small child, for example, can learn and understand one of the conditions
without having t o learn an infinity of them. On the objector’s view, infinitely more
learning must be done by such a person.
         As an addendum to this first argument, we may note that, from an intuitive
perspective, this objection gets things backward. The objection would have it that
our Understanding of ‘nacknick’, o r ‘stone’, is dependent on that of ‘paradigm nack-
nick’, or ‘paradigm stone’. But, intuitively, in ordinary situations, the contrary
seems to hold. We first learn ‘stone’ and only then understand longer expressions
of which it is a part, like ‘expensive stone’, ‘poor example of a stone’, or ‘paradigm
case of a Stone’. Returning to our small child, we can believe that he might under-
stand ‘stone’ without yet understanding any of these longer expressions. But he
could not attach much significance t o any of them without first understanding
‘stone’.
         A second argument is readily a t hand should it be needed. Now, for the sake
of argument, k t us suppose that, for all we have just said, “paradigm nacknick” and
its associated infinity may all be learned quite easily even by tiny tots. But even
supposing this, we now have t o confront t h e problem of groundless inconsistency.
F o r i t seems that if something is minutely different from a paradigm nacknick (in
shape), then something which is, in that same direction, only a tiny, minute bit
more different, will also be minutely different from the paradigm nacknick. But, by
reasoning familiar from the previous section, we shall then have to conclude of any
shaped object that it is minutely different from a paradigm nacknick. So, on our
new paradigmatic condition, i t must b e a nacknick. But by our discriminative con-
dition f o r ‘nacknick’, some such objects will not b e nacknicks. So, our paradigmat-
ic condition will n o t provide us with a Consistent expression.
         In reply t o this, the objection might have i t that a similar paradigmatic condi-
tion applies t o our underlying quantitative vague expressions, for example, t o ‘mi-
nute’. But is there any plausibility t o t h e idea that w e have a paradigm of something
minute? What would this putative paradigm be? But, perhaps, then, we should ex-
pand t h e quantitative expression that now is KO have a paradigm. What is it t o be:
‘minutely different’, ‘minutely different from something as regards shape’, ‘minute-
ly different from a paradigm nacknick as regards shape’; or what? The choice seems
hopeless. F o r there seems n o paradigm that we have for any of these expressions.
Moreover, the expressions t h a t have ‘nacknick’ as a component seem t o get ordi-
nary learning the wrong way round, as before, while those that lack such a compo-
nent seem too general to have much bearing o n the case a t hand.
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                   199

      Even if both of the previous two arguments are discounted, and we presume
that our paradigmatic condition is both easily learned and also results in no incon-
sistency, that condition would not seem to serve t h e purposes for which it was in-
troduced. For, as a third argument shows, the condition would then have it that
our apparently vague expressions were actually precise ones, and so not vague a t all:
We begin by remembering, from Section 3 , our truism that a given expression either
applies to a certain object o r does not apply. This will hold true for ‘paradigm nack-
nick’. Thus, this expression will apply to just those cases in a perfectly definite
range, and to any others it will not apply. So, ‘paradigm nacknick’ will be a precise
expression. By the same reason, ‘minutely different in shape from a paradigm nack-
nick’ will also be a precise expression. So, both indirectly and also quite directly,
we may reason that precisely the same will hold f o r t h e simpler ‘nacknick’ itself: it
will be a precise expression and, as such, n o t a vague one. So, contrary t o all appear-
ances, ‘nacknick’, as well as ‘stone’, will be absolutely precise, and thus will not be
vague at all. This final failure of our paradigmatic condition suggests a thought
whose importance goes beyond our interest in rebutting objections to our account.
The only way for our apparently vague terms t o be vague is for them to be inconsis-
tent. Were they n o t inconsistent, they should have to b e precise, which they are not.


    6 . SORITES ARGUMENTS, COUNTERFACTUAL REASONING,
                         AND OBSCURE DIMENSIONS
The stepwise reasoning we have recently gone through, to exhibit the inconsistency
in o u r invented expressions, ‘nacknick’ and ‘tinkergrid’, is hardly new to philosophi-
cal discussion. Such reasoning is characteristic of sorites arguments, which, follow-
ing the classical case of the alleged heap, or soros, seek to show that certain entities,
ordinarily alleged to exist, in fact d o not. In Section 2 , we encountered one such
argument, against the existence of tall men. T h a t argument, following tradition,
was exhibited in a highly realistic form. With normal suppositions in force, the in-
stances in the sequence over which reasoning ranged were all to be found in the ac-
tual world. The realism was available for us, we might say, because of the relevunt-
ly gradual nature of the actual world. This gradualness, and the attendant realism,
is in one way all to the good: I t makes sorites arguments hard to dismiss, if nor to
ignore, by serious thinkers who encounter them. But in another way, 1 think, a con-
centration on realistic examples can be unfortunate: it can blind us t o the concep-
tual basis of the arguments. So, to help illuminate this basis, let us engage in some
suitably counterfactual reasoning.16 The appropriate reasoning, as will shortly ap-
pear, is more thoroughly counterfactual, or hypothetical, than that usually encoun-
tered in philosophy, as well as in everyday thinking. I t requires us t o imagine people
living in a world different from ours who are themselves imagining a world different
from theirs, in particular, a world just like ours. In a way, then, we might think of
this reasoning as doubly counterfactual. But I cannot see that the extra imagination
involved causes any serious difficulties.
2 00       PETER UNGER

        Suppose, then, that according to some law of nature, all of the men who ever
lived, and w h o ever will, were either exactly ten feet in height or else nine feet, and
 that they were aware of their heights. Now, let us suppose as well that, even with
 this knowledge, these men had t h e same expression ‘tall man’ as we now do, com-
plete with t h e same meaning; they might even speak English, or an exact counter-
part. Supposing this, i t would be common f o r them to judge that all men were tall
men. And, supposing them to be aware of the law governing their heights, they
would judge further that all men would always be tall men, as indeed, in a sense,
they must. These men could imagine a man of five feet six, of course, just as we
can imagine one of six inches. But for them, such men would be only imaginary.
        Could a philosopher among them, who wanted to construct a sorites against
the existence of tall men, develop an effective sorites? I t seems clear to me that h e
could d o as well as we now can. I t is just that his arguments, by our previous sup-
positions, would b e conducted in a counterfactual manner. The philosopher would
bid his fellows to consider a world just like ours in fact is, where the distribution of
actual heights would thus be greatly increased in number and also shifted down-
ward. They would agree that a man of six feet six would still be tall, but a man of
five feet six would not be. Our philosopher would then have available a principle, in
counterfactual form, corresponding to our first condition for qualitative vagueness:
If a man of a certain height would be a tall man, then so t o o would be a man whose
height would be n o more than a thousandth of an inch less. Thus, our philosopher
could conclude that if there are any tall men, then a man of five feet six would be
a tall man and also would not be one. Since h e now could reason that there really
are n o t any tall men in t h e first place, our philosopher would have constructed an
effective sorites against tall men, though h e employed counterfactual reasoning in
t h e process. Thus, we have supported the idea that a sorites argument against tall
men is essentially a conceprual argument, which fits in so well with our account of
vague discriminative expressions.
        Just as our account of vague expressions has it, our counterfactual sorites
against tall men served to indicate that ‘tall man’ is inconsistent. Its inconsistency is
generated by our t w o conditions for qualitative vague terms. T h e second condition
says that an expression o f that sort will purport to distinguish, with respect to at
least one relevant dimension of difference, those entities that satisfy i t from those
that d o not. This condition, being quite general, does n o t specify or characterize
t h e dimensions to b e involved. I t is u p to us in any particular case to pick o u t a
relevant dimension, as a basis f o r our stepwise reasoning, o r else to conduct that
reasoning in such a way that, we can b e confident, i t will cover a t least one such di-
mension. In t h e case of ‘tall man’, our understanding of the expression allows US to
b e confident t h a t height is relevant. With ‘stone’, as already indicated, n o such rele-
vant dimension is ready to be so clearly specified: Size itself is n o t crucial. If you
pour an Alice-in-Wonderland potion o n a stone, i t will get much smaller, but will
still b e a stone (if one before). Perhaps, ‘sizein relation to structure’ is more like it,
b u t I cannot say exactly what that means, much less how i t is to b e treated as a
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                  201

dimension of difference. But we may build confidence, nevertheless, that ‘stone’
is a logically inconsistent expression.
       Toward this end, we may look for a variation or gradation in things that will
have ssociated with it a relevant gradation in a t least one dimension that plays a
discriminative role with ‘stone’. Our actual world, with its considerable divisibility
of “material complexes” suggests to us a suitable procedure. By removing a single
peripheral atom gently from an alleged stone, and then tossing it randomly away,
one will progressively produce a sequence of entities, going down to a single atom,
whose properties, with regard to a relevant dimension, will vary quite gradually.
With this procedure, we remain quite in t h e dark as to what dimensions of differ-
ence (are supposed to) form the basis of our term’s discriminations. But whatever
ones they may be, we can b e confident that a t least one is covered by a sequence of
entities, many millions in number, obtained in this systematic manner. Let us con-
struct, then, a suitable sorites of decomposition by minute removals.
        By having relevant properties vary gradually with our minute removals, nature
conspires to suggest to us an effective sorites against stones, in a rather realistic
form. For it is easy to find acceptable each of these two conditional propositions,
a t least as true in fact:
      (i) For anything there may be, if it is a stone, then the net removal from it of
          a single atom, in a way most preservative of there being a stone in the situ-
          ation, will not mean the difference as t o whether or not there is at least
          one stone in the situation.
     (ii) For anything there may be, if it is a stone, then it consists of more than a
          hundred atoms b u t of a finite number of them.
        These t w o premises, we may notice, will yield us a contradiction from t h e
        rather common-sensical assertion
      There is a t least one stone.
For, consider any plausible candidate for stonehood: T h a t entity will consist of a
finite number of atoms, say N, where N is greater than one hundred. That is assured
US by our second premise. But, by our first premise we are told that by taking away
an atom, we shall still have a stone, now one with N-1 atoms. According to that
same premise, then, by stepwise reasoning, we shall have a stone even when what is
before us is only an object consisting of ten atoms, or, indeed, even when we have
n o atoms a t all. But this contradicts what (ii) tells us: as there are not more than a
hundred atoms there, there is n o stone in t h e situation.
       Now, it is, of course, not part of t h e meaning of ‘stone’ that any stone should
consist of atoms, let alone more than a hundred but some finite number of them.
Indeed, so far as I can discern, it is not even required by our term that any portion
of a stone should be physically removable from the remainder. Further, providing
that some is thus removable, and even removed, there’s nothing in ‘stone’ which
says that the rest will n o t suddenly vanish, or suddenly serve to constitute some-
202        PETER U N G E R

 thing utterly different, f o r example, an exotic plant. That none of these things hap-
 pen, and that our argument proceed in way of a gradual sequence of suitable enti-
ties is, we might say, wholly a matter of worldly, contingent fact. But as presented,
our sorites against stones might seem to depend o n these suppositions. This appear-
ance is easily dispelled, however. For we may combine t h e idea of counterfactual
reasoning, previously discussed, with t h e systematic procedure used for obscure di-
mensions just developed. Without going into much derail, we may imagine a philos-
opher, with our same language, living in a very different world from ours, where his
alleged stones cannot be decomposed. But, if he were imaginative enough, he could
contemplate a world just like ours,where stones can be appropriately picked apart.
If his world contained stones, then so too would ours, he could reason. Then he
could show himself that ours would not and, thus, none anywhere.
       We are next to pass to a direct discussion of ‘person’, and of putative people.
Pursuing the ideas so far developed, we shall argue that t h e expression canoot be
satisfied, and that there really are n o such entities as people. Before we d o so, I
should note briefly that many objections have been raised against sorites arguments,
even against what might be regarded as t h e most realistic sort. While I think there is
little merit in any of these objections, i t is not a main purpose of mine here to meet
them. To the extent that my present account is well argued, of course, that pro-
vides some support for sorites arguments. Thus, indirectly, the account gives a reply
to all objections to these reasonings. But I leave to other places the matter of de-
tailed responses to particular objections.”
       To give you an idea, however, of what one must accept if one is to reject
sorites arguments, I shall just mention two points that I discuss elsewhere.’* First,
t o reject o u r sorites against stones, we must accept this: there will be certain stones,
composed of many billions of atoms, whose continued existence, with no atoms re-
placed, requires every single one of these billions! Can you believe that there are
ever any stones whose essence is as refined and tenuous as that? A second thought,
o n rhe side of language, mirrors t h e first: Consider t h e sentence, “There is a stone
before m e now,” and discount all problems of vagueness except those most direct-
ly concerned with ‘stone’. With a promising candidate for stonehood before you,
imagine peripheral atoms extracted in‘the style of our sorites. We are to evaluate
the sentence after each net removal. We suppose t h e sentence a t first to express a
genuine statement that is true. But can a single atomic removal alter t h e proper
evaluation? To suppose i t can requires us to suppose an enormous sensitivity o n the
part of our word ‘stone’. This, I suggest, is quite incredible.


                  7 . THE INCONSISTENCY OF ‘PERSON’
I t is now time to extend t h e results so far obtained to t h e key expression ‘person’.
I shall argue that chis term is a qualitative vague discriminative term and, as such, it
is inconsistent. Accordingly, as nothing then Satisfies the expression, anymore than
anything satisfies ‘perfectly square triangle’, there are n o people. Like perfectly
square triangles, people are logically impossible entities.
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                  203

       Should we arrive a t such a negative result for people, a paradoxical situation
will arise. Briefly, if there is n o t anybody, then there is n o one to understand these
alleged accounts, arguments, and conclusions to that effect. So, perhaps, these last
may themselves b e negated or dismissed as “self-defeating.” But, if our account is
otherwise unobjectionable, we may then employ i t again, t o complete a paradoxi-
cal circle and begin a new one. Now, in the section directly KO follow this one, I
shall argue that this admitted paradox cannot seriously nullify our nihilistic account.
But, first, in this present section, I shall argue that the paradoxical situation cannot
be avoided. I shall argue, that is, that o u r account of vague expressions Cannot be
brought to rest a t some relatively unproblematic stopping point.
       The expression ‘person’ is a vague discriminative term and, as such, an incon-
sistent expression. T o Support this thought, suitable sorites arguments shall be
sought. Now, as with ‘stone’, 1 have n o very good idea how to specify adequately
those dimensions of difference with respect to which ‘person’ purports to make
discriminations. I t is n o t that I have nothing a t all to say on the matter: Perhaps,
power of thought, o r intelligence, provides one such dimension; perhaps Capacity
for varied feelings and experiences provides one. But I should prefer t o regard these
proposals as primarily illustrative, and to construct our Sorites arguments on the
basis of ideas in which 1 have more confidence. Toward this end, we recall our ex-
perience with ‘stone’, for we had success there by adopting a procedure that re-
quired n o specification of dimensions. So, let us look for a sorites of decomposi-
tion by minute removals that will work well for ‘person’. We may best begin in a
moderately realistic vein. Then we can move ro the utterly fantastic, so that the
conceptual nature of the argumenrs may b e more clearly perceived.
       In our common thinking o n the matter, though this was not always so, it is
supposed that there are some people, if not all, who are composed of many cells,
though of a finite number. W e distinguish, of course, between a person and his
body. But, then, while we think the body to be of a certain weight, and to be com-
posed of such cells, we also think the person himself t o be. Now, some people, I
suppose, d o n o t g o along with this idea and think that, whatever might be true of
the body, the person himself never consists of any cells, o r of any other spatially
extended things. But even these people, I imagine, will agree that, in the case of
many people, each of whom has a body, there is a certain close association, or in-
timate relation, whatever its specific character, between each of these people and
his or her respective body. (That intimate relation, for all I am saying, might be
that of identity.) And, n o doubt, they will also agree that there is a close relation,
perhaps another one, between each of these people and those cells serving KO com-
pose his or her body. So, all of us may agree that if there are any people a t all,
then some of them, a t least, are in a close association with certain cells, or with
certain groups o r complexes of cells, and that each such suitable group, while con-
taining more than ten cells, has only a finite number of cells in it.
       Now, I think that another thing we agree o n is this: that if there is a person in
a situation, and that person is in some such aforesaid close relation with a certain
group of cells, then, if only one cell is removed from t h e group, and this is done in a
2 04      PETER UNGER

way most conducive to there being a person in such a close relation with the re-
maining cells, then there will b e a person in t h e situation after the removal. In cer-
tain instances, of course, this way will have to include the importation into the sit-
uation of certain life-support apparatus, and of certain items for supporting con-
sciousness. F o r matters with people seem more complex than with stones, however
unreal all of these may eventually prove to be. We may say, then, that whatever
substances o r properties are supported by some cells, so t h a t a person is there in
close association, they will also be supported, and in sufficient degree, with only
one cell less, providing, of course, that t h e lesser complex is so chosen, and so al-
lowed to function, that it can d o as good a j o b a t such supporting as is possible for
a group obtained by such a slight removal. Of course, in the cases to be considered,
the imported material does n o t replace cells; rather like a kidney machine, it just
helps cells, and what they serve to constitute, to function.
         These shared suppositions yield a sorites argument to the effect that there are
n o people a t all. For, if any person is closely associated with a certain group of
cells, say, N in number, so will one b e there with a group of N-1 cells. I suppose
that, as matters progress, we shall get down to a brain, in a vat, then half a brain,
then a third, and then a sixteenth. In each case, we must say, there is a person in
the situation, one w h o is in a special close association with t h e remaining cells.
Eventually, there are b u t three living cells in some sort of combination, and i t must
be said that there is a person there. But we have also agreed that, with n o more than
ten cells, there will b e n o such associated person. Thus, supposing there to b e a per-
son a t rhe start, there both is and is not a person in close association with our three
cells. Of course, this argues that there never are any people in close association with
any groups of cells. So, finally, we may conclude, there really are not any people
a t all.
         With an appropriately realistic argument before us, i t is now time to reason
counterfactually, so as to see the conceptual basis of t h e idea that there are n o
people. Let us imagine a world in which there are entities that we should consider
persons, and that consider themselves as such. We shall suppose that these putative
people have a language just like ours. They are a bit more intelligent than we, but
their powers of imagination far exceed our own. Their greatest differences from us,
however, are these: unlike us, these people have n o physical existence; they have n o
bodies nor are they in any very close relation with any physical phenomena. Fur-
ther, as a matter of imagined fact, they are neither divisible, diminishable, nor even
susceptible of any major change. Each of them has always existed and always will
exist, and always is a t o r near rhe peak of his sensibilities and powers. So, these be-
ings are, I suppose, quite as some philosophers have supposed ourselves really to be.
Finally, let us suppose that there are n o other sentient beings in this world.
         Consider a critical philosopher among them. H o w might he convince himself
that his term ‘person’, which is t h e same as our expression, is a logically inconsis-
tent term? Now, h e has n o relevant gradations in reality to help him base a sorites
argument. And, we suppose, i t is not clear to him either how to specify the dimen-
sions of difference with respect to which ‘person’ purports to discriminate. Now,
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                 205

what this reasoner should d o is try to supply himself with a sequence of imagined
entities that differed gradually with regards to a t least one such relevant dimension.
While by our poor standards it would take a great feat of imagination, how better
for him to d o this than to imagine a world Just like ours is (supposed to be) in fact?
In this world, thus imagined by him, whatever features were relevant would be sup-
ported by brains, each of which was composed of billions of cells.
       Our philosopher, in particular, might imagine someone exactly like you your-
self; living, kicking, breathing, and thinking, if anyone ever does, in just such a
world as you now find yourself t o be. He would think to himself, we may suppose,
first, that if anyone is a person, then this being like you would be a person, for that
is our same word, ‘person’, that is figuring in his premising. What more would that
free spirit endeavor t o think? Well, we might imagine, he could say t o himself that,
 under the total circumstances imagined, if there is indeed a person just like you,
 then.so t o o will there by a person when a single cell is removed, most conducively
for the continued support of a person, from those that may have supported t h e
 original candidate. Far better than we can d o , h e could imagine in detail the impor-
 tation of those lifesupport and consciousnesssupport systems involved in a most
 conducive way, so as to establish a suitable sequence of entities. Of course, he can
imagine this while starting, not only with an imagined counterpart of you, but with
that of any of a great variety of t h e putative people we suppose t o populate our
world. For our world, in general, he could then premise that a single cell removed,
in such a circumstance and manner, will never mean t h e difference between a t least
one person being in t h e Situation and there being none. For he could reason that, in
such a world, n o one cell will mean a difference, o n t h e dimensions in question, to
which ‘person’ is sensitive. Further, our thinker could say that, in this world, when
 there were n o more than ten cells in a relevant group or complex, then there would
b e n o person in the situation. From these premises, by familiar stepwise reasoning,
 our philsopher would now conclude that if a being like yourself would be a person,
then, with ten cells supporting a t their best and utmost, there both would be a per-
son in close association and also would not be. Thus, he should conclude that the
being first imagined, the one just like you yourself, was never any person in the
first place. And, finally, by his very first premise, he could now reason that there
were not, or are not, any people a t all. Thus, without any reality to help him, our
imagined philosopher could see for himself that there could never be any people,
even while having n o clear idea how to specify what dimensions of difference served
to determine the impossibility thus perceived.
       I have made my imagined philosopher a most pristine soul, a being whose
“nature in itself” would seem immune to sorites arguments. Moreover, if he appre-
ciated his nature, that awareness would d o nothing to suggest our word ‘person’.
But so long as this being does share our expression, he may reason to expose its
inconsistency and, thus, its lack of application. To make these points, I made m y
imagined philosopher as described.
       There is another reason, too, for my giving this being such a logically unob-
jectionable nature. F o r philosophers have sometimes suggested that o u r own natures
2 06       PETER UNGER

are much as I have stipulated his to be and, what is perhaps more interesting here,
even that our term ‘person’ analytically requires such a nature for its application.
Now, let us suppose that any being with such a narure as that cannot be dimension-
ally compared with, o r related t o , any other being. With these suppositions in force,
we may advance, f o r ‘person’, a condition of incomparability:
       (3p) If an entity satisfies ‘person’, then there is no dimension of difference
            such that with regard t o it there are entities which differ from that pu-
            tative satisfier.
According to this condition, there will be n o entities that thus differ minutely, or
substantially, from a satisfier. So, one might well think that were such a condition
to hold for ‘person’, b u t perhaps not for ‘stone’, then, unlike ‘stone’, ‘person’ might
be a perfectly consistent term after all.19
       But this supposition of consistency for ‘person’ would be much mistaken. For
as our sorites arguments indicate, ‘person’ is a vague discriminative expression and,
whatever else may be true of it, t h e term is governed by (1) and (2), o u r dimension-
al conditions of vagueness and of discriminativeness. So long as these conditions d o
govern it, which we have seen no good reason to deny, the expression will be incon-
sistent. Whatever further conditions may govern it as well cannot erase the two for
which we have argued o r , then, t h e contradictions t h a t they serve to generate. This
incomparability condition, if there be one governing ‘person’, will not make matters
better for the term. O n the contrary, it will serve only to compound the term’s
troubles. For taken together with either of our prior two conditions for ‘person’,
the incomparability condition, (3p), yields a contradiction from t h e supposition
that any entity satisfies the term. For, by either of t h e prior two, if there is a per-
son, then there are entities that differ dimensionally from any satisfier. And, by our
new condition, if there is a person, then there are no such entities. Hence, if there is
a person, then there both are and also are not such dimensionally differing entities,
which is absurd. Hence, by (1) and ( 3 ~ ) and  .    also by (2) and (3p), there are n o
people. Supposing an incomparability condition for ‘person’, we should say, not
that it is a consistent term, but, on the contrary, t h a t “person” is inconsistent f r o m
multiple sources.
      The inconsistency of ‘person’ means that n o people exist; they can exist n o
more than can perfectly square triangles. Do I exist, then, b u t a m no person after
all? Things would seem otherwise: If I exist, then there is a t least one person. So,
as there are none, there is no me. This result, paradoxical to say the least, can be
obtained as well by sorites arguments where there is a purported direct reference to
myself, by means, f o r example, of such terms as ‘I1, ‘Peter Unger’, and so on. T h e
most imaginative of our counterfactual sorites arguments might b e o u t of place
with these terms, o r a t least might have a rather different bearing o n t h e issues. Our
more realistic versions, however, will have obviously close parallel arguments. Take
away one peripheral cell from Peter Unger, with suitable lifesupport systems in
place, and that will n o t mean t h e difference between Unger and n o Unger. But,
with ten cells there is n o Unger. So, there never was that Unger.
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                  207

      T h e analysis of, or the account of, even the most realistic arguments with
such singular terms will require, of course, t h e presentation of conditions that logi-
cally govern t h e key singular expressions. N o doubt, these conditions will be impor-
tandy analogous to those given here for qualitative vague terms; perhaps our sug-
gestions f o r such terms as ‘door’ will be of some help. But these analytical questions
take us beyond our topic.
      More to the present point, ‘person’ is hardly the only qualitative vague ex-
pression whose inconsistency means much difficulty for us here. For example, the
expression ‘entity with a capacity f o r thought’ means similar troubles for us, how-
ever that expression may relate to ‘person’. For the arguments that point u p the in-
consistency in ‘person’ will d o as much for this longer expression. Moreover, as this
expression is of the purely qualitative sort, even the supporting account of the argu-
ments will be along t h e same familiar lines. Thus, for quite familiar reasons, it may
be concluded that there are n o entities with a capacity for thought. As with thought,
n o capacity for experience could be ours, nor for feeling, nor for anything of im-
portance. As regards each of these negative matters, we have, paradoxically enough,
not only adequate arguments, b u t accounts of how those arguments work adequate-
ly. For t h e key expressions involved are, in each case, vague discriminative terms of
the purely qualitative sort.


 8. THE INABILITY OF PARADOX TO NULLIFY THIS ACCOUNT
Paradox, already indicated, can easily be made manifest: if there are no beings with
any capacity for thought, then n o argument or statement can b e understood, or ac-
cepted a t all, and so none to the effect that there are n o such beings. So i t seems
that we are driven back logically to the assertion of o u r existence, of the existence
of beings that can think. Thus, there is next t h e implication that our expressions
‘person’ and ‘thinking being’ d o indeed apply. And so, finally, we have t h e implica-
tion that these terms are logically consistent ones. But things d o not really stop
here, either. For, along lines that are by now familiar, we may in turn reduce these
asserrions to absurdity. Thus, their negations obtain, including the proposition that
there are n o beings with any capacity for thought. T h e reasoning goes around and
around. What are we to make of this paradoxical situation? Should we hold OnKO
common sense robustly and say that the only genuine errors are in our account of
vagueness and in its connecting sorites arguments? Following this course, we might
better try to b e comfortable. For then thoughts of absurdity will be harder to keep
in mind. But perhaps, “so to uy to say,” paradox does little to nullify the basic
point and value of our radical account and arguments.
      In available terms, for Want of any better, I have argued that many of our
common expressions are logically inconsistent terms, including such key expres-
sions as ‘person’ and ‘entity with a Capacity for thought’. Much of my argument
began with the invention of a term, ‘nacknick’, for which inCOnSiStent inStrUCtiOnS
were given in its very introduction. Then, as our sorites arguments progressively in-
dicated, there appeared no logically relevant difference between ‘nacknick’ and
208       PETER UNGER

such common expressions as ‘stone’ and even ‘person’. To b e sure, the latter terms
are not learned from any explicit instructions a t all. But there is still a parity of in-
consistency, or a t least a very strong suggestion of it, that supports my account of
the ordinary terms as logically inconsistent. Despite whatever paradoxes our ac-
count may engender, then, how can this apparent parity be rationally denied?
       To deny the shared inconsistency, one cannot rationally rely on pointing t o
paradox. For, let us consider the implications of our lessons with ‘nacknick’. Now,
as this term concerns only the shape of objects, it is idle to suppose that it might
yield the sorr of paradox that an expression like ‘thinking being’ was recently ob-
served to do. What is less idle, however, is to imagine that inconsistent instructions
were, a t a suitable point, imposed upon t h e learning of such terms as ‘person’ and
‘thinking being’. Let us imagine, then, a society much like ours, with this excep-
tion: After normal early learning bad occurred, explicit inconsistent instructions
were given to the moderately young. Thus, children would hear words like thise:
“Typical vague words that you have learned, like ‘stone’ and ‘person’, will now be
more clearly revealed to you. To begin with, each of you should know that each of
these words serves to discriminate, o r distinguish, different sorts of things. So, the
word ‘stone’ distinguishes between t h e stones and everything else, which differ so
from stones that they d o n o t fit the meaning of the word. Of course, this word is a
vague one, and you should know this about it too: if something is a stone, and so
fits the word ‘stone’ properly, then anything that differs from i t only a little bit will
also fit the word, that is, will also be a stone. To be sure, there is n o definite limit as
to how much something may differ from a stone and for i t yet to be a stone. All of
this, you are to understand, is part of what it is for t h e word ‘stone’ to be a vague
word while still allowing us to make useful discriminations with it. And, of course,
these points apply just as well to other typical vague words, for example, to such
words as ‘house’, ‘person’, ‘red’, ‘soft’, ‘tall’, ‘running’, ‘thinking’, and so on. Now,
none of this should come as a surprise to any of y o u ; in fact, in a way, you have
known it already. But i t is just as well f o r us to be explicit about these things, for us
to have them o u t in t h e open.”
       What results would such instructions have if they were often involved in
teaching routines? As t h e people in this society are to b e much like ourselves, it
must be supposed that they will master what they are thus taught, should much
training be imposed. Later in life, even, should someone manage to claim some such
word to b e precise, t h e people will appeal t o the teachings, which they could recite
with little distortion. Thus, if someone said that a stone could not be less than one
inch in diameter, b u t that it could be less than one and one millionths inches, he
would be accused of violating the meaning of ‘stone’ just as we should accuse him.
Unlike us, however, t h e people in this other society, to support t h e charge that such
a claim of precision is in way of being an arbitrary stipulation, would appeal to the
explicit, repeated teaching routines. They would appear to be in a quite obviously
good position, then, to claim that there is indeed a stipulation here and, moreover,
one which conflicts with t h e learned, accepted meaning of the word.
                                             WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                   209

        Now, let us suppose that, just as I a m doing f o r our own words, a philosopher
in this society puts forward the idea that typical vague terms are inconsistent. This
is hardly an arbitrary supposition now, given what we have already imagined. For if
I have supposed as much with n o such explicit teaching to suggest the thought to
me, how much easier it will be f o r a thinker who is amidst so much apparent incon-
sistency. Focusing on the teaching, h e would point o u t the inconsistency in the in-
structions. Now, in that society, since t h e people are assumed to be much like us,
there would be thinkers of a rather conservative bent, who would wish to cleave to
the accepted thinking of their culture. How should these conservatives defend that
thinking; how should they rationally reply to t h e nihilistic critic?
        Whatever replies may be open to them, i t seems to me that among rhe least
effective of these would be an appeal to comprehensive paradox. True enough, if
such expressions as their ‘person’ and ‘thinking being’ are logically inconsistent, as
the explicit instructions for them indicate, then they would have to conclude that
n o one-could accept, or even understand, the critic’s arguments. But if the matter
were allowed to rest there, or even if t h e burden of argument were thought to be
substantially shifted, those conservative thinkers would display terribly little philo-
sophical sense, and virtually n o depth of thought or understanding. Generally, we
may note that any thoroughgoing radical critique of a language, or a system of
thought, conducted in the terms or concepts of what is criticized, must, of course,
have this paradoxical quality. But this does n o t mean that such a criticism cannot
be, so to try to say, appropriate to its object. In the society now under considera-
tion, whatever most of its members may think on the matter, such a criticism will
b e quite appropriate indeed.
        Now, it seems clear to me that t h e situation is n o t relevantly different in our
own case. I t is, of course, true that things are not exactly the same with us, for we
have had n o explicit instructions f o r our typical vague terms, much less have we any
that are inconsistent. But, as our arguments have indicated, what our imagined SO-
ciety’s members will have learned explicitly we seem to have learned implicitly. The
logic of our expressions is not a t variance with theirs. So, i t is most unlikely, 1 sub-
mit, that pointing to paradox will be futile against their radical critic b u t rational
against a critic in our less explicit society. As i t will n o t be rational there, so it is
n o t rational here. Pointing to paradox, then, does little or nothing to nullify these
present efforts.
        The point that paradox cannot nullify our account will stand just as well
should we agree that, in addition to the paradoxical situation already noted, various
other, perhaps deeper, paradoxes are consequences of our account. For example, it
might be held that if there are n o entities with any capacity to think, or to use lan-
guage, then there will be n o sentences, or any other expressions. And, it might be
held that if there are none of these latter, then there are n o statements or proposi-
tions, n o arguments or accounts of any sort, and not just none that are ever under-
stood or accepted. If this may be maintained, then fuller, or more direct, paradoxes
can be added to our account’s consequences. But, as our discussion has already in-
210          PETER UNGER

dicated amply, this will d o little to worsen matters for us. For, whatever paradoxes
our account should engender will all be rationally treated alike. They all will best be
taken, it seems clear, as showing the comprehensiveness of our radical account,
rather than its futility.


         9. A REEXAMINATION OF OUR ARGUMENT FROM
                           INVENTED EXPRESSIONS
Our account of vague expressions has been provided. I t has given support to our Ar-
gument from Invented Expressions, support which will n o t be nullified by any
charges of paradox. If we are to maintain common sense still, and hold that there
really are people, we must object to one of the premises of that Argument, though
few courses for such an objection appear still to be available. To take last things
first, there is little to be said against the Argument’s final premise:
      (111) If the expression ‘person’ is logically inconsistent, then there are n o
            people.
F o r a denial of it, as I have argued in Section 1, will rest only upon a confusion. So,
objections must come against its first two premises, for t h e Argument’s form is not
faulty. A t the outset of o u r reexamination of them, we note that a t this point these
premises look well supported. So, now, 1 suggest, the burden of argument is on any
attempted objection. Can this burden be shouldered effectively?
        Let us reexamine o u r second premise, in an attempt to review matters back to
our beginning:
      (11)    T h e expression ‘person’ is logically on a par with ‘nacknick’; if the lat-
              ter is inconsistent, then so is t h e former.
So far as we have been able to discern, from our early experiments onward, there is in-
deed this logical parity. If t h e matter is just an empirical, o r contingent, or causal one,
to be decided primarily by experiment and observation, then parity seems surely right.
F o r only the most tortuous and forced interpretation of o u r recent experiments and
observations would have things be otherwise. F o r an objection to (11) to be a t all
plausible, then, it must b e maintained that it is for some conceptual o r logical rea-
sons that there is a disparity between our invented expression and our ordinary one.
Now, we have already argued that, whatever else may be true of it, ‘person’ is a qual-
itative vague discriminative term. As such, it is logically on a par with such other, less
central common expressions as ‘stone’, ‘tall man,’ and ‘cubical object’. So, in effect,
what the objection must claim is that there is a logical barrier to a parallel between
‘nacknick’ and ‘cubical object’, and even ‘object whose shape is quite similar to that
of a cube’. But how might t h e claim of such a logical barrier be rationally supported?
        T h e support required would have to come in t h e form of ‘logical’ truths,
which would logically yield the statement of n o logical parity. But anything that
might be even plausibly considered a logical truth appears quite inadequate to pro-
                                           WHY THERE A R E NO PEOPLE                 21 1

vide the needed deduction. Here is an example of the problem, with a candidate for
relevant logical truth that is much better than most I have examined: One must
understand an invented expression, if one understands it a t all, in terms of a set of
expressions (each of which is not invented and) each of which is consistent. While i t
might later be doubted, let us now grant that, in a relevant sense, this is indeed a
logical truth. But, even so, of what use will it be in deriving logical disparity be-
tween invented and ordinary vague expressions?
        We have already encountered an invented expression which, if any ordinary
term satisfies this offered condition, quite nicely meets the alleged requirement.
That expression is ‘tinkergrid’, which 1 introduced and discussed in Section 4.Dis-
counting any minor lapse, I showed there that, unlike both ordinary vague terms
and also the invented ‘nacknick’, the invented ‘tinkergrid’, while i t was indeed in-
consistent, had inconsistency which was relevantly grounded. What seemed to hold
only between ‘nacknick’ and the ordinary terms, none of which appear to satisfy
o u r offered requirement, was t h e further parallel of having groundless inconsisten-
cy. So, even if we grant the offered requirement, the most it could logically yield,
it should be clear, is that ordinary vague expressions will differ from ‘nacknick’ as
regards the source or nature of whatever inconsistency they might have. T h e parity
we are concerned with, however, concerns whether, like both ‘nacknick’ and also
‘tinkergrid’, typical vague expressions are, in any way, and from whatever source,
logically inconsistent. As regards the required disparity, then, the offered require-
ment, even if logically true, is powerless to yield any result.
        While our reconsideration of ‘tinkergrid’ has shown the offered requirement
to be irrelevant, it suggests as well great doubt as to its truth. I t seems incredible to
suppose that we might have invented a term like ‘tinkergrid’ to parallel our ordinary
vague terms but failed with ‘nacknick’. For of the two useful, inconsistent inven-
tions, it is the latter that seems to provide the closer parallel here. So, o u r problems
compound: to have a (logical) truth presented in the first place, we are constrained
to weaken our alleged requirement. Perhaps the following has a decent chance for
truth: One must understand an invented expression, if a t all, in terms of a set of ex-
pressions (each of which is not invented and) a t least some of which are consistent
terms. But, now, we have available to yield contradiction, in addition to the clashes
between consistent ideas that ‘tinkergrid’ displayed, the inconsistency in various
vague expressions (which are n o t invented).
        The experience we have just suffered is typical of what I have encountered in
m y examination of objections to ( I I ) , the second premise of our Argument. The
more an offered proposition looks like it might be a logical truth, and so suitable
f o r a counterargument in that respect, the less it looks relevant to yielding t h e re-
quired deduction of disparity. N o candidate, then, of which I am aware, looks very
promising, and n o suitable counterargument appears forthcoming. While these mat-
ters must, perhaps, always b e somewhat inconclusive, it thus seems to m e that there
is no good objection to the apparent logical parity between the invented and ordi-
nary expressions.
212       PETER UNGER

      There is only one place left for an objection to be effective against our Argu-
ment, namely, in the place of our first premise:
      (I) The invented expression ‘nacknick’ is logically inconsistent.
This question brings us back to the beginning of our essay. Could we have misinter-
preted our little learning experiments, so that the apparently obvious and rational
interpretation was really out of place all along? As with (II), if the matter is essen-
tially an empirical, or contingent one, there would be little chance indeed that we
have been misinterpreting things, and that some ingenious complicated hypothesis
must be preferred. Thus, the objection must be that there is some logical barrier to
the truth of our first premise. But how might it be argued .that we have been labor-
ing under such an intellectual illusion?
       The occurrence of a definite description at the head of our premise, “the in-
vented expression ‘nacknick’,” may trigger the response that there may in fact
never have been any such invented expression. If so, then this premise will fail of
truth, whatever other status should then be accorded it. Now, it is clearly no good
to deny the thought that if there is any expression ‘nacknick’, then it is an invented
term. But it will also d o no good to challenge the premise on the ground that there
is n o expression ‘nacknick’ at all. For anything which will serve to argue that much,
it appears, will undermine as well the idea that there are ordinary vague expressions,
including ‘cubical object’ and ‘person’. The paradoxical consequences of our own
account, for example, can be used to this effect against the premise; but they will
undermine as well any typical vague expression, including ‘person’. So, this is no
good way to challenge our premise, as it gets rid of the baby along with the bath
water. Similar maneuvers will prove to n o better critical effect. For example, it is
n o good to find ‘nacknick’ an expression but a meaningless one, for how should
‘cubical object’ and ‘person’ then prove meaningful? The only plausible manner of
objection, then, will allow ‘nacknick’ as an expression that either is consistent or
else inconsistent.
       I t remains to object, of course, that this invented expression cannot possibly
be, in any sense that it might have, an inconsistent expression. I t appears that the
teacher, at least, has an understanding of such an inconsistent term, but this appear-
ance, the objection continues, must be an intellectual illusion. How might this be
cogently maintained? I suspect that an idea which might motivate this objection is
the by now old one that meaning is use, or is a function of use, though perhaps in
one of that idea’s newer guises or forms. But, in whatever form, this idea looks
quite unrealistic. Even when we consider terms that are not vague, and which may
be allowed as consistent, there seems little value in this approach. Consider a sur-
face. With certain purposes in mind, someone may say “This is flat,” his idea being
that the surface is suitable for those purposes. Weeks later, he may return with
other purposes, and say of the same surface “This is not flat,” and then turning to
another surface may say of it “That one is flat.” But, we may suppose, the original
surface did not become any less flat, and even may have been somewhat improved
in that respect. Weeks later still, with a third set of purposes, the same individual
                                            WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                  213

may declare the second surface to be not flat, now declaring a third surface to be a
flat one. And, so it may go, half a dozen times or more. How is this most plausibly
to be accounted? Surely, the meaning of the words did not relevantly change. And,
just as surely, the meaning of ‘flat’ does not concern anyone’s purposes. The real-
istic explanation, I suggest, involves supposing that none of the surfaces here ever
are f l a t , and that while actually speaking falsely, the man is informally implying in
each case something like this: The currently indicated surface is sufficiently close
to being (absolutely) flat so as to be suitable for the purposes the speaker and
hearer now have in mind.”
         If even apparently consistent terms are best accounted by thus distinguishing
meaning and semantic application from the uses to which the words are put, at least
as much should be expected where the terms appear to be inconsistent expressions.
I think we may do well now to consider once again our invented term ‘tinkergrid’.
This is a term that is to apply only to certain abstract, mathematical objects. To say
of a wooden structure that it is a tinkergrid is, just for this reason, a plain failure to
speak the truth. If use is to match with truth and meaning here, it will have to come
from quarters much further removed from directly observable behaviors and stimuli.
Perhaps we might ask various people to try to imagine tinkergrids. Various people,
perhaps unaware of any inconsistency, will frequently allege success. They are using
the term to describe what they imagine. But, 1 think we may agree that they can be
imagining no such thing, and that a literally accurate description of what they
imagine can be given only in some other terms. To go on multiplying examples and
considerations would be inappropriate for us now. To be sure, it is most unlikely
that anything can be said on these matters that will prove absolutely conclusive.
But, lacking such certainty, perhaps we may still agree that I have invented some
inconsistent expressions, even if those terms are well suited for our use.
         At this point, a subtler, and somewhat more plausible, objection may be at-
tempted. The idea here is to grant that ‘nacknick’ is an inconsistent expression, but
to deny it much of a place in our experimental learning situations. I t is not obvious,
however, precisely how this will serve to challenge our Argument. So, let us discuss
the matter.
         The attempted objection may take any of several forms, but they are all more
or less equivalent to this: our ‘nacknick’ is a term with two (or more?) meanings. In
one sense, which i t does seem forced to deny it, the term is indeed an inconsistent
one. In this sense, however, the objection continues, the term is not a useful expres-
sion. The sense in which the term is useful is another sense, in which the term is
consistent. And, what has happened in the learning situation? The teacher has in-
tended by his instructions, to inculcate in his hearers (or readers) the expression
‘nacknick’ in its inconsistent sense. But what his instructions actually have done is
to suggest to the hearers another sense for the term, a consistent useful one. The
hearers then learn ‘nacknick’ only in this latter sense; the former never gets further
than the teacher’s sounds or marks.2’
         This objection, we may see, attempts to force an equivocation upon our Ar-
gument. Interestingly, the term upon which the equivocation focuses is not a com-
214       PETER UNGER

mon, accepted one, but is our invented ‘nacknick’ itself. For the Argument to seem
to work, ‘nacknick’ must have one meaning in the first premise, on which the term
is inconsistent, and another meaning in the second premise, on which the term is
consistent. As the Argument thus eqhivocates, it is not a cogent piece of reasoning.
        This objection has some plausibility, but it will not bear scrutiny. For it to
work, we must suppose that the only way for ‘nacknick’ to be logically on a par
with ordinary vague terms, in particular, with ‘person’, is for the new expression to
be taken in a consistent sense. But, might not rhere be a deep parallel here between
the two, so that ‘person’ as well as ‘nacknick’ has an inconsistent meaning? If SO,
then our Argument will not equivocate, but will concern both terms, as regards
their inconsistent meanings. As such, it will be a cogent piece of reasoning, though
perhaps a bit limited in its scope.
        My suggestion of this deep parallel implies that the inconsistent sense for
‘nacknick’ did get further than my marks or sounds, that it was inculcated in you.
What might support this suggestion? We remember our instructive society, where in-
consistent instructions for learned ordinary terns became a matter of widespread,
repeated scholastic drill. Now, we need only extend our experiments with ‘nack-
nick’ to match their drills with ‘stone’, ‘cubical object’, and ‘person’. So, let us
imagine that after I taught you ‘nacknick’, we went over the instructions so much
that you had them down pat. In such a case, there is no plausibility at all in suppos-
ing the inconsistent sense got n o further than my marks or sounds, and never enter-
ed your learning. For, now, you would be confident that the aforesaid instructions
governed your ‘nacknick’, which you had learned from me. Indeed, after you per-
ceive the inconsistency in your term, you will be able to say of other expressions,
which are not thus inconsistent, that they are thus different from the expression
you just learned. Thus, you will say that ‘perfect cube’ is logically quite different
from the term you learned from me. But, of course, you will be ready to use ‘nack-
nick‘ for many objects anyway and to withhold it of many others. I t appears quite
easy to tell how our extended experiments will turn out, and what those results
show. For what occurs there explicitly also occurs, implicitly, in our original ex-
periments.
        Now, none of this is to deny that my instructions may have inculcated in
you, in addition to ‘nacknick’ in the inconsistent sense, a consistent sense for the
expression. And, it is not to deny that this consistent sense may have been impor-
tant, even essential, for the term’s being a useful one for you. I think these last pos-
sibilities to be, in fact, quite unlikely. But there is still some plausibility in the idea
of them. What is important for us to notice now is, first, how much less plausible
it is to think that with ‘nacknick’, as well as with ‘person’, n o inconsistent sense
ever got to you at all, no matter what else may have gotten to you, and, second,
that it is this much less plausible idea that is required for the charge of equivocation
to work against our Argument.
        To appreciate fully the failure of this charge, we should understand that
whatever we may say of ‘nacknick’ in these regards, we may say with just as much
reason, or just as little, in regards to ‘stone’ and ‘person’. Thus, even if it concerns
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                  215

terms only in one, conscious meaning, our Argument will have a second premise
suitable to match its first. For example, we may grant that there is an unconscious,
consistent sense for ‘nacknick’ which, in our experiments, you learned and then em-
ployed. Then we might say, of course, that you also used the term in its inconsis-
tent sense, perhaps doing so in (the process of) using it in its consistent one. But
then we might just as well say the same for ‘person’, or ‘stone’: We learn two senses
and, when we use ‘stone’ in its inconsistent sense, we d o so in (the process of) us-
ing it in its unconscious, consistent sense. For another example, we might say that
the consciously learned sense is never useful, and that there appears to be a use for
‘nacknick’ only in this inconsistent sense. But, then, of course, we might just as well
say that ‘stone’ is perfectly idle in its conscious, inconsistent sense, and is used only
in that unconscious sense in which it is a consistent expression. Whatever we may
say for ‘nacknick’, we should understand, we may just as well say for ‘stone’ and
for ‘person’. So, to repeat, our Argument does not rely upon equivocation, but is an
adequate piece of reasoning.
       This final objection has failed. But it suggests some ideas, recently consider-
ed, that, while they do not constitute an objection to our Argument, may serve to
place limits on its application. For, if there may be two senses of ‘nacknick’, and
thus of ‘person’ also, it might be said that our Argument concerns these expressions
in only one of those senses, the inconsistent one. Thus, for all that piece of reason-
ing says, there may be a consistent sense for ‘person’, as well as for ‘nacknick’, and,
in that sense, there may well be plenty of people. If our Argument is thus limited,
then the interest of our conclusion, it might be said, will be equally limited, though
perhaps still of some significance. What are we to make of this?
       In the first place, we should remind ourselves that the postulation of these
additional meanings appears ro be quite gratuitous and, if it actually is so, then
nothing further need be said. Indeed, can’t we leave i t at that? For these alleged
meanings are not only wholly unconscious ones, but we are to have no clue as to
how anyone might ever become aware of them. Of course, someone might take a
stab at articulating his putative unconscious meaning of ‘person’, but how should
he ever judge his success, let alone the propriety of extending his suggestion to my
own putative unconscious meaning for the term? T o my mind, the postulation of
these alleged meanings looks t o be a desperate pretense.
       But suppose we grant that there really are such shared consistent unconscious
meanings. So far as I can tell, we still cannot say anything much as to what they
are. Unlike the conscious inconsistent meanings, for which we can give at least such
conditions as in (1)and (2), these postulated entities are utterly obscure and mysten-
ous. But if we do not have any idea as to these obscure meanings, then we have none
either as to what it is for an entity to be a person, or even to be a nacknick. Thus,
with respect to any entity whatever, even an alleged shoelace, we have no idea either
as to whether i t is a person or a nacknick, or both, or neither. In this sense of per-
son-and how masy others like it-perhaps there may be ever so many people. But
now the matter has become utterly mysterious and obscure. If this is all there is to our
Argument’s being limited, that reasoning seems not to have any serious limitations.
216       PETER UNGER

10. SOME OUTSTANDING PROBLEMS POSED BY THIS ACCOUNT
                       AND ITS RELATION TO THEM
Largely by providing and employing an account of typical vague expressions as logi-
cally inconsistent, I have argued that there are no people. We have discussed the
chief objections to the account, including the charge of paradox, and we have sup-
ported the account by answering or disarming them. Thus, paradoxically enough, I
suggest that at this point my account is to be accepted, at least as a working hypo-
thesis for certain problems. I should now like briefly to discuss three of these.

                       A . The Problem of Explanation
If ‘person’ is an inconsistent term, then bow are any entities able, so to say, to use
it as successfully as it appears gets done quite regularly? Indeed, how does this hap-
pen with any inconsistent expression? If such an expression is tied to consistent
terms, so that it functions in place of them, then the matter is not very problemat-
ic. We saw this before, in Section 1, where we discussed a working agreement to use
‘perfectly square triangle’ in place of ‘tomato which is both yellow and sweet’, sup-
posing the latter expression to be consistent. But, without any such supposition as
that, which is our present problem situation, there is considerable explanatory
difficulty.
       If our account is right, then any explanation given in available terms must
eventually, like the terms themselves, prove logically incoherent. So, we should not
expect too much here in the way of valuable results. Nevertheless, it is unhelpful to
say nothing more than that there is nothing for us to do. For, even if they are inco-
herent, the questions that introduced this problem for us appear to point up some
puzzling phenomena. So, I shall stick my neck out now and offer the beginnings of
an explanatory suggestion.
       Perhaps we might understand the role of putative paradigms on the model of
an animal’s learning to respond to a stimulus. A rat can be taught to press a nearby
bar just when a certain sort of stimulus is present, for example, a triangular object.
After learning with this stimulus, what happens with rats when, on the next trial, a
somewhat different stimulus is for the first time presented, perhaps a more or less
rounded triangular object? We may plot measures of response against difference
from the original shape, those measures being frequency of any response, quickness
of response when one is made, strength of response, such as pressure on the bar,
and so on. With such suitable measures, a gradient, or curve, will be established for
a rat population and, by extrapolation, for a typical rat member. For almost any
rat, the peak of the gradient will center quite precisely on the original shape, the
slope away from that varying somewhat from rat to rat. We might say, then, that
each rat has his own idea of a triangular object, though there is important common-
ality to their ideas.
       I suggest that our conception of a triangular object, and of a nacknick, is sim-
ilarly based. Much as a rat can be trained to respond to an alleged paradigm nack-
nick, so I can more quickly learn to respond more flexibly with regard to such puta-
                                           WHY THERE ARE NO PEOPLE                   217

tive objects, and with respect to my invented term for them. And, of course, so can
you. While our centers will not differ much, though with different people and differ-
ent individual paradigms some difference is to be expected, our slopes may be ex-
pected to differ significantly, especially for cases far away from center. Thus, various
behavioral borderline cases will arise where you and 1 are inclined toward disparate
judgments. Now, suppose my interior decorator tells me to use a nacknick in a cer-
tain place, though any shaped nacknick will be suitable. In a store, I come upon a
“borderline case” while shopping in your company. I am inclined to judge i t a nack-
nick, you to judge it not one. Who is right? I t would be silly for us, even if we thought
there were some nacknicks, to force the issue and to declare that there must be a fact
of the matter. Behaving typically, we would not do that. Rather, I suggest, we should
treat the matter as a social problem, with each person having a chance to influence
the other. Now, to move you to my side, to apply, I will rely on the vagueness condi-
tion: Look, this is so like those others, in shape, which you agree are nacknicks; so
why should we stop just there, and not here? To move me, not to apply, you will rely
on the discriminative condition: But, see here, we have to stop somewhere, or just
any old thing will do; so why not stop there, which is a perfectly good place to do
so? In the logic of the situation itself, there is nothing to settle matters. So, things
get settled by further considerations. For example, if you are an architect, and I have
no strong interest in conventional shape description, I may well yield to you, expect-
inglike treatment from you in areas where my classificatory interests are the strong-
er. Of course, if you are a king and I am a peasant, then I may expect to do a good
deal more yielding on matters generally. The discriminative vagueness of ‘nacknick’,
as established in our conditions, allows these accommodations to take place with no
one getting the idea that he is giving up any truth, or being hypocritical.
       Even in one’s own case, the matter is similar. If my decorator told me to use a
nacknick, and I happen to have a putative borderline case free to hand, while most
nacknicks would be quite expensive for me, 1 might rely on the vagueness condition
to allow me to judge it a nacknick, even should I otherwise not be much inclined to
do so. I want to follow my decorator’s advice, and I also want to use what is free if
possible, so as to keep my expenses down. By appealing to the vagueness condition,
I can happily satisfy both of my desires.
       Now, I do n o t mean to place much stock in this bare explanatory suggestion.
I t points up a virtue, though, in our account, and a corresponding problem with
other ways of thinking about vague expressions. For people do differ as to how to
handle many such behavioral borderline cases, and a given person often differs from
himself over time. These do not appear to be matten of losing truth, where thoughts
of self-deception should enter, or thoughts of losing one’s faculties owing to social
pressure. On the idea that ‘nacknick’ is consistent, and that it actually applies to a
whole bunch of things, which are exactly the nacknicks, these bizarre thoughts
move to take over. For, as we saw in Section 3 , in every case, ‘nacknick’ either ap-
plies or else it does not, so that there are no logical borderline cases. Thus, on this
more usual idea, in accommodating, someone will often give up truth (for falsity).
But on our account, there are no such strange losses t o be further accounted.
218       PETER UNGER

       In a way, though, the main point for us now is to see how we have succeeded
in avoiding the complex problem of explanation. We have done so by introducing
‘nacknick’, and by then formulating our Argument from Invented Expressions. For,
just as with ordinary vague terms, with ‘nacknick’ also we have no good detailed
explanation of how it might be useful to us even while it is inconsistent. But, we
may accept the idea that ‘nacknick’ is both useful and inconsistent, and also that it
is relevantly similar to ‘cubical object’ and to other typical vague expressions. So,
even in the absence of a worked out explanation for them, we may accept the idea
that our common vague expressions are useful even while they are inconsistent.
       Of course, were I able to offer a good explanation of how they were useful,
that would offer more support for our account of common vague discriminative
terms. Similarly, were 1 able to offer a detailed explanation for ‘nacknick’, that
would further my support for my thoughts about it. In each case, the better the ex-
planation, the more the support we add. But, then, all of this is in the area of add-
ing support to an account which, by other means, is already supported. On the
other hand, should no good explanation be forthcoming for any of these terms,
that would not, I suggest, detract much from the credibility of my account. For the
problem of explanation might just be too difficult for anybody.

                  B. The Problem of Scope and Comparison
On my account, our language is inconsistent in a certain respect: it is inconsistent
in (the fact that it has) its qualitative vague discriminative expressions, including
‘being with a capacity for using language’.22 Already we have found a fair number
and variety of expressions to be of this sort. Our success suggests that we inquire as
to which other terms can also be thus categorized. This is an inquiry into the prob-
lem of the scope of our account.
       One of the first things we shall wish to examine, as regards the scope of our
account, are those expressions that are the negatives of expressions we have already
accounted. Thus, we look at such expressions as ‘not a nacknick’ and ‘not a person’.
While syntax thus often suffices to spot such terms, we may semantically define a
negative of an expression e quite simply: n is a negative of e just in case, with re-
spect to any entity, n applies to the entity if and only if e does not apply to it.
Thus, ‘person’ is a negative of ‘not a person’ just as the latter is a negative of the
former. We should inquire, then, whether a negative of a qualitative vague discrim-
inative expression is also an expression of that sort. The issues here are, I think, ex-
ceptionally difficult and complex. Partly for this reason, I have not broached them
in our previous discussions. For now, I think it will be enough to say this: If our
negatives are also terms of our key category, that will mean a further source of con-
tradictions and paradoxes.
       For consider ‘not a srone’ and suppose it applies t o a certain group of twenty
atoms, or to something they constitute. Now, if our first condition governs this ex-
pression, we may keep adding suitable atoms, one at a time, and it will apply to the
result in each case. But, if our second condition also governs it, we must reach an
                                           WHY THERE A R E NO PEOPLE                219

entity that does not satisfy ‘not a stone’, if not by that additive process then by
some such procedure. But, then, as ‘not a stone’ does nor apply to this entity, any
ncgative of it will apply to it, including ‘stone’. Thus, this entity, which by our
vagueness condition is not a stone, also is a stone. Thus, ‘not a stone’ does not ap-
ply to our original complex of twenty atoms. So, any negative of ‘not a stone’ ap-
plies to that complex. Thus, as ‘stone’ is such a negative, those twenty atoms con-
stitute a stone! But, then, our familiar arguments show, as well, that those few
atoms do not compose a stone.23
       What we say about our negative expressions, then, will determine whether or
not such new sources of paradox and contradiction are upon us. But, even if we
eventually say that these negatives are indeed of our typical vague variety, and so
have these paradoxes upon us, that will do nothing to discredit seriously our ac-
count of them, or of any other terms. For the points we made about paradox be-
fore, in Section 8, apply in full generality. Thus, in particular, they will fully cover
these present matters.
       On a slightly more positive note, another thing we shall want to examine, in
connection with the scope of our account, is the logic of vague discriminative terms
that are not purely qualitative. For powerful sorites arguments are available KO re-
fute the existence of those entities that putatively satisfy ‘bachelor’, ‘door’, and
many other terms, including arguments of a relevantly counterfactual form. To ex-
plain these arguments, we want to exhibit conditions that govern the key terms, ac-
cording to which those terms are inconsistent. I believe that many proper names
will find their logic exposed in this manner, as will various expressions that have
been supposed interestingly similar to names. In Section 2, I made some brief sug-
gestions for extending our account to cover discriminative expressions generally.
But, we want to go far deeper into the matter.
       While there is no real line separating them, we may conveniently move from
discussing this problem of scope to examining the related problem of comparison.
What we want to do here is show that the sort of source of inconsistency so far dis-
cussed, which has much to do with vagueness, is not an isolated phenomenon of our
language, but is only one of several linguistic sources of inconsistency. As a possible
example of another type of source, we may consider the putative expression ‘ex-
pression that does not apply to itself‘. I t seems that there really cannot be any such
expression, for if there is one, then it applies to itself if and only if i t does not,
which is absurd. This might be just a surprising case of reason cutting through illus-
ory appearance. But, it may not stop there. For if this alleged expression is really
not anything genuine, then, it seems, there will not really be any expression ‘expres-
sion that applies to itself‘. But, if not that, then not either ‘expression that applies
to something other than itself‘ nor, then, ‘expression that applies to something’.
But, if not this last, then it seems there is no real expression ‘expression’. And, with
this last gone, it seems we must conclude, in fact, that there are no expressions, and
SO no languages, at all. SO, comparative matters merit further examination.%
       Now, we should notice that the putative expression ‘expression that does not
apply to itself‘, supposing it does exist, might well be a vague discriminative expres-
220       PETER UNGER

sion. If so, then it will yield inconsistency from at least two sorts of source. And, if
that is so, then so much the better for our present account.

                        C. The Problem of Replacement
What I regard as the most difficult problem posed by my account, but also the most
important, is that of devising consistent expressions to replace the inconsistent ones
that have been prevalent t o date. Part of the problem is that it is unclear even in
what sense or way the new terms will replace the old. But the most dizzying part is
that the devising seems to require an indefinite number of choices for US to make,
and while these choices look like extremely important ones, they must be entirely
arbitrary. While these two parts may not exhaust this problem, it will be enough for
us now, in an attempt to understand the problem’s difficulty, to focus our discus-
sion upon them exclusively.
       In what sense or way is a newly devised term to replace an existing ordinary
one, for example, to replace ‘stone’? Normally, we should think of replacing one
term by another where we think of two consistent terms involved. Thus, an old ex-
pression may apply to certain cases that we want to capture as well with a new term,
but it may include other cases that we want newly to exclude. So, the new term will
be defined accordingly. If we then give up the old term, and no other available ex-
pression comes near to applying and excluding along these lines, we shall naturally
think of having replaced the old term by the new. But, in the present case, each old
term is inconsistent, applying to no cases at all. So, what does any do that a new
term may d o with a difference?
       A “pragmatic” answer seems the only one relevant. While our inconsistent
terms are all logically on a par, different ones serve us differently. Roughly, this
difference in service is due to different response repertoires associated with the
different terms. Each term has, for any speaker at any time, associated with it a
certain pattern of responses t o different possible situations. While there is some
variation here, there will be, even across many speakers over a substantial period
of time, a considerable amount of agreement in response for a term. So, for each
inconsistent term, we might devise a consistent one that is to have a rather similar
response repertoire. Still, as conflicting responses each has no claim to be (more)
in accord with the old term itself, a ruling in favor of some, and against others,
will have no basis in the meaning of the common term. But someone’s repertoire
will suffer should any decision be made. Thus, it is not easy to tell what can pos-
sibly count as a successful outcome for such a project.
       Let us pretend that, for many vague expressions, this difficulty has been re-
solved. We are now to replace our term ‘person’. For this particular task, we should
reflect back on situations we have imaginatively encountered already. For example,
when we remove peripheral neurons, one at a time, from an alleged person, there
really seems nothing to choose, despite our generous reference to a “way most con-
ducive to there still being a person.” Thus, at (virtually) any point, the removal of
(almost) any particular neuron does not leave an entity that is, in any acceptable
                                               W H Y THERE A R E NO PEOPLE                   221

sense, any less o f a person than would be left instead with the removal of (almost)
any other. With nothing for a guide, how are “we” to choose an expression that,
unlike ‘person’, will select certain removals as preferable to others.
       To highlight the problem, consider two rather different sequences of removal,
each disposing of t h e same number of neurons, millions of them, where t h e net re-
sult, in terms of eventually supported capacities, is quite dissimilar. Now, in certain
cases of this sort, our associated response repertoire may indicate one resulting en-
tity to be preferred as a person over the other. For example, t h e capacities support-
ed a t the end of one sequence may be much greater as regards feelings, while the
main advantage resulting from another sequence may lie in t h e less personal area of
physical dexterity. But, in many other such cases, while t h e net results from t h e se-
quences are apparently different in important ways, there seems nothing to choose
between them as far as being a person is concerned: suppose one entity is more in-
telligent and is better able to experience pleasure, while the other is more sympa-
thetic and is more sensitive to varieties of pain. Now, what we are to do, in devising
a new term, is t o make a choice anyway for even such arbitrary cases, which choice
will then be reflected in how the term itself “decides things.”
       These dizzying matters get far more difficult when the underlying circle of
our thought is exposed and appreciated. For, we want our key terms, like ‘person’,
to reflect certain interests, which will favor those entities included under the term
over those not so included. But whose interests will these be? They cannot be t h e
interests of any people, since there are not any such things. But, even supposing any
of our descriptions to be coherent, should t h e interests of entities less brilliant than
Einstein b e accorded in devising a most suitable replacement for ‘person’? Should
any weight be given to having eyes whose color lies within a certain precise range
(of bright blue)? Should ,entities with a very low degree of musical aptitude be ex-
cluded altogether? We have firm ideas and strong feelings o n these matters, b u t who
are we to have feelings and ideas that matter? There appears to be an impossible
bootstrap operation required of any attempt a t replacement to achieve any priority
or even significance. Indeed, I cannot see how there could be, in any area of intel-
lectual endeavor, a harder problem than this one.”

                                             Notes
    1. In formulating these conditions, I have been helped by correspondence with John Tien-
son.
    2. I use the plural term ‘Expressions’ in naming this Argument because. while I , in fact,
chose to begin with ‘nacknick’. and with certain matters of shape, I could have begun as well
with other matters and invented expressions.
    3 . My discussion of this matter emerged from conversation with Samuel Wheeler.
    4. I am indebted to several people for help in formulating these complex statements, espe-
cially to Terence Leichri. But there have been so many problems with previous versions that I
despair that some must srill remain. I trust, however, that the reader will not judge m y philoso-
phy primarily in terms of formulational details.
    5 . For an extended discussion of the semantics of ‘flat’, and of other such absolute terms,
see chapter I 1 of m y book Ignorunce (Oxford, 1975).
222         PETER U N G E R

    6. For an alternative interpretation of why sorites arguments are sound, see two papers by
Samuel Wheeler: “Reference and Vagueness,” Synthese, Vol. 30. No. 3/4 (April/May. 1975)
and “On That Which Is Not,” Syntbese (forthcoming).
    7. In the case of (almost) all the sorites arguments presented in this paper, in regards to
matters of formulation, I am indebted to Terence Leichti.
    8. On the need for such a ”providing” clause, I am indebted to James Van Cleve.
    9. In John Tienson. “Can Things of Different Natural Kinds Be Exactly Alike?”. Analysis
3 7 ( 1977): 190-97.
    10. This is suggested by the main point of Tienson’s paper, “Can Things of Different Natu-
ral Kinds Be Exactly Alike?”
    11. Perhaps the most prominent recent exponent of this idea of incompleteness. or of an
idea much like it. is Michael Dummetr in his unfortunately named “Wang’s Paradox,” Syn-
these 3 0 (1975). especially as on pages 309-12.
    12. As I hope is indicated by the language, this general proposition is not intended to con-
cern future situations. As regards the future, I think there are genuine problems, as made fa-
mous by Aristotle and his argument of the sea battle.
     13. Various remarks in the section just ended are in response to conversations with Terence
Leichti and with David Lewis.
    14. This argument, adapted, shows that there is no genuine dyadic relation of similan’ty. For
we can now show that if there is such a relation. then i t must be transitive. But. also, quite clearly,
if there is such a relation, then it is not transitive. Thus, despite intellectual appearances to the
contrary, there is no real similarity relation. (The question of respects, and of degrees. of simi-
larity changes nothing here.) This point first emerged for me in discussion with Vincent Tomas.
    15. This objection, or one much like it, was offered to me in conversation by Terence Leichti
and also by David Lewis. What I go on t o say about the matter is indebted to these helpful con-
versations.
    16. For impressing upon me the importance of counterfactual reasoning in relation to sorites
arguments, I a m indebted to discussion with David Lewis.
    17. See three recent papers of mine: “I Do Not Exist,’’ in Epistemology in Perspective, ed.
Graham Macdonald (London. forthcoming), which is the festschrift for Professor Sir A. J. Ayer;
“There Are No Ordinary Things,” Syntbese, forthcoming: “Skepticism and Nihilism,” Nous,
forth coming.
    18. See the three papers cited in the just previous note.
    19. For discussion regarding an incomparability condition for ‘person’, I am indebted t o
James Van Cleve.
    20. The points just made were suggested to me by an unpublished paper of John Tienson’s,
“An Argument Concerning Quantification and Propositional Attitudes.’’ I make some related
points in Ignorance.
    21. This objection, or one much like it. was offered in conversation by David Lewis.
    22. Saying that a language is inconsistent is admittedly somewhat unnatural. But if one speci-
fies appropriate respects in which it might be inconsistent. that unnaturalness will be harmless.
    23. If ‘not a stone’ is indeed a vague discriminative expression, the foregoing argument will
go against a good deal of what I said in Section 4 of “There Are No Ordinary Things.” But most
of what I said there is directed against cenain arguments from common sense and. as such, still
will stand.
    24. The paradox just sketched derives from the Grelling, which in turn derives from the
Liar. The Liar is attributed b y scholars t o the great Megarim thinker Eubulides. who is also
credited with inventing the sorites, as well as other important arguments. For some recent re-
search on Eubulides, see Jon Moline. “Aristotle, Eubulides and the Sorites.” Mind 78 (1969):
343-407. TO m y mind, i t is puzzling how much this great philosopher has been neglected.
    25. In writing this paper. I have been fortunate in having been helped by many people, too
many to thank each individually. However, I should like to express thanks now to three who
were especially helpful: Terence Leichti, David Lewis, and Samuel Wheeler.
