                                       13
     Remarks on the Mind-Body Question



                           Introductory Comments
   F. Dyson, in a very thoughtful article, 1 points to the everbroadening
scope of scientific inquiry. Whether or not the relation of mind to body
will enter the realm of scientific inquiry in the near future—and the
present writer is prepared to admit that this is an open question—it seems
worthwhile to summarize the views to which a dispassionate contempla-
tion of the most obvious facts leads. The present writer has no other
qualification to offer his views than has any other physicist and he be-
lieves that most of his colleagues would present similar opinions on the
subject, if pressed.
   Until not many years ago, the "existence" of a mind or soul would have
been passionately denied by most physical scientists. The brilliant suc-
cesses of mechanistic and, more generally, macroscopic physics and of
chemistry overshadowed the obvious fact that thoughts, desires, and
emotions are not made of matter, and it was nearly universally accepted
among physical scientists that there is nothing besides matter. The epi-
tome of this belief was the conviction that, if we knew the positions and
velocities of all atoms at one instant of time, we could compute the fate
of the universe for all future. Even today, there are adherents to this
    Reprinted by permission from The Scientist Speculates, I. J. Good, ed. (London:
William Heinemann, Ltd., 1961;'New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1962).
    1
      F. J. Dyson, Scientific American, 199, 74 (1958). Several cases are related in
this article in which regions of inquiry, which were long considered to be outside
the province of science, were drawn into this province and, in fact, became focuses
of attention. The best-known example is the interior of the atom, which was consid-
ered to be a metaphysical subject before Rutherford's proposal of his nuclear model,
in 1911.

                                        171
172                        Symmetries and Reflections

view2 though fewer among the physicists than — ironically enough —
among biochemists.
   There are several reasons for the return, on the part of most physical
scientists, to the spirit of Descartes's "Cogito ergo sum," which recognizes
the thought, that is, the mind, as primary. First, the brilliant successes of
mechanics not only faded into the past; they were also recognised as
partial successes, relating to a narrow range of phenomena, all in the
macroscopic domain. When the province of physical theory was ex-
tended to encompass microscopic phenomena, through the creation of
quantum mechanics, the concept of consciousness came to the fore
again: it was not possible to formulate the laws of quantum mechanics
in a fully consistent way without reference to the consciousness.3 All
that quantum mechanics purports to provide are probability connections
between subsequent impressions (also called "apperceptions") of the
consciousness, and even though the dividing line between the observer,
whose consciousness is being affected, and the observed physical object
can be shifted towards the one or the other to a considerable degree, 4
it cannot be eliminated. It may be premature to believe that the present
philosophy of quantum mechanics will remain a permanent feature of
future physical theories; it will remain remarkable, in whatever way
our future concepts may develop, that the very study of the external
world led to the conclusion that the content of the consciousness is an
 ultimate reality.
  It is perhaps important to point out at this juncture that the question
concerning the existence of almost anything (even the whole external
world) is not a very relevant question. All of us recognize at once how
meaningless the query concerning the existence of the electric field in
vacuum would be. All that is relevant is that the concept of the electric
    2
       The book most commonly blamed for this view is E. F. Haeckel's Weltratsel
( 1 8 9 9 ) . However, the views propounded in this book are less extreme (though
more confused) than those of the usual materialistic philosophy.
     3
       W. Heisenberg expressed this most poignantly [Daedalus, 87, 99 (1958) ]: "The
laws of nature which we formulate mathematical!)' in quantum theory deal no longer
with the particles themselves but with our knowledge of the elementary particles."
And later: "The conception of objective reality . . . evaporated into the . . . mathe-
matics that represents no longer the behavior of elementary particles but rather
our knowledge of this behavior." The "our" in this sentence refers to the observer
who plays a singular role in the epistemology of quantum mechanics. He will be
referred to in the first person and statements made in the first person will always
refer to the observer.
    4
       J. von Neumann, Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik            (Berlin:
Julius Springer, 1932), Chapter VI; English translation (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1955).
                     Remarks on the Mind-Body Question                             173

field is useful for communicating our ideas and for our own thinking.
The statement that it "exists" means only that: (a) it can be measured,
hence uniquely defined, and (o) that its knowledge is useful for under-
standing past phenomena and in helping to foresee further events. It can
be made part of the Weltbild. This observation may well be kept in
mind during the ensuing discussion of the quantum mechanical descrip-
tion of the external world.


                    The Language of Quantum Mechanics

   The present and the next sections try to describe the concepts in
terms of which quantum mechanics teaches us to store and commu-
nicate information, to describe the regularities found in nature. These
concepts may be called the language of quantum mechanics. We shall
not be interested in the regularities themselves, that is, the contents
of the book of quantum mechanics, only in the language. It may be that
the following description of the language will prove too brief and too
abstract for those who are unfamiliar with the subject, and too tedious
for those who are familiar with it.5 It should, nevertheless, be helpful.
 However, the knowledge of the present and of the succeeding section is
not necessary for following the later ones, except for parts of the section
on the Simplest Answer to the Mind-Body Question.
   Given any object, all the possible knowledge concerning that object
can be given as its wave function. This is a mathematical concept the
exact nature of which need not concern us here—it is composed of a
(countable) infinity of numbers. If one knows these numbers, one can
foresee the behavior of the object as far as it can be foreseen. More pre-
cisely, the wave function permits one to foretell with what probabilities
 the object will make one or another impression on us if we let it interact
with us either directly, or indirectly. The object may be a radiation field,
and its wave function will tell us with what probability we shall see a
    5
      The contents of this section should be part of the standard material in courses
on quantum mechanics. They are given here because it may be helpful to recall
them even on the part of those who were at one time already familiar with them, be-
cause it is not expected that every reader of these lines had the benefit of a course in
quantum mechanics, and because the writer is well aware of the fact that most
courses in quantum mechanics do not take up the subject here discussed. See also,
in addition to references 3 and 4, W. Pauli, Handbuch der Physik, Section 2.9,
particularly page 148 (Berlin: Julius Springer, 1933). Also F. London and E. Bauer,
La Theorie de I'observation en mecanique quantique (Paris: Hermann and Co.,
1939). The last authors observe (page 4 1 ) , "Remarquons le role essential que joue
la conscience de 1'observateur. . . ."
174                     Symmetries and Reflections

 flash if we put our eyes at certain points, with what probability it will
leave a dark spot on a photographic plate if this is placed at certain
positions. In many cases the probability for one definite sensation will be
 so high that it amounts to a certainty—this is always so if classical me-
 chanics provides a close enough approximation to the quantum laws.
    The information given by the wave function is communicable. If
someone else somehow determines the wave function of a system, he
can tell me about it and, according to the theory, the probabilities for
the possible different impressions (or "sensations") will be equally large,
no matter whether he or I interact with the system in a given fashion.
In this sense, the wave function "exists."
    It has been mentioned before that even the complete knowledge of
the wave function does not permit one always to foresee with certainty
the sensations one may receive by interacting with a system. In some
cases, one event (seeing a flash) is just as likely as another (not seeing
a flash). However, in most cases the impression (e.g., the knowledge of
having or not having seen a flash) obtained in this way permits one to
foresee later impressions with an increased certainty. Thus, one may be
sure that, if one does not see a flash if one looks in one direction, one
surely does see a flash if one subsequently looks in another direction.
The property of observations to increase our ability for foreseeing the
future follows from the fact that all knowledge of wave functions is
based, in the last analysis, on the "impressions" we receive. In fact, the
wave function is only a suitable language for describing the body of
knowledge—gained by observations—which is relevant for predicting
the future behaviour of the system. For this reason, the interactions
which may create one or another sensation in us are also called observa-
tions, or measurements. One realises that all the information which the
laws of physics provide consists of probability connections between sub-
sequent impressions that a system makes on one if one interacts with
it repeatedly, i.e., if one makes repeated measurements on it. The wave
function is a convenient summary of that part of the past impressions
which remains relevant for the probabilities of receiving the different
possible impressions when interacting with the system at later times.

                               An Example
  It may be worthwhile to illustrate the point of the preceding section
on a schematic example. Suppose that all our interactions with the sys-
tem consist in looking at a certain point in a certain direction at times
                   Remarks on the Mind-Body Question                       175

: . to + 1, r0 + 2, • • • , and our possible sensations are seeing or not seeing
a flash. The relevant law of nature could then be of the form: "If you
see a flash at time t, you will see a flash at time t + 1 with a probability
 l
   /4, no flash with a probability %; if you see no flash, then the next
observation will give a flash with the probability %, no flash with a
probability *4; there are no further probability connections." Clearly,
this law can be verified or refuted with arbitrary accuracy by a suffi-
ciently long series of observations. The wave function in such a case de-
pends only on the last observation and may be i//t if a flash has been seen
at the last interaction, ^ 2 if no flash was noted. In the former case, that
is for i/n, a calculation of the probabilities of flash and no flash after
unit time interval gives the values % and %; for i//2 these probabilities
must turn out to be % and %. This agreement of the predictions of the
law in quotation marks with the law obtained through the use of the
wave function is not surprising. One can either say that the wave func-
tion was invented to yield the proper probabilities, or that the law given
in quotation marks has been obtained by having carried out a calcula-
tion with the wave functions, the use of which we have learned from
Schrodinger.
   The communicability of the information means, in the present exam-
ple, that if someone else looks at time t, and tells us whether he saw a
flash, we can look at time t + 1 and observe a flash with the same prob-
abilities as if we had seen or not seen the flash at time t ourselves. In
other words, he can tell us what the wave function is: i/o if he did, i/^ if
he did not see a flash.
   The preceding example is a very simple one. In general, there are
many types of interactions into which one can enter with the system,
leading to different types of observations or measurements. Also, the
probabilities of the various possible impressions gained at the next
interaction may depend not only on the last, but on the results of many
prior observations. The important point is that the impression which
one gains at an interaction may, and in general does, modify the prob-
abilities with which one gains the various possible impressions at later
interactions. In other words, the impression which one gains at an inter-
action, called also the result of an observation, modifies the wave func-
tion of the system. The modified wave function is, furthermore, in gen-
eral unpredictable before the impression gained at the interaction has
entered our consciousness: it is the entering of an impression into our
consciousness which alters the wave function because it modifies our
176                        Symmetries and Reflections

 appraisal of the probabilities for different impressions which we expect
 to receive in the future. It is at this point that the consciousness enters
the theory unavoidably and unalterably. If one speaks in terms of the
 wave function, its changes are coupled with the entering of impressions
 into our consciousness. If one formulates the laws of quantum mechanics
 in terms of probabilities of impressions, these are ipso facto the primary
 concepts with which one deals.
    It is natural to inquire about the situation if one does not make the
 observation oneself but lets someone else carry it out. What is the wave
 function if my friend looked at the place where the flash might show
 at time t? The answer is that the information available about the object
 cannot be described by a wave function. One could attribute a wave
function to the joint system: friend plus object, and this joint system
would have a wave function also after the interaction, that is, after my
 friend has looked. I can then enter into interaction with this joint system
by asking my friend whether he saw a flash. If his answer gives me
 the impression that he did, the joint wave function of friend + object
 will change into one in which they even have separate wave functions
 (the total wave function is a product) and the wave function of the
object is ipi. If he says no, the wave function of the object is </% i.e., the
 object behaves from then on as if I had observed it and had seen no
 flash. However, even in this case, in which the observation was carried
 out by someone else, the typical change in the wave function occurred
only when some information (the yes or no of my friend) entered my
 consciousness. It follows that the quantum description of objects is
 influenced by impressions entering my consciousness.6 Solipsism may
be logically consistent with present quantum mechanics, monism in
the sense of materialism is not. The case against solipsism was given at
the end of the first section.

                          The Reasons for Materialism
  The principal argument against materialism is not that illustrated in
the last two sections: that it is incompatible with quantum theory. The
    6
      The essential point is not that the states of objects cannot be described by means
of position and momentum co-ordinates (because of the uncertainty principle).
The point is, rather, that the valid description, by means of the wave function, is
influenced by impressions entering our consciousness. See in this connection the re-
mark of London and Bauer, quoted above, and S. Watanabe's article in Louis de
Broglie, Physicien et Penseur (Paris: Albin Michel, 1952), p. 385.
                    Remarks on the Mind-Body Question                          177

principal argument is that thought processes and consciousness are the
primary concepts, that our knowledge of the external world is the con-
tent of our consciousness and that the consciousness, therefore, cannot
be denied. On the contrary, logically, the external world could be
denied—though it is not very practical to do so. In the words of Niels
Bohr,7 "The word consciousness, applied to ourselves as well as to others,
is indispensable when dealing with the human situation." In view of
all this, one may well wonder how materialism, the doctrine 8 that "life
could be explained by sophisticated combinations of physical and chem-
ical laws," could so long be accepted by the majority of scientists.
   The reason is probably that it is an emotional necessity to exalt the
problem to which one wants to devote a lifetime. If one admitted any-
thing like the statement that the laws we study in physics and chemistry
are limiting laws, similar to the laws of mechanics which exclude the
consideration of electric phenomena, or the laws of macroscopic physics
which exclude the consideration of "atoms," we could not devote our-
selves to our study as wholeheartedly as we have to in order to recognise
any new regularity in nature. The regularity which we are trying to
track down must appear as the all-important regularity—if we are to pur-
sue it with sufficient devotion to be successful. Atoms were also con-
sidered to be an unnecessary figment before macroscopic physics was
essentially complete—and one can well imagine a master, even a great
master, of mechanics to say: "Light may exist but I do not need it in
order to explain the phenomena in which I am interested." The present
biologist uses the same words about mind and consciousness; he uses
them as an expression of his disbelief in these concepts. Philosophers
do not need these illusions and show much more clarity on the subject.
The same is true of most truly great natural scientists, at least in their
years of maturity. It is now true of almost all physicists—possibly, but
not surely, because of the lesson we learned from quantum mechanics.
It is also possible that we learned that the principal problem is no longer
the fight with the adversities of nature but the difficulty of understand-
ing ourselves if we want to survive.
    7
      N. Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, section on "Atoms and Hu-
man Knowledge," in particular p. 92 ( New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1960).
    8
      The quotation is from William S. Beck, The Riddle, of Life, Essay in Adven-
tures of the Mind (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, I 9 6 0 ) , p. 35. This article is an
eloquent statement of the attitude of the open-minded biologists toward the ques-
tions discussed in the present note.
178                        Symmetries and Reflections

                Simplest Answer to the Mind-Body Question

    Let us first specify the question which is outside the province of
physics and chemistry but is an obviously meaningful (because opera-
tionally defined) question: Given the most complete description of my
body (admitting that the concepts used in this description change as
physics develops), what are my sensations? Or, perhaps, with what
probability will I have one of the several possible sensations? This is
clearly a valid and important question which refers to a concept—sensa-
tions—which does not exist in present-day physics or chemistry. Whether
the question will eventually become a problem of physics or psychol-
ogy, or another science, will depend on the development of these
disciplines.
    Naturally, I have direct knowledge only of my own sensations and
there is no strict logical reason to believe that others have similar expe-
riences. However, everybody believes that the phenomenon of sensa-
 tions is widely shared by organisms which we consider to be living. It is
very likely that, if certain physico-chemical conditions are satisfied, a
consciousness, that is, the property of having sensations, arises. This
statement will be referred to as our first thesis. The sensations will be
simple and undifferentiated if the physico-chemical substrate is simple;
it will have the miraculous variety and colour which the poets try to
describe if the substrate is as complex and well organized as a human
body.
    The physico-chemical conditions and properties of the substrate not
only create the consciousness, they also influence its sensations most
profoundly. Does, conversely, the consciousness influence the physico-
 chemical conditions? In other words, does the human body deviate from
the laws of physics, as gleaned from the study of inanimate nature? The
traditional answer to this question is, "No": the body influences the
 mind but the mind does not influence the body. 9 Yet at least two reasons
 can be given to support the opposite thesis, which will be referred to
 as the second thesis.
    The first and, to this writer, less cogent reason is founded on the
    9
      This writer does not profess to a knowledge of all, or even of the majority of all,
metaphysical theories. It may be significant, nevertheless, that he never found an
affirmative answer to the query of the text—not even after having perused the rele-
vant articles in the earlier (more thorough) editions of the Encyclopaedia        Britan-
nica.
                     Remarks on the Mind-Body Question                         179

quantum theory of measurements, described earlier in sections 2 and 3.
In order to present this argument, it is necessary to follow my descrip-
tion of the observation of a "friend" in somewhat more detail than was
done in the example discussed before. Let us assume again that the ob-
ject has only two states, i/n and uV2. If the state is, originally, i/u, the state
of object plus observer will be, after the interaction, ij/1 X X i; if the state
of the object is i/»2, the state of object plus observer will be <p2 X A2 after
the interaction. The wave functions xi and X-' g l v e t n e state of the ob-
server; in the first case he is in a state which responds to the question
"Have you seen a flash?" with "Yes"; in the second state, with "No."
There is nothing absurd in this so far.
    Let us consider now an initial state of the object which is a linear
combination a \f/1 + B <L> of the two states i/n and i/»2. It then folloivs from
the linear nature of the quantum mechanical equations of motion that
the state of object plus observer is, after the interaction, a (aq X Xi) + B
(i//2 X X2 ). If I now ask the observer whether he saw a flash, he will with
a probability | a [2 say that he did, and in this case the object will also
give to me the responses as if it were in the state t/n. If the observer
answers "No"—the probability for this is \B\2—the object's responses from
then on will correspond to a wave function ov2. The probability is zero
that the observer will say "Yes," but the object gives the response which
i//2 would give because the wave function a (uVj X Xl ) + B (\p<> X x2) of the
joint system has no (</*,, X xi) component. Similarly, if the observer denies
having seen a flash, the behavior of the object cannot correspond to x1
because the joint wave function has no (i/n X x.,) component. All this is
quite satisfactory: the theory of measurement, direct or indirect, is
logically consistent so long as I maintain my privileged position as ulti-
mate observer.
    However, if after having completed the whole experiment I ask my
friend, "What did you feel about the flash before I asked you?" he will
answer, "I told you already, I did [did not] see a flash," as the case may
be. In other words, the question whether he did or did not see the
flash was already decided in his mind, before I asked him.10 If we
accept this, we are driven to the conclusion that the proper wave func-

   10
      F. London and E. Bauer (op. cit., reference 5) on page 42 say, "II [l'observa-
teur] dispose d'une faculte caracteristique et bien familiere, que nous pouvons ap-
peler la 'faculte d'introspection': il peut se rendre compte de maniere immediate de
son propre etat."
180                         Symmetries and Reflections

tion immediately after the interaction of friend and object was already
either yq X X l or yq X x2 a n ( i not the linear combination a (yq X Xl ) + B
('/'2 X X2/- This is a contradiction, because the state described by the wave
function a (yi X Xi) + B (y2 X x2) describes a state that has properties
which neither yh X A i nor y2 X X2 has. If we substitute for "friend" some
simple physical apparatus, such as an atom which may or may not be
excited by the light-flash, this difference has observable effects and
there is no doubt that a (yj X Ai) + /3 (^2 X X2) describes the properties
of the joint system correctly, the assumption that the wave function is
either </u X Xi or y2 X ^2 does not. If the atom is replaced by a conscious
being, the wave function a (yu X Xi) + 8 (^2 X ^2) (which also follows
from the linearity of the equations) appears absurd because it implies
that my friend was in a state of suspended animation before he answered
my question. 11
     It follows that the being with a consciousness must have a different
role in quantum mechanics than the inanimate measuring device: the
atom considered above. In particular, the quantum mechanical equa-
tions of motion cannot be linear if the preceding argument is accepted.
This argument implies that "my friend" has the same types of impres-
sions and sensations as I—in particular, that, after interacting with the
object, he is not in that state of suspended animation which corresponds
to the wave function a (yq X Ai) + ft (^2 X X2). It is not necessary to see
a contradiction here from the point of view of orthodox quantum me-
chanics, and there is none if we believe that the alternative is meaning-
less, whether my friend's consciousness contains either the impression
of having seen a flash or of not having seen a flash. However, to deny
the existence of the consciousness of a friend to this extent is surely an
   11
      In an article which will appear soon [Werner Heisenberg und die Physik
unserer Zeit (Braunschweig: Friedr. Vieweg, 1961)] G. Ludwig discusses the
theory of measurements and arrives at the conclusion that quantum mechanical
theory cannot have unlimited validity (see, in particular, Section Ilia, also V e ) .
This conclusion is in agreement with the point of view here represented. However,
Ludwig believes that quantum mechanics is valid only in the limiting case of micro-
scopic systems, whereas the view here represented assumes it to be valid for all in-
animate objects. At present, there is no clear evidence that quantum mechanics be-
comes increasingly inaccurate as the size of the system increases, and the dividing line
between microscopic and macroscopic systems is surely not very sharp. Thus, the
human eye can perceive as few as three quanta, and the properties of macroscopic
crystals are grossly affected by a single dislocation. For these reasons, the present
writer prefers the point of view represented in the text even though he does not
wish to deny the possibility that Ludwig's more narrow limitation of quantum me-
chanics may be justified ultimately.
                  Remarks on the Mind-Body Question                    181

^r.natural attitude, approaching solipsism, and few people, in their
 -carts, will go along with it.
     The preceding argument for the difference in the roles of inanimate
       rvation tools and observers with a consciousness—hence for a viola-
  •. an of physical laws where consciousness plays a role—is entirely cogent
- :• long as one accepts the tenets of orthodox quantum mechanics in all
their consequences. Its weakness for providing a specific effect of the
consciousness on matter lies in its total reliance on these tenets—a reli-
        which would be, on the basis of our experiences with the ephemeral
nature of physical theories, difficult to justify fully.
     The second argument to support the existence of an influence of the
consciousness on the physical world is based on the observation that we
do not know of any phenomenon in which one subject is influenced by
another without exerting an influence thereupon. This appears convinc-
ing to this writer. It is true that under the usual conditions of experi-
mental physics or biology, the influence of any consciousness is certainly
verv small. "We do not need the assumption that there is such an effect."
It is good to recall, however, that the same may be said of the relation
of light to mechanical objects. Mechanical objects influence light—other-
wise we could not see them—but experiments to demonstrate the effect
of light on the motion of mechanical bodies are difficult. It is unlikely
that the effect would have been detected had theoretical considerations
not suggested its existence, and its manifestation in the phenomenon
of light pressure.


                        More Difficult Questions

   Even if the two theses of the preceding section are accepted, very
little is gained for science as we understand science: as a correlation of
a body of phenomena. Actually, the two theses in question are more
similar to existence theorems of mathematics than to methods of con-
struction of solutions and we cannot help but feel somewhat helpless
as we ask the much more difficult question: how could the two theses
be verified experimentally? i.e., how could a body of phenomena be built
around them. It seems that there is no solid guide to help in answering
this question and one either has to admit to full ignorance or to engage
in speculations.
   Before turning to the question of the preceding paragraph, let us note
182                     Symmetries and Reflections

in which way the consciousnesses are related to each other and to the
physical world. The relations in question again show a remarkable sim-
ilarity to the relation of light quanta to each other and to the material
bodies with which mechanics deals. Light quanta do not influence each
other directly12 but only by influencing material bodies which then in-
fluence other light quanta. Even in this indirect way, their interaction is
appreciable only under exceptional circumstances. Similarly, conscious-
nesses never seem to interact with each other directly but only via the
physical world. Hence, any knowledge about the consciousness of an-
other being must be mediated by the physical world.
    At this point, however, the analogy stops. Light quanta can interact
directly with virtually any material object but each consciousness is
uniquely related to some physico-chemical structure through which
alone it receives impressions. There is, apparently, a correlation between
each consciousness and the physico-chemical structure of which it is a
captive, which has no analogue in the inanimate world. Evidently, there
are enormous gradations between consciousnesses, depending on the
elaborate or primitive nature of the structure on which they can lean:
the sets of impressions which an ant or a microscopic animal or a plant
 receives surely show much less variety than the sets of impressions which
man can receive. However, we can, at present, at best, guess at these
impressions. Even our knowledge of the consciousness of other men is
derived only through analogy and some innate knowledge which is
hardly extended to other species.
    It follows that there are only two avenues through which experimenta-
 tion can proceed to obtain information about our first thesis: observation
 of infants where we may be able to sense the progress of the awakening
 of consciousness, and by discovering phenomena postulated by the sec-
 ond thesis, in which the consciousness modifies the usual laws of physics.
The first type of observation is constantly carried out by millions of
families, but perhaps with too little purposefulness. Only very crude
 observations of the second type have been undertaken in the past, and
 all these antedate modern experimental methods. So far as it is known,
 all of them have been unsuccessful. However, every phenomenon is
 unexpected and most unlikely until it has been discovered—and some of
them remain unreasonable for a long time after they have been dis-
covered. Hence, lack of success in the past need not discourage.
   12
      This statement is certainly true in an approximation which is much better
than is necessary for our purposes.
                      Remarks on the Mind-Body Question                              183

               Non-linearity of Equations as Indication of Life

    The preceding section gave two proofs—they might better be called
indications—for the second thesis, the effect of consciousness on physical
phenomena. The first of these was directly connected with an actual
process, the quantum mechanical observation, and indicated that the
usual description of an indirect observation is probably incorrect if
the primary observation is made by a being with consciousness. It
may be worthwhile to show a way out of the difficulty which we
encountered.
    The simplest way out of the difficulty is to accept the conclusion
which forced itself on us: to assume that the joint system of friend plus
object cannot be described by a wave function after the interaction—the
proper description of their state is a mixture. 18 The wave function is
 (</r x xi) with a probability | a | 2 ; it is (\j/2 X A2) with a probability | B | 2 . It
was pointed out already by Bohm 14 that, if the system is sufficiently
complicated, it may be in practice impossible to ascertain a difference
between certain mixtures, and some pure states (states which can be
described by a wave function). In order to exhibit the difference, one
would have to subject the system (friend plus object) to very compli-
cated observations which cannot be carried out in practice. This is in
contrast to the case in which the flash or the absence of a flash is reg-
istered by an atom, the state of which I can obtain precisely by much
simpler observations. This way out of the difficulty amounts to the
postulate that the equations of motion of quantum mechanics cease to
be linear, in fact that they are grossly non-linear if conscious beings enter
the picture. 15 We saw that the linearity condition led uniquely to the
   13
      The concept of the mixture was put forward first by L. Landau, Z. Physik, 45,
430 (1927). A more elaborate discussion is found in J. von Neumann's book (foot-
note 4 ) , Chapter IV. A more concise and elementary discussion of the concept of
mixture and its characterisation by a statistical (density) matrix is given in L. Lan-
dau and E. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics (London: Pergamon Press, 1958), pp.
35-38.
   14
      The circumstance that the mixture of the states (i/q X Xi) a n d (vAr X X2)'
with weights | a | 2 and | /3 | 2 , respectively, cannot be distinguished in practice from
the state a(\f/l X Xi) + rHu/2 X X2)» if t r i e states X are of great complexity, has
been pointed out already in Section 22.11 of D. Bohm's Quantum Theory (New
York: Prentice Hall, 1951). The reader will also be interested in Sections 8.27, 8.28
of this treatise.
   15
      The non-linearity is of a different nature from that postulated by W. Heisen-
berg in his theory of elementary particles [cf., e.g., H. P. Diirr, W. Heisenberg,
H. Mitter, S. Schlieder, K. Yamazaki, Z. Naturforsch., 14, 441 ( 1 9 5 4 ) ] . In our case
the equations giving the time variation of the state vector (wave function) are
postulated to be non-linear.
184                      Symmetries and Reflections

unacceptable wave function a ( ^ X X] ) + B (^2 x x2) r o r t n e j 0 m t stafe-
Actually, in the present case, the final state is uncertain even in the sense
that it cannot be described by a wave function. The statistical element
which, according to the orthodox theory, enters only if I make an obser-
vation enters equally if my friend does.
   It remains remarkable that there is a continuous transition from the
state a(i/u X Al ) + B(\p2 X x 2 ) t o the mixture of i/u X Xl and ih> X A „ with
probabilities jal 2 and 1/3 J2, so that every member of the continuous
transition has all the statistical properties demanded by the theory of
measurements. Each member of the transition, except that which cor-
responds to orthodox quantum mechanics, is a mixture, and must be
described by a statistical matrix. The statistical matrix of the system
friend-plus-object is, after their having interacted (| a I2 + I /312 = 1),

                                              aB' cos 8
                        a*/3 cos 8                  I/?! 2
in which the first row and column corresponds to the wave function
•Ai x Xi> the second to y2 X        The 8 = 0 case corresponds to orthodox
                                x2
quantum mechanics; in this case the statistical matrix is singular and
the state of friend-plus-object can be described by a wave function,
namely, a(\fii X Ai) + B(\fl2 X A2 ). For 8 = %ir, we have the simple mixture
of \j/x X A l and \p2 X x2, with probabilities j a | 2 and |/3j 2 , respectively.
At intermediate 8, we also have mixtures of two states, with probabilities
M; + (Vi ~ | ctB | 2 sin 8)% and hi - (% - | aB j 2 sin2 8)%. The two states are
a(<Ai X Xi) + P(fl>* x X2) and -B*(#i X Xi) + a°(>A2 X x 2 ) for 8 = 0 and
go over continuously into i/n X Ai and i/*2 X A2 as 8 increases to \-K.
   The present writer is well aware of the fact that he is not the first one
to discuss the questions which form the subject of this article and that
the surmises of his predecessors were either found to be wrong or un-
provable, hence, in the long run, uninteresting. He would not be greatly
surprised if the present article shared the fate of those of his predeces-
sors. He feels, however, that many of the earlier speculations on the
subject, even if they could not be justified, have stimulated and helped
our thinking and emotions and have contributed to re-emphasize the
ultimate scientific interest in the question, which is, perhaps, the most
fundamental question of all.
