Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
Vol. LXXVII No. 3, November 2008
Ó 2008 International Phenomenological Society




Bad Luck Once Again
neil levy
Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics, University of Melbourne
James Martin 21st Century School, Oxford University


     In a recent article in this journal, Storrs McCall and E.J. Lowe sketch an account
     of indeterminist free will designed to avoid the luck objection that has been
     wielded to such effect against event-causal libertarianism. They argue that if deci-
     sion-making is an indeterministic process and not an event or series of events, the
     luck objection will fail. I argue that they are wrong: the luck objection is equally
     successful against their account as against existing event-causal libertarianisms.
     Like the event-causal libertarianism their account is meant to supplant, the process
     view cannot oﬀer a reasons explanation of the agent’s choice itself; that choice is
     explained by nothing except chance. The agent therefore fails to exercise freedom-
     level control over it.

In ‘‘Indeterminist Free Will’’ (McCall and Lowe 2005) Storrs McCall
and E.J. Lowe oﬀer us an account of indeterministic decision-making
that is designed to avoid the luck objection that has widely been seen
as vitiating existing accounts of libertarian free will. They argue that
on their process view, agents choose for reasons, and that ‘‘something
that happens for a reason does not happen by chance’’ (p. 685). How-
ever, avoiding the luck objection requires more than just showing that
agents choose for reasons. An adequate libertarianism must oﬀer a rea-
sons explanation of the very choice that is the locus of free will, not
simply of the options between which the agent chooses. The process
view does not, and cannot, oﬀer such an explanation, and therefore
fails to avoid the luck objection.

           I. Indeterminist Decision Making: The Process View
McCall and Lowe begin from a familiar starting point: the apparent
vulnerability of extant libertarian theories to an objection from luck.
Consider Robert Kane’s event-causal libertarianism. Kane (1996) argues
that agents possess libertarian free will only if they at least sometimes
exercise what McCall and Lowe call the ‘‘‘two-sided’ ability’’ to act in a


                                                          BAD LUCK ONCE AGAIN        749
certain manner or to perform an incompatible action. On Kane’s
account, agents exercise this ability when they confront a situation in
which they have strong, though not decisive, (internalist) reasons for
performing an action, and strong, though not decisive, reasons for an
incompatible action. Kane argues that in such circumstances, the conﬂict
we experience disrupts the thermodynamic equilibrium in our brains
such that a chaotic process begins, which ampliﬁes the quantum level
indeterminacy which otherwise would be too small to have any eﬀect on
our behavior or thought. As a consequence, it is causally open to us to
choose to perform either action for which we have strong reasons.
    Kane pictures agents in these circumstances as simultaneously trying
to do two incompatible things; which alternative wins out is settled by
undetermined quantum level events in their brains. Because in these
circumstances it is undetermined which action the agent shall choose to
perform, but whatever they choose to perform they try to choose, and
they endorse as what they were trying to choose, they are responsible
for the choice; since (on Kane’s view) agents are responsible only for
what they do freely, their responsibility entails that they choose freely.
    As McCall and Lowe point out, however, this kind of account does
not provide the agent with freedom-level control over the indeterministic
process that issues in her choice. They invoke Van Inwagen’s (2000) replay
argument to make the point. Suppose that God repeatedly replayed the
history of the universe, starting from a time just prior to a particular
undetermined, and allegedly free, decision. In these replays, sometimes
the agent’s choice would go one way, and sometimes it would go the
other (if she were equally inclined toward each option, we can expect that
about half the time she would /, w-ing in the remainder). Now, what
brings it about that she /s or ws? Nothing, apparently—nothing about
her, her reasons, desires, volitions, or tryings—except luck. She does not
control which alternative she settles for. The indeterministic causal pro-
cess settles that. So long as our actions, decisions, or deliberations are the
product of indeterministic event-causal processes, we do not exercise any
greater control over them than we would in a deterministic world. We do
not control the indeterministic process which settles how we act, decide
or deliberate (Strawson 2000; Mele 1999; Haji 2002). Some thinkers are
happy to concede that an event-causal libertarianism secures as much
freedom as an adequate compatibilist account; they deny, however, that
is secures any more (Clarke 2003, p. 96; cf. O’Connor 2000, p. 29). Since
event-causal libertarianism does not provide any freedom-level control
unavailable in a deterministic universe, it ought to be unacceptable to
libertarians.
    McCall and Lowe suggest that any libertarian account of free deci-
sion-making will be vulnerable to the luck objection so long as it

750   NEIL LEVY
predicates the indeterminism of discrete events. For any such undeter-
mined event, and no matter how many such events there might be, the
luck argument will show that the agent failed to exercise freedom-level
control over how it turned out. Instead, they argue, an adequate liber-
tarianism will predicate the indeterminism of a continuous process. On
such a libertarianism, an undetermined decision can be freely made for
reasons, in such a manner that is not due to chance. Thus, the agent
exercises freedom-level control over her decision, by exercising
freedom-level control over the process of deliberation.
    McCall and Lowe ask to imagine an agent, Jane, who is deliberating
about whether to vacation in Hawaii or in Colorado. Like the agents
Kane focuses upon in his account of free will (exactly like them, since
the case is borrowed from Kane (1996)), Jane has strong but not deci-
sive reasons for each option. Each option is epistemically open to her,
in the sense that she believes that she is able to choose to vacation in
either state, and to act upon her choice, and she does not yet know
which she will choose. Accordingly, Jane deliberates about her options.
If the entire process of deliberation is controlled by Jane, then she deci-
des freely.
    The deliberation process described by McCall and Lowe has the
following characteristics. First, throughout the process, Jane’s options
remain open to her, which is to say (at least) that the neural states that
correspond to either decision are continuously causally open. Second,
Jane exercise freedom-level control throughout the deliberative process
inasmuch as she not only weighs her reasons for and against each
option, she also weights them. An agent weighs reasons when she
attempts to discover how signiﬁcant, all things considered, they are for
her, given her values, preferences, goals and desires. An agent weights
reasons when she cannot weigh them because they lack ‘‘ready-made
weights’’ (p. 686). When reasons lack weights, the agent ‘‘must assign a
weight or degree of importance to each reason’’ (p. 687). I take it that
it is because Jane must weight, and not weigh, her reasons that indeter-
ministic decision-making is a continuous process and not an event.
Whereas there is an event that corresponds to weighing reasons,
weighting (as McCall and Lowe conceive it) is a process.
    Now, how do free agents go about weighting reasons? McCall and
Lowe argue that weighting is a rational process. It is Jane’s rational
judgment that assigns weights. Before she decides, she does not know
where she will vacation. ‘‘She employs her reason to ﬁnd out, using her
judgment to adjudicate between the competing claims’’ (p. 688). It is,
McCall and Storr tell us, Jane’s judgment that weighs and weights her
reasons, not random or unpredictable events. For this reason, ‘‘the pro-
cess is strictly under her control’’ (p. 688).


                                                  BAD LUCK ONCE AGAIN   751
                      II. Assessing the Process View
Kane’s version of event-causal libertarianism fails to deliver freedom-
level control that is unavailable on the best compatibilist accounts.
Does McCall and Lowe’s account do better? I shall argue that it does
not. I shall claim that it, too, is vulnerable to the luck objection: on the
process indeterminist view, the agent’s assignment of weights to her
reasons can only be a matter of chance.
   McCall and Lowe concede, as they must, that were God to replay
Jane’s decision, the result might turn out differently. They must
concede this because Jane’s decision was undetermined: only if one
alternative had suﬃcient conditions prior to her choice would it be the
case that the result could not turn out diﬀerently, and indeterminism
entails the absence of such suﬃcient conditions. Nevertheless, they
insist, the diﬀerent outcomes would not be due to chance. Why not?
Because whatever Jane chose, ‘‘she would do so for a reason, and
something that happens for a reason does not happen by chance’’ (pp.
684–5). But Kane can make exactly the same claim. Kane argues that
agents like Jane are responsible for their decisions because whichever
choice she makes she was trying to make, and she was trying to make
it because she had (strong though not decisive) reasons for it. No mat-
ter how she decides, on Kane’s view, she decides for reasons.
   Why is Kane’s account widely held to be inadequate, despite the fact
that on it agents make decisions for reasons? The objection is this: on
Kane’s view reasons do not explain the very decision that is held to be
the locus of free agency. The agent’s reasons explain why she is choos-
ing between these options, and not others (Jane’s vacation deliberations
will not end with her deciding to vacation in Afghanistan, or to take
up yoga). But they do not explain her choosing Hawaii over Colorado,
or vice-versa. In other words, the luck objection focuses on the contras-
tive fact, <that the agent chooses to / rather than to w>, even though
she has strong reasons for both. What explains this contrastive fact?
Invoking the agent’s reasons do not help: they have, as it were, got her
this far, but since (by hypothesis) she does not have decisive reasons
for /-ing or for w-ing, they can take her no further. Instead, the
contrastive decision is left to chance. Nothing about the agent, her
character, judgment or reasons, explains the contrastive fact; it seems
that it is a matter of chance which option she chooses.
   If McCall and Lowe are to avoid the luck objection, it is not enough
for them simply to point out that on their model agents choose for
reasons. Instead, they must show that the agent’s free choice itself is
explained by reasons (or, in any case, explained by something other
than chance). In other words, the reasons explanation must apply to
the contrastive fact, <that Jane chooses Hawaii over Colorado>.

752   NEIL LEVY
Their model cannot explain this contrastive fact, and therefore does
not constitute an advance over Kane’s, I contend. The central element
of their account, the insistence that agents weight, and not merely
weigh, their reasons ensures that McCall and Lowe are unable to
explain the relevant contrastive fact.
   Consider how an agent might go about assigning weights to her
reasons. Suppose, ﬁrst, that Jane assigns weights to surﬁng and to
white-water rafting, and that this assignment is made without any ref-
erence to what her reasons are prior to the assignment. In that case,
the assignment is entirely arbitrary. If Jane’s weightings are not to be
arbitrary, they had better be something that she does in the light of her
reasons. On the other hand, Jane’s weighting had better not be done
simply by her discovering what weights her reasons have for her: if
that’s all weighting comes down to, it is merely a more indirect manner
of weighing. Weighting had better be done in the light of reasons, with-
out being done for reasons.
   By ensuring that weighting is done in the light of reasons, McCall
and Lowe avoid the charge that Jane’s weighting is entirely arbitrary:
Jane will not choose Afghanistan or yoga when she deliberates between
Colorado and Hawaii. In this sense, Jane chooses for reasons. But the
fact that McCall and Lowe must explain is, once again, not that
<whichever option Jane chooses she chooses because she has reasons
in favor of it>. Instead, it is the contrastive fact <that Jane assigns a
greater weight to one of the options for which she has reasons than the
other for which she has roughly equal reasons>. That Jane’s weighting
is made in the light of reasons ensures that the ﬁrst fact is explained,
but her reasons are necessarily powerless to explain the second, con-
trastive, fact. Jane has (prior to her weighting of her reasons) reasons
for both options, but no decisive reasons for either. Her reasons got
her this far, but they can take her no further. If her reasons explained
that contrastive fact then she would not be weighting them; she’d be
weighing them. There cannot be a reasons explanation for the weight-
ing of reasons, because the reasons that would explain the weighting
are the weighted reasons themselves. There is, once again, a reasons
explanation available of why Jane deliberates between Colorado and
Hawaii, and not Afghanistan or yoga, but if Jane’s decision assigns a
weight to her reasons, then a reasons explanation of that decision itself
cannot be given.
   What does explain the contrastive fact that Jane assigns a greater
weight to, say, surﬁng than to white-water rafting? We can say about
this weighting almost precisely what we said about the analogous deci-
sion of an agent who satisﬁes Kane’s conditions on free choice. What
brings it about that she /s or ws (where /-ing is assigning a greater


                                                BAD LUCK ONCE AGAIN   753
weight to surﬁng and w-ing is assigning a greater weight to white water
rafting)? Nothing—nothing about her, her reasons, desires, volitions, or
tryings—except luck. She does not control which alternative she weights
more heavily; it’s simply a matter of chance. We do not control the
indeterministic process which settles how we assign weights. We do not
exercise freedom-level control over the very element that is supposed to
ensure our freedom. Since McCall and Lowe’s account of indeterminist
free will is vulnerable to the same objection that ensures that Kane’s is
no advance over an adequate compatibilism, it is not itself an advance
over Kane’s view.
   MccCall and Lowe hoped that their account would ﬁnally deliver
the unﬂawed statement of libertarianism the lack of which Wiggins
(1973) lamented more than three decades ago. By the standards they
set themselves, they have failed. If it is possible to formulate an
account of libertarianism that avoids the luck objection, without of
course suﬀering from some other ﬂaw at least as serious, we have yet
to see it. Wiggins’s call remains unanswered.

                               References
Clarke, Randolph (2003) Libertarian Accounts of Free Will (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press).
Haji, Ishtiyaque (2002) Deontic Morality and Control (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press).
Kane, Robert (1996) The Signiﬁcance of Free Will (New York: Oxford
    University Press).
McCall, Storrs and Lowe, E.J. (2005) ‘‘Indeterminist Free Will,’’ Phi-
    losophy and Phenomenological Research 70: 681–690.
Mele, Alfred (1999) ‘‘Ultimate Responsibility and Dumb Luck,’’ Social
    Philosophy and Policy 16: 274–293.
O’Connor, Timothy (2000) Persons and Causes: The Metaphysics of
    Free Will (New York: Oxford University Press).
Strawson, Galen (2000) ‘‘The Unhelpfulness of Indeterminism,’’ Philos-
    ophy and Phenomenological Research 60: 149–156.
Van Inwagen, Peter (2000) ‘‘Free Will Remains a Mystery,’’ Philosophi-
    cal Perspectives 14: 1–19
Wiggins, David (1973) ‘‘Towards a Reasonable Libertarianism,’’ in Ted
    Honderich (ed.) Essays on Freedom of Action (London: Routledge).




754   NEIL LEVY
