Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
Vol. LXXVII No. 3, November 2008
 2008 International Phenomenological Society




The Determinists Have Run Out of
Luck—For a Good Reason
storrs mccall
McGill University


e.j. lowe
Durham University


In his paper ‘‘Bad luck once again’’ Neil Levy attacks our proof of the
consistency of libertarianism by reiterating a time-worn compatibilist
complaint.1 This is, that what is not determined must be due to chance.
If A has a choice of X or Y, neither X nor Y being causally deter-
mined, then if A chooses X it can only be by chance, never for a
reason. The only ‘‘reason’’ that could explain the choice of X over Y
would have to be a causally suﬃcient reason, which would rule out A’s
having a genuine choice in the ﬁrst place. Either X is causally necessi-
tated or X is realized by sheer luck. But that these are the only alter-
natives is untrue. The exercise of deliberative reason opens the way
between the Scylla of causal necessitation and the Charybdis of chance,
as we shall try to make clear.
   The central core of Levy’s argument is that any attempt to give a
reasons-based explanation of a contrastive fact must fail. A contrastive
fact is a fact of the kind ‘‘Jane decides to vacation in Hawaii rather
than Colorado,’’ or ‘‘Jane assigns a greater weight to surﬁng that to
white-water rafting.’’ In the last three paragraphs of his paper Levy
argues that Jane’s assigning more weight to surﬁng than to rafting can-
not be a reasons-based assignment, because, as he puts it, ‘‘the reasons
that would explain the weighting are the weighted reasons themselves.’’
Similarly, prior to making her Hawaii ⁄ Colorado decision, Jane has

1
    Neil Levy, ‘‘Bad Luck Once Again’’ (next article), discussing McCall and Lowe,
    ‘‘Indeterminist Free Will,’’ Philosophy and Phenomenological Research LXX (2005),
    pp. 681–690.


                 DETERMINISTS HAVE RUN OUT OF LUCK—FOR A GOOD REASON             745
reasons for both options, but no decisive reasons for either. As he says,
‘‘Her reasons have got her this far, but they can take her no further.’’
Lacking a decisive reason, by which Levy apparently means a reason
causally suﬃcient to produce Jane’s choice, her decision must be due to
pure chance or luck.
   Levy’s arguments are fallacious. Clearly, for him, a reason for A’s
doing or choosing to do X cannot count as ‘‘decisive’’ unless A’s hav-
ing that reason necessitates her doing X. It ‘‘explains’’ her action sim-
ply by excluding the possibility of any other course of action. But a
libertarian cannot accept such a notion of a ‘‘decisive reason.’’ For lib-
ertarians, A’s reason for doing X was ‘‘decisive’’ if and only if it was,
in fact, the reason for which A did X. The ‘‘decisive’’ reasons are just
those that the agent did act upon, as opposed to those she could have
acted upon but did not. Reasons which do not necessitate can still
explain why this course of action resulted rather than that, contrary to
Levy’s apparent assumption. And such reasons are absent altogether in
genuine cases of luck or chance.
   Levy suggests that our position is no better than the Kane’s. But we
suggest on the other hand that Levy’s objection is no better against
Kane’s position than it is against ours: it simply begs the question at
issue between the libertarians and their opponents. Levy has failed to
perceive what is distinctive about our position and makes it superior to
Kane’s, namely that the evaluation stage of deliberation is a continuous
indeterministic process rather than a punctuated series of chance
events. Despite what he says, the weighting of reasons can be reasons-
based, and a decision to act on the reasons for X rather than the reasons
for Y can be, and frequently is, rationally explicable and defensible. This
emerges clearly in the example of Jane’s vacation deliberations.
   Suppose that Jane asks Susan, a friend, to help her make up her
mind. She reviews with Susan the pros and cons of Hawaii versus Col-
orado, the luxury of a beach house, the incredible sunsets over the
Grand Canyon, the danger of trail horses stumbling, the expense of ﬂy-
ing halfway across the Paciﬁc, etc. Over a period of days, during which
time the two options remain continuously open and choosable, Jane
attempts to make precise the importance she attaches to these different
reasons pro and con. It turns out, perhaps, that Jane has an exagger-
ated fear of rattlesnakes, loves the smell of campﬁres, adores snorkeling
but has never forgotten the horror of the movie ‘‘Jaws,’’ etc. With Sus-
an’s help, she eventually arrives at a scale of weights attached to every
conceivable feature of the two alternative vacations, and is able to
articulate the reasons upon which her weighting system is constructed.
Finally, on the day of decision, she makes her controlled, considered,
reasons-based choice. Luck, or chance, does not enter into it. Jane’s

746   STORRS MCCALL AND E.J. LOWE
decision is the antithesis of tossing a coin. It is fully rational and yet,
both options continue to be physically possible future alternative
courses of action up until the moment Jane phones her travel agent.
If God were to order a re-play of Jane’s deliberation it is conceivable
that Jane’s weighting system might be slightly different, and that her
choice could go the other way. A situation of this kind is describable
as ‘‘two-way rational.’’
   The difﬁculty that some philosophers experience in grasping the pos-
sibility of controlled, indeterministic, rational, open-ended processes
which typically constitute deliberations may be explained by their
neglect of the concept of probabilistic causation. Although Humean
causes are invariably followed by their effects, probabilistic causes are
not. It is possible that during deliberation, the activity of the central
nervous system is best described as an indeterministic neurological
mechanism subject to the force of probabilistic causes, these causes cor-
responding to the various reasons and weightings of reasons that deli-
berators like Jane deal with. This is not to say that reasons are causes,
but only to suggest that probabilistic causation may be a useful concept
when studying deliberative processes. The notion of probabilistic causa-
tion completely undercuts the false Scylla ⁄ Charybdis dilemma of the
determinists, to which Levy appeals.
   When a deliberator is deliberating, the probabilities of each option
being selected vary continuously, with swings toward one option or
another as new considerations occur to the deliberator, or as she
attempts to justify her weighting system to a third party. Finally, with
the decision, each option’s probability moves smoothly and continu-
ously to assume the value of zero or one. In this model of libertarian
deliberation, there is room for probability, and for probabilistic causa-
tion, but no room for unadulterated chance or luck.
   A ﬁnal example, taken from judicial deliberation, shows that in some
cases it may prove not just mistaken, but even risky, for a determinist
to assert that a person’s choice of option X rather than option Y is
due to chance or luck. In June 2005 the Supreme Court of Canada
brought down a decision in the case of Chaoulli vs the Attorney Gen-
eral of Quebec which surprised many jurists. Chaoulli, a physician, had
a patient with a number of health problems who was deprived of the
timely care he needed by the long waiting times for hospital treatment.
Chaoulli had tried unsuccessfully over a period of years to have his
home-delivered medical services recognized and to operate an indepen-
dent private hospital, for which patients could purchase private health
insurance in addition to the public insurance that every Canadian pos-
sesses automatically. The Quebec government had refused to permit
such private insurance on the grounds that it violated the Canada


                DETERMINISTS HAVE RUN OUT OF LUCK—FOR A GOOD REASON    747
Health Insurance Act. However, Chaoulli argued that the lengthy wait-
ing times for certain surgical procedures, which inﬂicted needless pain
and suffering on patients and in some cases increased their risk of
mortality, infringed their rights as guaranteed in the Canadian Charter
of Human Rights. Section 7 of the Charter states that every citizen has
the right to life, liberty and security of the person. Chaoulli argued that
patients who were deprived of urgent health care when there was a
remedy through private insurance were being deprived of a fund-
amental Charter right, and to the great surprise of many Canadians the
court agreed with him. The Canada Health Act which guarantees
health care to all regardless of their ability to pay is a cornerstone of
Canadian society, and the Chaoulli decision, which may now force the
government to permit access to some forms of health care through
private insurance, is a landmark decision. Canada, it seems, is the only
OECD country which prohibits insurance for health care provided by
non-participating physicians.
   The Chaoulli decision is an example of a controlled, rational, inde-
terministic process. Its relevance to the libertarian ⁄ determinist debate
lies in (a) the unpredictability of, and surprise occasioned by, the
Supreme Court judgment, and (b) the great care which the participat-
ing judges took in comparing the legal weight of the Canada Health
Act with that of individual rights enshrined in the Charter. No doubt
the eventual decision arrived at could have gone the other way. But for
Neil Levy or anyone else to assert that the Supreme Court’s judgement
was arrived at ‘‘by luck,’’ or ‘‘by chance,’’ would be a bold and risky
move. To stand up and say this in a legal tribunal would be to invite
the charge of contempt of court. In throwing around the word ‘‘luck,’’
determinists should be careful.
   Summing up, there are in deliberation many contrastive facts which
admit of reasons-based explanations. The Supreme Court decision to
support individual Charter rights over the Canada Health Act is one of
them, and the reasons for and against this decision will surely be
argued for years to come. To say, with the compatibilists, that the deci-
sion was arrived at by luck adds nothing to the debate but obfuscation
and confusion.




748   STORRS MCCALL AND E.J. LOWE
