                                                  Uwe Meixner

                      New Perspectives for a
                       Dualistic Conception
                       of Mental Causation
         1. Nonphysical Causation of Physical Events?
It is a curious fact of the history of philosophy that so many philoso-
phers have complained about the incomprehensibility of nonphysical
mental causation of physical events, considering that most of the
many philosophical conceptions of causation on offer (i.e., regularity
theories, counterfactual theories, and probabilistic theories) do not give
any grounds for supposing that there is anything particularly incompre-
hensible about the nonphysical causation of physical events. It should
be noted that the principles of causal closure of the physical world —
constantly invoked against the nonphysical causation of the physical —
are neither principles of the logic of causation nor principles of physics,
but postulates of materialist metaphysics. As such, the closure princi-
ples are begging the very question which is at issue.
   But does not physics itself tell against the nonphysical causation of
the physical? It does not. In the first place, it is rather unclear whether
the concept of causation is indispensable for physics. The concept of
force is the place where causation must come into physics if it comes
into physics at all, and it must be admitted that there is much causal
talk surrounding that concept, even among physicists. But this causal
talk seems to be entirely due to extra-scientific motivations and asso-
ciations. For, regarded purely as a concept of physics, the (net) force a
particle is subjected to at a time t is definable (though not usually
defined) as the (net) change of momentum that the particle undergoes

Correspondence:
Uwe Meixner, Institute of Philosophy, University of Regensburg, D-93040
Regensburg, Germany. Email: uwe.meixner@psk.uni-regensburg.de

           Journal of Consciousness Studies, 15, No. 1, 2008, pp. 17–38
          Copyright    (c) Imprint Academic 2011
      For personal use only -- not for reproduction
      18                                  U. MEIXNER

      in an infinitesimally small interval of time surrounding t,1 in analogy
      to the definition of the particle’s (net) acceleration at t, which is
      defined as the (net) change of velocity that it undergoes in an infinites-
      imally small time-interval surrounding t. There certainly seems to be
      not a glimpse of causation in the suggested definition of force.
         It is alleged again and again that the nonphysical causation of phys-
      ical events is bound to violate received physics because it, allegedly,
      entails the violation of the law of the preservation of energy, or the
      violation of the law of the preservation of momentum. Repetition does
      not make false allegations any less false. First, in physics, the men-
      tioned preservation laws are always asserted under the condition that
      the physical system with regard to which they are asserted is a so-
      called closed system: that no energy or momentum is coming into the
      system from entities that are outside of it, or is going out of the system
      to entities outside of it. Now, physics is silent on the question whether
      the entire physical world is a closed system. Moreover, it does not
      seem to be an analytic truth that the physical world is such a system. It
      follows that in order to have the nonphysical causation of physical
      events conflict with the preservation laws, it is necessary to go beyond
      physics and to assume the metaphysical hypothesis that the physical
      world is a closed system.
         Making this assumption is a necessary condition for obtaining a
      conflict; but, note, it is not a sufficient one. For suppose, for the sake
      of the argument, the physical world were indeed a closed system. Con-
      sider then: does the occurrence of an instance of nonphysical causa-
      tion of a physical event necessarily entail that the sum total of energy
      or of momentum in the physical world is any greater or smaller than
      before — in spite of the physical world being a closed system, as we
      have supposed for the sake of the argument? Suppose the instance of
      nonphysical causation we are considering is due to a subjective expe-
      rience, which, in my view,2 is by natural (or nomological) necessity
      causally equivalent with a brain state, meaning that it has the same
      causes and the same effects as that brain state. It is evident that this
      kind of nonphysical causation, which is entirely in step with physical
      causation, need violate neither the law of the preservation of energy

[1] This definition follows Newton’s original formulation of his Second Law of Motion (see
    Newton, 1962, p. 13; what we call ‘momentum’, Newton, 1962, p. 1, calls ‘the quantity of
    motion’). Since it does not presuppose the constancy of mass, it is more general than the
    usual definition of force, according to which force is the product of mass and acceleration
    (at a given moment of time). It is, however, equivalent to this latter definition if constancy
    of mass is presupposed, as was done by Newton (but not by Einstein).
[2] For details, see Meixner (2004).

                 Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
             For personal use only -- not for reproduction
           A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 19

      nor the law of the preservation of momentum if it is true that physical
      causation violates neither law. And everybody agrees that physical
      causation violates neither of these two laws (the physical world being
      a closed system notwithstanding). Thus, there is no objection that
      comes from the direction of physics against the nonphysical causation
      of a physical event if this nonphysical causation is taken to be due to
      the — nomologically established — causal equivalence between brain
      states and nonphysical subjective experiences.
         Objector: But if nonphysical subjective experiences have causal conse-
         quences and are causally equivalent to brain states, then this will imply
         causal over-determination. This seems to me a serious drawback.
         Response: You should not let yourself be misled by the word,
         ‘over-determination’. Like the word ‘over-reaction’, it suggests that
         something untoward is going on. I would prefer the neutral expression
         ‘nomologically coordinated causation’ for designating the causal situa-
         tion that due to the laws of nature an event A that is a cause of event C
         cannot be a cause of C without an event B that is distinct from A being
         also a cause of C, and vice versa (regarding A and B). The manifest
         image of the psycho-physical relationship suggests that nomologically
         coordinated causation in fact occurs. It certainly cannot be ruled out on
         a priori grounds.

             2. Purely Nonphysical Causation of Physical Events
                        or: Free Nonphysical Agency
      But what about the nonphysical causation of physical events without
      equivalent physical causation, say, without any accompanying physi-
      cal causation at all? Would not the occurrence of nonphysical causa-
      tion of physical events without accompanying physical causation get
      into conflict with physics? It would not, not even under the metaphys-
      ical supposition that the physical world is a closed system: because an
      instance of nonphysical causation of a physical event without accom-
      panying physical causation would leave the sum total of energy and
      momentum unchanged. It would merely involve a redistribution of
      energy and momentum. Redistributions of energy and momentum are,
      of course, happening constantly, and normally, it seems, one need not
      invoke nonphysical causation for having them come about. But, as
      most modern physicists hold, at least some of these redistributions are
      not determined by the energy/momentum distributions of the past.3 If

[3]   Most physicists are following the lead of Max Born who wrote in 1926 that the paths of
      particles ‘are determined only insofar as they are constrained by the principle of energy
      and momentum conservation; apart from this, the value distribution of the y-function


                 Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
             For personal use only -- not for reproduction
     20                                  U. MEIXNER

     this is true, then the physical past leaves a lacuna of determination that
     need not be left entirely to chance, but that can be, at least partly, filled
     by additional determination coming purely from a nonphysical
     source. In an indeterministic physical world, there is room for the non-
     physical — specifically, the nonphysical mental — causation of phys-
     ical events without accompanying physical causation.
        Let me call such causation purely nonphysical mental causation of
     the physical. Purely nonphysical mental causation of the physical, if it
     occurred, would not originate in subjective experiences, since subjec-
     tive experiences are causes only in unison with their physical causal
     equivalents (at least in my eyes). Purely nonphysical mental causation
     of the physical would originate in the mental subject, in the non-
     physical individual, wholly present at each moment of its existence,
     which is the centre of consciousness: in the nonphysical substantial
     self.4 Since purely nonphysical mental causation of the physical
     presupposes physical indeterminism and originates in a substantial
     nonphysical mental agent, I will also call this kind of causation free
     nonphysical agency.
        Supposing that free nonphysical agency exists — physicalists, of
     course, do everything to make this supposition appear absurd — the
     fundamental question to be answered by dualists is this: how does free
     agency fit naturally into a dualistic framework — in such a manner
     that it does not get into conflict with anything we know about the
     brain, perhaps even in such a manner that free agency is positively
     supported by some things we know about the brain?
        As far as we bodily existing human beings know, the nonphysical
     mental subject does not exist without a functioning brain.5 But
     although the nonphysical mental subject, as far as we know, depends
     for its nonphysical existence on the brain, it is not a superfluous
     ghostly excrescence of the brain, but has certain evolved functions, via
     the brain, for the organism as a whole. Its first function is that of being
     the centre of another nonphysical product of the brain: of conscious-
     ness. A mental subject is a subject of consciousness. Its second func-
     tion is that of being a free agent, acting, via the brain and body, on the


    determines only the probability that a particle will follow a particular path’ (cited and
    translated in Torretti, 1999, p. 333).
[4] In Meixner (2004), many reasons (in my view, good reasons) are provided why the mental
    subject, the self, should be conceived of as a nonphysical substance. I cannot repeat these
    reasons here, but they have to do with the nature of consciousness, without reference to the
    nature of action.
[5] It is metaphysically possible that the mental subject exist without a functioning brain, but
    in the normal course of nature we know of this is never actually the case.

                Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
            For personal use only -- not for reproduction
           A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 21

      behalf of the organism, in the service of its survival (or at least its
      well-being), within a certain scope of prior indetermination.6 In addi-
      tion to being a subject of consciousness, a mental subject is a subject
      of free agency — of free agency that is guided by the (non-determina-
      tive) information provided to it in consciousness.
         In the light of this last remark, it emerges that the first function of
      the mental subject — its being the subject of consciousness — is sub-
      ordinate to its second function — its being the subject of free agency.
      And incidentally, we can now see what consciousness is good for (tak-
      ing this seemingly teleological question, as evolution theorists are
      wont to do, in the following non-teleological sense: what is the reason
      for the persistence of consciousness in the course of evolution): it
      effectively provides the subject of consciousness with the (non-deter-
      minative) information needed for acting freely and successfully on the
      behalf of the organism, the organism to which consciousness (pre-
      cisely speaking: a particular consciousness) and its subject (a particu-
      lar subject of consciousness) are connected; cf. Meixner (2004;
      2006).7 As Michael Polanyi put it several decades ago:
         Descending therefore from the person of a great man down to the level
         of the newborn infant and beyond that to the lowest animals, we find a
         continuous series of centres whose a-critical decisions account

[6] Avoidance is one important type of antecedently undetermined physical action that a men-
    tal subject freely undertakes for its organism. It will hardly be considered surprising that
    this view of avoidance collides with the view presented in Dennett (2003, p. 60): ‘If we
    want to make sense of the biological world, we need a concept of avoidance that applies
    liberally to events in the history of life on Earth, whether or not that history is determined.
    This, I submit, is the proper concept of avoidance, as real as avoidance could ever be.’ I
    agree with Dennett that we need a concept of avoidance that applies liberally to events in
    the history of life on Earth. But if we want to make sense of the biological world, we pre-
    cisely cannot assume that that history is determined. I submit, we cannot make sense of
    conscious life — an important part of the biological world — without assuming that the
    history of life on Earth is not determined (for more on this, see Meixner, 2006). We there-
    fore need an incompatibilist concept of avoidance, which, incidentally, is also the normal
    concept: one cannot normally say that a determined object avoids anything.
[7] In contrast to what is argued in Meixner (2006) and Meixner (2004), Chalmers (1996,
    p. 120) believes that consciousness does not serve a physical function that could not be
    achieved without it; consequently, he is sceptical about an evolutionary explanation of
    consciousness. But Chalmers erroneously believes that the logical possibility that con-
    sciousness achieves in the physical world merely what can be achieved without it (in other
    words, the logical possibility of a zombie twin) shows the evolutionary irrelevance of con-
    sciousness. Not so; something more than a mere logical possibility would be required for
    that. Dretske (1995, p. 122), on the other hand, holds that ‘the function of conscious states
    is to make creatures conscious — of whatever they need to be conscious to survive and
    flourish’. For him, the non-redundantly advantageous function of consciousness in the
    evolutionary process is obvious. His physicalistic stance, however, blinds him to the real
    force of the problem which he formulates clearly enough a few pages earlier (ibid., p. 119):
    ‘What use is experience in cognition if the same job (the processing of information needed
    for the determination of appropriate action) can be achieved without it?’

                 Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
             For personal use only -- not for reproduction
      22                                 U. MEIXNER

           ultimately for every action of sentient individuality. Thus the personal
           pole of commitment retains its autonomy everywhere, exercising its
           calling within a material milieu which conditions but never fully deter-
           mines its actions (Polanyi, 1969, p. 397).

                   3. The Brain as an Apparent DOMINDAR
      The difficult question is how the nonphysical mental subject manages
      to do all this. If there is an answer, it must be provided by the brain. I
      maintain that the brain is, among other things, (1) an instrument for
      the detection of macroscopic indetermination in the environment of
      the organism (which environment includes, as its limit, the organism
      itself) and (2) an instrument for restricting the detected macroscopic
      indetermination to the advantage of the organism. In short, I maintain
      that the brain is a DOMINDAR:
            Detector Of Macroscopic INDetermination, And Restrictor.
      This is a bold assertion because it has not seemed to most philosophi-
      cally tuned people that there is enough macroscopic indetermination
      in the physical world8 to be detected or restricted by anything. This, I
      believe, is a false impression.
         But let me first show that the brain certainly seems to be a
      DOMINDAR. Suppose someone, George (precisely speaking:
      George-in-the-body), fleeing from his deadly enemies, comes to a
      crossroads. What is his brain doing? It prominently presents — in the
      foreground of consciousness, to the subject of George’s conscious-
      ness, which in fact is George himself, I maintain — four alternative
      items as things he could do within the immediate future (and in the
      background of consciousness, an indefinite number of further alterna-
      tive items as things he could also do): turn back, turn right, turn left,
      go straight ahead. If this presentation of alternatives of action is
      veridical — and it certainly seems veridical to George (and would
      seem veridical to us if we were in George’s place) — then George’s
      brain has served as a detector of macroscopic indetermination in the
      environment of its organism; for the presentation in question is
      veridical only if at the time of the presentation, given the entire physi-
      cal past and all the laws of nature, the organism can indeed move in
      one or another of four alternative ways (at least!): turn back, turn
      right, turn left, go straight ahead.

[8]   Indetermination is of course not in the physical world in the sense of being more or less
      literally a part of it. The quantity of indetermination in the physical world at a time t
      depends on the quantity of physical and physically possible further world-courses that
      veer away from each other after time t.

                  Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
              For personal use only -- not for reproduction
     A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 23

   Objector: I reject this interpretation of what George is presented with in
   experience. George is not presented with four alternative actions he can
   realize, but with four alternative actions each of will be realized
   depending on his choice. The latter interpretation obviously allows
   George’s experience to be veridical even if determinism is true, since
   George’s choice may itself be perfectly determined.
   Response: The second interpretation of what George is presented with
   in experience collapses into the first interpretation if one adds to the
   second interpretation: George experiences that he has four choices open
   to him. I claim that George indeed experiences (i.e., is under the impres-
   sion) that he has four choices open to him. In fact, this experience is
   contained in his experience of having four alternative actions open to
   him. On pain of infinite regress, it is not possible to argue once again:
   George is not presented with four alternative choices he can make, but
   with four alternative choices each of which will be realized depending
   on his choice.
   Objector: This amounts to claiming that George, before acting and
   choosing, experiences his alternative possible actions and choices of
   action to be causally undetermined.
   Response: Precisely. And this experience is veridical only if at the time of
   the experience, given the entire physical past and all the laws of nature,
   George’s organism can indeed move in more than one way. Thus the
   experience betokens (veridically or not) macroscopic physical indeter-
   mination. It also betokens nonphysical psychological indetermination,
   since a choice of action is causally undetermined at a time only if it is still
   open given all antecedent factors (including the inner — psychological
   — states of the person, whether physical or nonphysical). Nonphysical
   indetermination, however, is not my concern here.
   And George’s brain not only appears to be a detector of macro-
scopic indetermination in the described situation, it also appears to be
the restrictor of this indetermination. For once George has decided
what to do (on the basis of the conscious experiences his brain makes
him have), his brain will implement his decision and accordingly
appear to restrict the previously apparent indetermination in the envi-
ronment of George’s body. Say, George effectively decides to go
straight ahead, likely enough in the light of a brief rational deliberation,
taking into account, say, the high probability of a helicopter waiting for
him one mile ahead; then it is his brain that makes George’s body (and
with it George-in-the-body) go straight ahead (in the way so well
explored by neurophysiology), excluding (or ‘closing’) thereby all the
other alternatives for George and his body that previously appeared to
be open to him at this particular juncture of his career.



          Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
      For personal use only -- not for reproduction
      24                                 U. MEIXNER

         Thus, it must be concluded that the brain seems to be a DOMINDAR.
      But is it in fact? If the macroscopic physical world is a deterministic
      world, or practically deterministic world, then the appearance that the
      brain is a DOMINDAR is an illusion;9 for then there is certainly not
      enough indetermination in the macroscopic physical world to be
      either detected or restricted. But, if it is assumed that macroscopic
      determinism rules in the physical world, one may well ask why the
      brain in each moment of conscious existence presents to the subject of
      consciousness alternatives of action which that subject does not in fact
      have, systematically misleading it. If macroscopic determinism rules
      in the physical world and we nevertheless for some reason have to
      have consciousness, why then do we not at least have a consciousness
      that truthfully tells us in each moment of conscious existence: this,
      and this alone, is what I must do? I have not seen a plausible answer to
      this question.
           Objector: But in fact there is an easy answer to it: the decision of the per-
           son is part of what determines the course of events. The person cannot
           know his or her own decision in advance before deliberation. This
           epistemic point is perfectly compatible with the assumption that the
           result of the decision and the decision itself is nonetheless causally
           determined by antecedent factors.
           Response: We have agreed above that George experiences his alterna-
           tive possible actions and choices of action to be causally undetermined,
           that is: as being not determined by all antecedent factors, where the
           phrase ‘by all antecedent factors’ must, in reason, mean: by all factors
           antecedent to his decision, since he also experiences — i.e., is under the
           impression — that which choice of action he actually makes and which
           course of action he actually takes will (though previously undeter-
           mined) be determined by his decision, whatever that decision will be.
           This, in total, is what George experiences, call it: the experience of lib-
           erty. And if determinism is assumed to be true, then this experience of
           George and the similar experiences we all have in practically all the
           moments of our conscious lives must be regarded as illusory and need
           an explanation of why they nevertheless occur to this massive extent.
           Have you offered such an explanation? You have sketched a psycholog-
           ical mechanism that with some plausibility produces the experience of
           liberty even if determinism is true — only with some plausibility, since
           not always when we do not know how things will turn out the impres-
           sion arises in us that it is undetermined how they will turn out. It must
           also be pointed out that one can have — and often has in fact — the
           experience of liberty even though one knows with perfect certainty in
           advance which choice of action one is going to make and which course

[9]   The brain may still be a potential DOMINDAR — but a potential DOMINDAR that is
      never actualized.

                  Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
              For personal use only -- not for reproduction
    A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 25

   of action one is going to take (say, by having made up one’s mind
   regarding the eventuality in question long beforehand). Your ‘epistemic
   point’, therefore, falls short of explaining the experience of liberty.
   Moreover, my demand for explanation did, as a matter of fact, not
   require an answer to the question of how the experience of liberty is pos-
   sible even under determinism (this is the question you addressed), but it
   required an answer to the question of what is the point (mainly, the bio-
   logical point) of the experience of liberty even under determinism. I still
   haven’t seen a plausible answer to that question.
   Objector: How can one already know — I mean, know — how one will
   decide and still be at liberty — still be undetermined by all factors ante-
   cedent to one’s decision — regarding how one will decide?
   Response: Now you are changing the subject.

    4. The Brain as an Instrumental DOMINDAR and the
                      Libet-Experiment
This is the appropriate place for briefly addressing what the much-
discussed Libet-experiment of the 1980s means for the brain’s being a
DOMINDAR. A detector of macroscopic indetermination and
restrictor can be such a thing in two ways: in its own right, or instru-
mentally for something else. As I have presented matters, the brain is
— among many, many other things, of course — an instrumental
DOMINDAR for something else, namely, for the nonphysical self,
which is at once the subject of consciousness and of agency. In my
opinion, the brain is an instrument of detection and restriction of
indetermination for that self, and not in its own right. This view of the
matter has the advantage of not turning consciousness and self into
phenomena that are superfluous from the biological point of view.
   But it does have the disadvantage that it is vulnerable to a standard
interpretation of the result of the Libet-experiment. This experiment is
standardly taken to show that the brain does not wait for the self to ini-
tiate action, that it initiates action on its own, the self merely echoing
the brain’s decision. If this were the correct view of the matter, then
the brain could still be a DOMINDAR — nothing in the standard
interpretation of the result of the Libet-experiment tells against that.
But it would have to be a DOMINDAR in its own right, and not instru-
mentally for the self.
   Fortunately, the standard interpretation of the result of the Libet-
experiment is by no means forced upon us. The standard interpretation
is based on the problematic assumption that the moment when the self
decides what to do is identical with the moment it becomes conscious
of deciding what to do. Suppose the self’s decision is in fact, as it

          Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
      For personal use only -- not for reproduction
26                               U. MEIXNER

should be, infinitesimally prior to the instrumental initiation of action
by the brain, but the self becomes conscious of deciding only after the
brain has already instrumentally initiated action, and therefore only
after the self has already decided. Is this an absurd supposition? It is
not. For making an informed decision, the self needs to be conscious
of the facts relevant to the decision prior to making the decision; but
for making the decision, and for making it in an informed way, the self
certainly does not need to be conscious of making the decision at the
very same time it makes it.
   Being conscious of (presently) making a decision is not relevant to
making the decision, neither regarding the intending of the decision
(of course not), nor regarding its being actually made. The conscious-
ness of making a decision has a different role to play in the economy
of action, a role for which it is not necessary that the consciousness of
making a decision occur at the very time when the decision is being
made. Well, what is that role? It is this: the fact that we have decided
so-and-so is likely to be in its turn something we need to be informed
of in order to make further informed decisions; but for remembering
that we have decided so-and-so, we must have been conscious of
deciding so-and-so; this is why we become conscious of (presently)
deciding so-and-so.
   And the consciousness of a state of affairs P being (presently) the
case is always somewhat later than the actual fact of P’s being the
case; it is hardly surprising that the consciousness of making a deci-
sion is no exception to this general rule, which is due to the depend-
ence of consciousness on neurophysiology. What is important from
the biological point of view is that, in general, the consciousness of
something being presently the case does not come too late for the self
to react beneficially to the actual fact which is already in the past
(which, note, need not preclude its still obtaining at present). For
example, it is important from the biological point of view that, usually,
the consciousness of several alternative possibilities being open does
not come too late for the self to make a decision on which one of them
is to be realized, and that, usually, the consciousness of making a deci-
sion does not come too late for the self to revoke that decision —
which decision, indeed, has already been made, but which might still
be kept from becoming fully effective.
     Objector: I find this interpretation of the result of the Libet-experiment
     — an interpretation also discussed by other authors (for example,
     Rosenthal, 2002) — quite problematic for several reasons. First, it is
     problematic to call something that takes place without the person being
     aware of it a decision.

            Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
        For personal use only -- not for reproduction
  A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 27

Response: But the person is aware of its taking place — only a bit later
than it is actually taking place, and, as I said, this lag of awareness is
quite unavoidable.
Objector: Still, it seems a highly plausible philosophical view about the
nature of decisions that it is essential to a decision that the person taking
the decision is aware of taking the decision in taking it.
Response: Suppose one insisted on claiming that it is essential to notic-
ing X that the person noticing X is aware of noticing X in noticing X.
This view would be quite unhelpful in explaining why we often react to
a stimulus X before being able to report that we have noticed X. We
should not insist on a philosophical idea if it is unhelpful.
Objector: But you must explain the illusion of the timing of our deci-
sions. When we become aware of our decisions, we certainly do not
have the impression of having decided a while earlier but we have the
impression of just taking the decision at that very moment. So if it were
indeed the case that we make our decisions before being aware of them,
we would be quite radically wrong about the moment of our decisions.
Response: According to the Libet-experiment, the brain initiates (the
process that leads to) the movement c. 550 msec before the movement
and c. 350 msec before the first awareness that one is going to move.
Therefore, if the self makes its decision infinitesimally prior to the initi-
ation of movement by the brain — as I have proposed — then the timing
of that decision in consciousness is erroneous by c. 350 msec. Do you
call this ‘being quite radically wrong about the moment of our deci-
sions’? I do not think that it is radically wrong from the biological point
of view — the point of view that really counts. I have already explained
above why we become aware of our decisions at all; it remains for me to
explain in a different manner than I already did why we become aware
of them as being simultaneous to our being aware of them, which,
indeed, is an illusion (though a biologically benign one, as I have
argued). However, let me emphasize first that an explanation of this
illusion is required of any account of the Libet-experiment, not just of
mine. In my view, then, the reason for the said illusion is simply that,
due to our neurological organization, we cannot represent in the con-
scious present an unconscious decision of ours that occurred c. 350
msec earlier (than the conscious present) as a — conscious or uncon-
scious? — decision of ours that occurred c. 350 msec earlier than now.
For representing the decision in question as being past for such a short
time is biologically unimportant, and therefore evolution made no neu-
rological provisions for having it represented as being past for such a
short time in consciousness (that is, in naked consciousness, without
measuring instruments coming to its aid). Since there was no advantage
to be gained from the alternative course, evolution took the simplest and
most economical course. A most welcome side-effect of the resulting
benign illusion is that the unity of the self as agent and of the self as sub-
ject of consciousness is underscored for the self, strengthening the self’s

       Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
   For personal use only -- not for reproduction
28                               U. MEIXNER

     awareness of that very unity (which, indeed, is nothing less than the
     evolutionary raison d’être of the self).
     Objector: Be that as it may, but in many cases we do something without
     any antecedent decision and nonetheless experience our doings as
     spontaneously brought about by ourselves. You do not seem to have a
     plausible response to the Libet challenge for these cases.
     Response: If we experience our doings as spontaneously brought about
     by ourselves, then we invariably experience them as something we have
     decided to do. If we experience our doings not as something we have
     decided to do, then we do not experience them as spontaneously
     brought about by ourselves, but as something that is happening to us,
     spontaneously or not. Note that the experienced decision need not be
     distinguished in consciousness as being antecedent to the also experi-
     enced onset of the action; it may also appear — and often does in fact
     appear — to be simultaneous to the latter. This is the phenomenal situa-
     tion. Now, what are you trying to tell me? That we sometimes experi-
     ence certain doings as spontaneously brought about by us without our
     decision? I have just argued that there are no such experiences. That we
     sometimes experience certain doings as spontaneously brought about
     by us, with our decision, but without any antecedent decision of ours?
     As I just said, this often happens, but it is no challenge to my position.
     That we sometimes experience certain doings as spontaneously brought
     about by us, with our (experienced) decision, but in fact there is no
     effective decision of ours, antecedent or otherwise? Yes, we can be —
     and sometimes are — under the illusion that we spontaneously bring
     about certain doings, with our decision — while these doings are, as a
     matter of fact, entirely due to other factors and while there is no real
     (effective) decision of ours (see Wegner, 2002). But my point has been
     that the Libet-experiment does not force us to accept that we are always
     under such an illusion. This is my response to the Libet challenge, cov-
     ering all cases under that challenge.

               5. How the Brain Is a DOMINDAR and
                    Macroscopic Indeterminism
So much for the Libet-experiment. Now, it is a necessary condition of
the brain’s being a DOMINDAR that there is indetermination in the
macroscopic physical world, indetermination which is relevant to the
survival of organisms, and enough of it to be detectable. Suppose the
brain is in fact a DOMINDAR and there is a lot of biologically rele-
vant indetermination in the macroscopic physical world. How does
the brain detect it? And how does the brain transform what it has
detected into the consciousness of possibilities of action now open to
the subject of consciousness and agency?


            Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
        For personal use only -- not for reproduction
           A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 29

        Nobody, to date, knows the answer to these questions. Nobody, it
     seems to me, looks for an answer to these questions. The reason for
     this situation is that most researchers regard the macroscopic physical
     world as evolving deterministically (or practically deterministically,
     if they wish to honour what they believe to be the, as it were,
     subatomically small probability that quantum indeterminism makes
     itself felt in the physical macro-world). The fact that much of what
     happens in the physical macro-world is entirely beyond the pale of
     predictability does not disturb the usual researchers in their dogmatic
     slumbers; they have so thoroughly internalized the lesson from chaos
     theory that unpredictability is no sure sign of indetermination, that
     they ignore the fact that unpredictability must nevertheless be taken to
     indicate indetermination with a probability greater than 0.5 — in the
     absence of contrary evidence (and an a priori belief in determinism is
     no such evidence). It also does not disturb them that if determinism is
     taken to rule in the physical macro-world, then brains must be
     regarded as incessantly providing their users with ineradicable illu-
     sions that have no evolutionary point to them at all.10
        Objector: If we accept that what we experience is that our decision is
        undetermined by all antecedent factors, then, under determinism, we
        would indeed labour under an illusion, and an ineradicable one at that.
        But why would the illusion be pointless? The illusion is necessary to
        motivate deliberation, and thus the illusion is itself a causal factor in
        bringing about a rational decision.
        Response: I have no idea what could be the point of deliberation and
        rational decision under determinism. Note that determinism implies
        that what course of action you will now take has forever been fixed
        (such that the Laplacian Demon could have foretold the course of action
        you will now take, say, 2000 million years ago). Deliberation and ratio-
        nal decision are, therefore, irrelevant under determinism; if they never-
        theless occur, they themselves, far from being ‘causal factors’ for
        anything, have forever been determined to occur — even long before
        the beginning of biological evolution — as inward epiphenomena that
        absurdly accompany the outward course of events.



[10] In Wegner (2002) a large amount of psychological material is compiled to demonstrate the
     thorough illusoriness of the experience of free personal authorship of action; but the mate-
     rial is far from inductively establishing the desired conclusion. Moreover, Wegner pre-
     supposes a rather primitive Humean model of apparent personal authorship, the model of
     ‘apparent mental causation’, which model is far from compelling. Wegner has nothing to
     say about the evolutionary point of the alleged illusion, which refuses to go away even if it
     is — allegedly — exposed. It cannot have anything to do with human social life (ibid.,
     p. 342), since the experience of free personal authorship of action would also occur, we
     may be sure, in an isolated human being.

                Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
            For personal use only -- not for reproduction
30                            U. MEIXNER

   I have a few speculations to offer as to how the brain is a
DOMINDAR. First of all, the brain is a fallible DOMINDAR: not
always is there in fact the indetermination in the physical world that
the brain tells us there is. Second, the brain does not tell us of all the
indetermination there is in the environment of our body. We may be
sure that some of this indetermination is not noticed by the brain at all,
indetermination that is merely at the subatomic level, for instance. But
probably there is also macroscopic indetermination in the environ-
ment of our body (which environment is taken to include, as its limit,
the body itself, as I said) that the brain does not notice. From the
indetermination the brain notices, it selects the indetermination worth
reporting according to relevancy (for the survival, or at least the well-
being, of the organism) and restrictability (since the biological point
of detecting and reporting indetermination is to subsequently restrict
that indetermination advantageously). I am not saying, however, that
all physical indetermination that the brain reports to the self is biologi-
cally relevant to the organism and restrictable by the self of the organ-
ism. As in other areas of life, we may count on it that there is no perfect
fit between a biological faculty and its evolutionary purpose. Some-
times a biological faculty is in error, failing to fulfill its evolutionary
purpose, and sometimes it works — ‘meaninglessly’ — in excess of it.
   Finally, the indetermination selected by the brain as worth reporting
is classified according to relative importance, so that the self, in con-
sciousness, is ultimately presented with a relatively clear spectrum of
weighted alternatives open to it. Then the decision what to do is up to
the self.
   The crucial question is this: how does the brain manage to notice
action-relevant macroscopic physical indetermination? The brain is a
macroscopic organ monitoring the rest of the body, the outside of the
body, and — least of all — itself. The monitoring is effected via the
transmission of physical signals. The brain registers indetermination
at a time t in the system that consists of the brain, the rest of the body,
and the outside of the body if the totality of the physical signals pro-
cessed by the brain strikes at t a symmetrical pattern regarding future
developments. In such a situation it becomes impossible for the brain
to predict how, in certain respects, things will continue to happen. The
brain registers this situation as a case of indetermination, and as a case
of indetermination in which it is itself involved: in such a manner that
the indetermination extends also to a relevant part of its own future
activity. The brain may sometimes be wrong about this; for although
in some cases the brain cannot predict how things will continue to
happen, it is doubtless in some of these cases entirely determined how

          Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
      For personal use only -- not for reproduction
           A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 31

     things will continue to happen — due to factors that are hidden to the
     brain. The important thing is that we cannot assume a priori that the
     brain must always be wrong when it translates unpredictability as
     indetermination. More likely than not, the brain is more often than not
     quite right in making this translation. In support of this position I offer
     the following evolution-theoretic considerations.

               6. An Argument for Macroscopic Indeterminism
     Evolution has led to the development of organisms with a monitoring
     and governing organ: the brain. But if determinism ruled in the physi-
     cal macro-world, brains, we can take it, would never have developed.
     For what would have been the evolutionary advantage of their devel-
     oping? If determinism ruled in the physical macro-world, then there
     would be nothing in that world that needed controlling, and hence
     nothing would need to be monitored or governed by any organ. For
     under determinism, everything happens automatically, with absolute
     precision and with inexorable necessity. Thus, unless there is indeter-
     mination of considerable extent in the physical macro-world, the
     emergence of brains is absolutely pointless from the evolutionary
     point of view. This is true if brains are regarded as entities that, under
     macroscopic physical indeterminism, would be DOMINDARs. But it
     is also true if we consider brains merely as highly complex multi-
     possibility reactors, much more complex than other multi-possibility
     reactors (cars, pianos, computers, etc.) but nevertheless reactors of
     the multi-possibility type, which, if they function well, yield —
     according to the laws of nature that govern them, without any margin
     of indetermination — a specific exclusive physical output for each
     actualized physical input in a set that comprises several (in principle)
     possible physical inputs.11 Under macroscopic physical determinism,
     the structural complexity of every apparatus, natural or artificial, is
     pointless that makes in advance provision for realizing at a time t one
     or another of several incompatible alternatives regarding the physical
     macro-world,12 where each of these alternatives is possible at time t.
     Why provide for the realization of one or another among several such
     alternatives — even if only in such a manner that the realization

[11] Multi-possibility reactors resemble Gary Drescher’s situation-action machines (in
     Drescher, 1991). But DOMINDARs are something else than Drescher’s choice machines.
     If we compare a multi-possiblity reactor to a piano, then a DOMINDAR might be com-
     pared to a piano plus a piano-player (where the piano-player may itself be just instrumen-
     tal for another, higher-order player).
[12] In the car, this provision is manifested by the steering wheel; in the piano, it is manifested
     by the piano keyboard; in the computer, it is manifested by the computer keyboard.

                 Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
             For personal use only -- not for reproduction
32                               U. MEIXNER

merely amounts to a law-determined reaction to a given physical condi-
tion, as in a multi-possibility reactor — if, under macroscopic physical
determinism, it is true of only one thing at any moment in time that it
can happen in the physical macro-world (namely, the one that does in
fact happen)? When evolution ran a course that led, let’s suppose,
merely by (microscopic) accidental mutation and subsequent natural
selection to the development of macroscopic devices that are geared
for implementing choices (made — by the devices themselves or by
something else — between at least two incompatible alternatives that
are each possible at the time in question), had evolution then forgotten
that macroscopic physical determinism is true? Was it ignoring it?
     Objector: I have no idea of what the argument is supposed to be here. It
     seems plain that being governed by a more complex mechanism (being
     governed by a brain rather than a primitive agglomeration of a few neu-
     rons) may be an evolutionary advantage for an organism in providing
     the capability of more differentiated reactions to information from the
     environment.
     Response: Being governed by a more complex mechanism not only may
     be an evolutionary advantage for an organism, it is such an advantage in
     fact. But the question is whether it would be an evolutionary advantage
     even under determinism. I maintain that, under determinism, being
     governed by a complex mechanism is no evolutionary advantage for an
     organism. Hence, under determinism, there is no good reason for such
     mechanisms to develop. Hence, under determinism, they would not
     have developed. Now, this argument can be attacked at several points.
     One objection is rather unlikely to be raised: the objection that even if
     under determinism there were no evolutionary advantage for an organ-
     ism in being governed by a complex mechanism, there still would be
     good reason for such mechanisms to develop — even under determin-
     ism. Another objection, which is rather more likely to be raised, is the
     objection that even if under determinism there were no good reason for
     complex governing mechanisms to develop, they might nevertheless
     have developed even under determinism. I address this objection below.
     Objector: My objection is neither of the two you just mentioned. I hold
     that being governed by a complex mechanism is an evolutionary advan-
     tage for an organism even under determinism.
     Response: I have tried to argue the contrary above. Let me try again.
     Suppose we are playing a rather strange game against each other. The
     game consists in two players alternately pushing their respective game-
     buttons: each time a button is pushed a new game-situation appears on
     the display, replacing the previous one. The game is strange because,
     unbeknownst to us, each and every stage of it is determined by the rules
     of the game once its initial situation has been fixed, which is done by
     throwing dice, say. Unbeknownst to us, the game has, therefore, already

            Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
        For personal use only -- not for reproduction
           A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 33

        been decided in its very beginning. But, due to lack of knowledge, we
        are far from just going mechanically through the motions. Moreover,
        there is a rather striking contrast between us. While I have merely one
        button for pushing (with the attitude ‘well, let’s see what comes next
        and hope that it’s not bad’), you have several such buttons and a fancy
        computer which advises you, in reaction to the game-situation already
        on display, which button to push in order to make progress towards your
        goal of winning the game. Thus, you have the capability of more differ-
        entiated reactions to information from the environment, so to speak,
        while I don’t have that capability. But are you because of having that
        capability at an advantage in this game, as compared to me? Evidently,
        that capability cannot give you an advantage over me, since whatever
        your computer tells you to do and whatever button you push, the new
        game-situation on the display will be what it has from the beginning
        been determined to be. It is a predetermined stage on your predeter-
        mined way to your predetermined winning — or predetermined losing.
        Unbeknownst to you, your plurality of buttons and your fancy computer
        are just so many useless gadgets.
        Objector: I am not at all sure whether the story you offer is coherent.
        How might I fail to notice that my plurality of buttons and my computer
        are just useless gadgets?
        Response: That is a further question, but it can be answered in the fol-
        lowing way: With each of your buttons a certain result (a new game-
        situation) is firmly connected, and you know in each case which one it
        would be. The computer, in turn, tells you — veridically — at each
        stage of the game when it’s your turn to make a move (i.e., to push a
        button) that it is rational to push this or that button, with the consequent
        result. What you don’t know, however, is this: that the computer is
        determined to tell you at each stage of the game, when it’s your turn to
        make a move, to push that button which has the result connected to it
        that is determined to happen anyway at this stage. The — perverse, but
        possible — situation is simply that the course of the game is both deter-
        mined from its beginning and, with regard to you, as rational as it can be
        (whether you are predetermined to win or predetermined to lose).
        I am of course not saying that the development of the above-
     mentioned devices for implementing choices is logically incompatible
     with macroscopic physical determinism; for this determinism could, in
     principle, be of such a kind that the emergence of, say, multi-possibility
     reactors was itself determined.13 This would be an absurd — that is, an
     unnecessarily expensive — course for nature to take,14 and therefore a
     rather unlikely course (even for a complete mechanist regarding nature
[13] In Chapter 2 of Dennett (2003), it is described in detail how this could be.
[14] Against the Dennettian speculations mentioned in the previous note, it should be remem-
     bered that nature certainly has no interest in making itself interesting (to whom?) by super-
     fluous complexity.

                Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
            For personal use only -- not for reproduction
     34                                   U. MEIXNER

     it remains true that nature normally follows the course which is the most
     economical), but it is not a logically impossible one.15
         Therefore, in asserting that if determinism ruled in the physical
     macro-world brains would never have developed, I am relying on an
     implicit inference to the best explanation.16 Made explicit, it is the
     following inference: Organismic devices geared for implementing
     choices between several incompatible but possible alternatives with
     regard to the physical macro-world are widespread throughout natural
     history, even highly complex devices of this kind, the most prominent
     examples being brains. The best explanation of this uncontroversial
     fact is that there are indeed innumerable choices that are organismic-
     ally implemented, that is: that there do indeed exist innumerable
     organism-dependent realizations of one among several incompatible
     but at the moment possible alternatives regarding the physical
     macro-world. And this can only be the case if determinism is, to a con-
     siderable extent, false, even in the physical macro-world.
         Inferences to the best explanation are fallible. But as long as there is
     no explanation of the geared-for-implementing-choices fact which is
     both better than the explanation that has just been offered and pre-
     serves macroscopic physical determinism,17 I prefer to regard the
     impressive emergence of brains in the course of evolution as an indi-
     cation of the great extent to which the terrestrial physical macro-world
     is undetermined (prior to additional determination). Given this mas-
     sive macro-indetermination, the unpredictability with which brains
     are confronted in their monitoring and governing activity must indeed
     more often than not betoken indetermination.
          Objector: But it seems that the set of unpredictable cases for a given
          brain is a lot larger than the set of cases that might plausibly be assumed
          to be cases of indetermination. Hence it seems that you are yourself
          committed to a claim of massive illusion. Moreover, it does not seem to
          be the case that we interpret every case where we cannot predict what

[15] The basic idea in making the existence of choice-implementing devices compatible with
     determinism is this: the provisions for implementing choices among several incompatible
     synchronic possibilities might, as a matter of fact, be merely used to channel pure
     event-causal determination under various (synchronically incompatible, but) diachroni-
     cally compatible possible conditions (i.e., conditions whose forever determined realizations
     may happen to succeed each other in time). It could, in principle, have been a forever-deter-
     mined fact that devices develop which, while being indeed choice-implementing devices,
     are never used as such. But what would be the point of their developing? To make what has
     forever been ‘decided’ seem as if it had not been forever decided? But why?
[16] Compare: an inference to the best explanation is also at the basis of asserting the
     counterfactual ‘If he left the house, the light would not be on.’
[17] It would be quite unwarranted to assume that any explanation that preserves determinism in
     the physical macro-world must ipso facto be better than any explanation that does not.

                 Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
             For personal use only -- not for reproduction
    A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 35

   will happen as a genuine case of indetermination, so you do not seem to
   do justice to phenomenology.
   Response: One must distinguish between the set M1 of all unpredictable
   cases for a given brain, which is a very large, presumably infinitely
   large set, and the set M2 of all unpredictable cases for a given brain that
   are taken notice of by that brain and are interpreted by it as cases of
   indetermination, which is a much smaller and no doubt finite set. Bio-
   logical evolution has made sure that the further subset M3 of M2, which
   contains all the genuine cases of indetermination in M2, is not too small
   compared to M2. Massive illusion, therefore, is out of the question,
   although M3 does certainly not coincide with M2. Regarding your sec-
   ond objection, it suffices to say that my point was not that we experience
   cases of unpredictability for us which we always interpret as genuine
   cases of indetermination, but that our brains interpret certain cases of
   unpredictability for them as genuine cases of indetermination, which
   cases we therefore experience (veridically or not) as genuine cases of
   indetermination — and not as mere cases where we cannot predict what
   will happen (and which we may or may not interpret as genuine cases of
   indetermination).

             7. Two Models of Action-Determination:
             Chance-Generator and Decision-Maker
Once it is accepted that the brain is often right in translating unpredict-
ability as indetermination, and as indetermination about which some-
thing can be done (via the brain), the question arises in what manner it
is determined what will be done; that is, the question arises in what
manner it is determined how the detected indetermination will be
restricted. There are two salient models for this. The first model —
where the brain is a DOMINDAR in its own right — can do without
consciousness; it simply consists in this: the brain contains a physical
chance generator (that is, a generator of genuine physical chance
events: physical events without sufficient cause), and determining
which alternative to realize from the several realizable alternatives the
brain has detected is left to cerebral gambling (and subsequent
mechanical cerebral processes), for which procedure consciousness is
not essential. The second model — where the brain is a DOMINDAR
instrumentally for something else — cannot do without conscious-
ness; for, according to it, consciousness is precisely the nonphysical
medium in which the several realizable alternatives the brain has
detected are presented by the brain to the nonphysical self (under
normal conditions, quite faithfully), who then, in the light of
consciousness, makes an at least rudimentarily rational decision
regarding which alternative to realize. This decision may, but need not

          Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
      For personal use only -- not for reproduction
     36                                   U. MEIXNER

     necessarily, be preceded by deliberation, and under normal conditions
     it is quite faithfully put into effect by the brain. It far too often turns
     out to be the correct decision for it to be with any likelihood the result
     of a mere chance process. The instigation by the self of the brain to go
     into action in a certain manner is indeed an occurrence of nonphysical
     causation of the physical without accompanying physical causation.18
     But this occurrence of nonphysical causation of the physical cannot
     interfere with physical causation and the laws of physics, because it is
     purely and simply the beginning of the realization of one among sev-
     eral physical possibilities — involving brain, rest of the body, and
     outer environment — that the laws of physics, the entire physical past
     and therefore the sum total of physical causation could not by them-
     selves exclude from happening.
         But what about the, supposedly, big sticks that all physicalists carry
     even if they speak softly:19 the principles of causal closure, the alleg-
     edly trusty weapons they are quick to wield in order to make the world
     safe for physicalism?20 Given that there is macroscopic indeter-
     mination in the physical world — indetermination that needs to be
     restricted somehow, since reality will continue in a unique way — it is
     unwarranted metaphysical dogmatism to believe without reservation
     in the principles of causal closure of the physical world, be it the
     strong closure principle, according to which every cause of a physical
     event must itself be physical, or be it the weak closure principle,
     according to which every physical event that has a cause at all also has
     a physical cause.
          Objector: I cannot see how indeterminism gives reason to doubt princi-
          ples of the causal closure of the physical world. Would you care to
          explain?
          Response: Suppose we have situations of indetermination in the physical
          world. Hence at certain points in time — moments of indetermination —
          the further course of the physical world is not determined by its past.
          Hence there are physical events — each a part of the (relative) physical
          future that starts with a moment of indetermination — that have no
          physical cause. Some of these events may have no cause at all (note,

[18] Remarkably, according to Polanyi (1969, p. 403), ‘mechanical effects can be produced
     without force, merely by selection,’ and there is, therefore, ‘a possibility for conceiving
     the action of the mind on the body as exercising no force and transferring no energy of its
     own. Indeed, since it is the peculiar function of the mind to exercise discrimination, it may
     not even appear too far-fetched that the mind should exercise power over the body merely
     by sorting out the random impulses of the ambient thermal agitation. We may bear this
     possibility in mind whenever referring to autonomous centres of decision.’
[19] Cf. a famous saying by Theodore Roosevelt, referring to diplomacy.
[20] Cf. an equally famous saying by Woodrow Wilson, referring to democracy.

                 Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
             For personal use only -- not for reproduction
          A DUALISTIC CONCEPTION OF MENTAL CAUSATION 37

        however, that the old principle of sufficient causation: every event has a
        sufficient cause, once believed to be a quasi-logical truth, does not
        allow this). But it is quite unwarranted to assume a priori that all of them
        have no cause at all. If some of them have a cause, then they that have a
        cause have a nonphysical cause and are thus counter-instances to the
        principles of the causal closure of the physical world — not only to the
        strong principle, but also to the weak principle, considering that the
        events in question are physical events without physical cause. For this
        line of argument, the nature of the nonphysical causes can be left quite
        unspecified. But if an action — a certain physical event — is prior to its
        realization not only undetermined by all antecedent physical factors,
        but by all antecedent factors (that is, by all antecedent events, physical
        or nonphysical) and has a cause, then its nonphysical cause can only be
        a nonphysical agent.
       Now, which of the two afore-mentioned models of action-determi-
    nation is the correct one? Quite possibly they are realized side by side,
    each being correct in some cases. In any case, hard dualists — i.e.,
    substance dualists who accept agent-causation by the nonphysical self
    — will insist that the second model is not only feasible, and not only
    appears to be realized, but is in fact realized. The problem for hard
    dualists is that hardly anybody in the philosophical community nowa-
    days believes this.21 Another bad reason for this general attitude of
    disbelief — a reason that I have not yet touched on — is the following:
       It is agreed on all sides that a rational decision is not a chance event.
    But most philosophers these days find it very difficult to distinguish
    between a rational decision and an event that is causally determined
    by a complex of desires and beliefs to which the event is, in addition,
    rationally adapted. In their eyes, what else could a rational decision be
    but just such an event? But a ‘decision’ in this widely accepted sense is
    not a decision properly speaking, because it is event-causally deter-
    mined. One might as well call the turning back of a stone that has been
    thrown straight up into the air ‘a decision’, ‘its decision’. Moreover, in
    view of its event-causal determination, the so-called rationality of a
    commonly so-called rational decision is merely an irrelevant garnish.
    A rational decision properly speaking is determined only by the deci-
    sion-maker, freely (which implies: in a relevant situation of macro-
    scopic prior indetermination), and in the light of his or her desires and
    beliefs, to which desires and beliefs the decision is rationally adapted
    by the choice of the rational decision-maker, but which desires and
    beliefs do not cause it.

[21] However, there are new neuroscientific results — specifically, results in cognitive
    neurobiology regarding tethered Drosophila fruit flies — that are decidedly friendly (this
    seems to be the exact term) to the DOMINDAR-hypothesis. See Maye et al. (2007).

               Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
           For personal use only -- not for reproduction
38                                 U. MEIXNER

     Objector: Given the immense amount of literature that tries to defend
     the view that genuine decision is compatible with determinism, I find
     the tone of this last paragraph a bit irritating.
     Response: That tone is itself a sign of irritation on the side of the author.
     Objector: Another matter of tone: To my taste, you make it all too
     obvious — by several polemical passages — that you see yourself as a
     member of a small minority fighting against the mainstream. I believe
     that this is rather a disadvantage for the text.
     Response: It may well be a disadvantage for the text, given human
     nature. But take my occasional polemical tone as a — comparatively
     mild — reaction to the flood of undeserved ridicule and contempt that
     has been let loose on dualists in recent decades. It helps me to deal with
     what I consider to be a great philosophical injustice.

                                    References
Chalmers, D.J. (1996), The Conscious Mind (New York: Oxford University Press).
Dennett, D.C. (2003), Freedom Evolves (London: Allen Lane).
Drescher, G. (1991), Made-Up Minds: A Constructivist Approach to Artificial
  Intelligence (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Dretske, F. (1995), Naturalizing the Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Maye, A., Hsieh, C-h., Sugihara, G., Brembs, B. (2007), ‘Order in spontaneous
  behavior’, PLoS ONE, 2(5): e443. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000443
Meixner, U. (2004), The Two Sides of Being: A Reassessment of Psycho-Physical
  Dualism (Paderborn: Mentis).
Meixner, U. (2006), ‘Consciousness and freedom’, in Analytic Philosophy Without
  Naturalism, ed. A. Corradini, S. Galvan, & E.J. Lowe (London: Routledge),
  pp. 183–96.
Newton, I. (1962), Principia. Volume One. The Motion of Bodies, translated by A.
  Motte, revised by F. Cajori (Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of Cali-
  fornia Press).
Polanyi, M. (1969), Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy
  (London: Routledge).
Rosenthal, D.M. (2002), ‘The timing of conscious states’, Consciousness and
  Cognition, 11, pp. 215–20.
Torretti, R. (1999), The Philosophy of Physics (Cambridge: Cambridge University
  Press).
Wegner, D.M. (2002), The Illusion of Conscious Will (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Paper received April 2007




            Copyright (c) Imprint Academic 2011
        For personal use only -- not for reproduction
