Found Phys
DOI 10.1007/s10701-011-9581-0




Epistemic Primacy vs. Ontological Elusiveness
of Spatial Extension: Is There an Evolutionary Role
for the Quantum?

Massimo Pauri




Received: 1 April 2011 / Accepted: 25 June 2011
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011



Abstract A critical re-examination of the history of the concepts of space (includ-
ing spacetime of general relativity and relativistic quantum field theory) reveals a
basic ontological elusiveness of spatial extension, while, at the same time, highlight-
ing the fact that its epistemic primacy seems to be unavoidably imposed on us (as
stated by A.Einstein “giving up the extensional continuum . . . is like to breathe in
airless space”). On the other hand, Planck’s discovery of the atomization of action
leads to the fundamental recognition of an ontology of non-spatial, abstract enti-
ties (Quine) for the quantum level of reality (QT), as distinguished from the nec-
essarily spatio-temporal, experimental revelations (measurements). The elementary
quantum act (measured by Planck’s constant) has neither duration nor extension,
and any genuinely quantum process literally does not belong in the Raum and time
of our experience. As Heisenberg stresses: “Während also die klassische Physik ein
objectives Geschehen in Raum and Zeit zum Gegenstand hat, für dessen Existenz
seine Beobachtung völlig irrelevant war, behandelt die Quantentheorie Vorgänge, die
sozusagen nur in den Momenten der Beobachtung als raumzeitliche Phänomene auf-
leuchten, und über die in der zwischenzeit anschaulische physikalische Aussagen sin-
loss sind”. An admittedly speculative, hazardous conjecture is then advanced con-
cerning the relation of such quantum ontology with the role of the pre-phenomenal
continuum (Husserl) in the perception of macroscopically distinguishable objects in
the Raum and time of our experience. Although rather venturesome, it brings together
important philosophical issues. Coherently with recent general results in works on the
foundations of QT, it is assumed that the linearity of quantum dynamical evolution
does not apply to the central nervous system of living beings at a certain level of the
evolutionary ramification and at the pre-conscious stage of subjectivity. Accordingly,


In the Honor of Evandro Agazzi, most affectionately, as ever, and with gratefulness to the Referee for
his insightful remarks and additional bibliographic information.
M. Pauri ()
Physics Department, University of Parma, Parma, Italy
e-mail: massimo.pauri@unipr.it
                                                                                           Found Phys

corresponding to the onset of a non-linear dynamic evolution, a ‘primary spatial’ re-
duction is ‘continually’ taking place, thereby constituting the neural precondition for
the experience of distinguishable macroscopic objects in the continuous spatial exten-
sion. While preventing the theoretically possible quantum superpositions of macro-
scopic objects from being perceivable by living beings, the ‘primary reduction’ has no
effect on the standard processes concerning quantum level entities involved in labora-
tory man-made experiments. In this connection, an experimental check which might
falsify the conjecture is briefly discussed. The approach suggested here, if sound,
leads to a naturalization of that part of Kant’s Transcendental Aesthetics than can
survive the Euclidean catastrophe. According to such naturalized transcendental-
ism, “space can well be transcendental without the axioms being so”, in agreement
with a well-known statement by Boltzman. Finally, as far as QT is concerned, the
conjecture entails that a scheme for quantum measurement of the von Neumann type
cannot even ‘leave the ground’, vindicating Bohr’s viewpoint. A quantum theory of
measurement, in a proper sense, turns out to be unnecessary and in fact impossible.

Keywords Spatial extension · Perception of macroscopic objects in space ·
Quantum ontology · Superposition principle · Macro-objectification · Violation of
linearity of quantum evolution · Naturalized transcendentalism


Personne n’est exempt de dire de fadaises
Le malheur est de le dire courieusement.
Michel de Montaigne1



1 Introduction

The core view inspiring the present paper is the recognition that the discovery of
the quantum of action and the atomization of processes by Planck is the deepest and
most far-reaching acquisition in the whole history of knowledge. Nevertheless, the
radical ontological ‘diminution’ implied by the atomization of action for the concept
of object, as a perceived entity within the extensional Raum of our experience, has
not explicitly affected yet our notions of space and time. On the other hand, we have
historical evidence of a significant correlation between the ontological notions of
space and time, on the one hand, and those of objects and processes, on the other.
   In the present paper I intend to analyze from various perspectives the nature of
this missing correlation on the basis of both a critical re-examination of the histori-
cal concept of space and a re-analysis of the main open problems in quantum theory
(QT). Admittedly, the paper does not belong to the main stream of contemporary phi-
losophy of science. In some places, I shall present viewpoints that deviate sensibly

1 Essays, Troisième Livre, chapitre 1. Note that in 16th century French the word ‘courieusement’ had
the same meaning as the contemporary word ‘pretentieusement’. Yet, the first English translation of the
Essays, by Charles Cotton Esq, can be found in the E.H.W. Meyerstein Collection of the English Faculty
Library, Oxford, 1711. The quoted passage sounds like “No Man is free from speaking foolish things: but
the worst on’t is when a Man studies to play the Fool”.
Found Phys

from what could be considered accepted wisdom in present literature, at least outside
the so-called ‘continental’ camp. In particular, the final sections contain a main ven-
turesome conjecture about the role of quantum theory concerning our macroscopic
experience of spatial objects. On the other hand, given the lasting situation of QT,
especially concerning the so-called measurement problem or macro-objectification
issue, it seems that one either has to admit to total ignorance or is authorized to en-
gage in some speculation. I do believe that any suggestion about such problems which
is not absolutely crazy or evidently contradictory, and brings together some important
correlated issues should be made explicit. Thus, I acknowledge from the beginning
that my presentation contains a good deal of provocative speculation and that my
main proposal can be defended by plausible arguments only. I would consequently
like to define this paper as a (risky) adventure in empirical metaphysics, where the
oxymoron is justified by the fact that, although not positively supported by any direct
empirical evidence, my conjecture will however be shown to admit falsifiability in a
definite and concrete sense by experimental check, a test which is becoming techno-
logically feasible in quantum optics. Finally, I must apologize for the fact that due to
the variety and complexity of the subject matter, the presentation of the paper may
appear to be rather sketchy.
    In conclusion, the reader is invited to take my present proposal in the spirit of
Montaigne’s statement quoted in the epigraph.


2 Space

2.1 A Brief Account of the Classical Debate and Its Current Relevance2

I assume that the reader is well aware of the historical main distinctions between the
so-called absolutist or, better, substantivalist, and the relational view of space, the
former being roughly identified with Newton’s position and the latter with Leibniz’s
position. A simplified yet remarkably clear account of the various senses of ‘abso-
lute’ in Newton’s Principia (Scholium) can be found in [13]. Such senses of absolute
mainly concern the concept of motion whilst I am here interested in the question
of the ontological consistency of the concept of space. Thus I will limit myself to
quoting the points relevant to the latter issue, together with its relational counterpart.
   Newton substantivalism.3 A1 : “Space (or Space-time) is a substance in that it
forms a substratum that underlies physical events and processes, and spatiotempo-

2 In this paper I will focus primarily on the concept of space rather than on the whole space-time. In
spite of the formal operational unification of time and space within the special theory of relativity (STR),
time and space maintain a deep ontological difference. Also, in General Theory of Relativity (GTR), once
examined from the dynamical (Hamiltonian) point of view, time plays a special role (see [30, 31]). Even
more, time has a substantially different status from space in quantum theory. Time (unlike the position of
something in space) is not observable at any level of the theory and, furthermore, it plays a privileged role
in the foundations of the very concept of probability. It is nevertheless true that many assertions concerning
space scattered throughout this paper could be plainly attributed to the time continuum and the relativistic
concept of space-time too.
3 As a matter of fact, Newton’s absolutist position is much more articulated. A is an oversimplification
                                                                               1
based on the Leibnizian tradition. See later.
                                                                                               Found Phys

ral relations among such events and processes are parasitic on the spatiotemporal
relations inherent in the substratum of space-time points and regions”.
    Leibniz relationism. Though Earman recognizes that there is no direct (Leib-
nitzian) relationist counterpart to Newton’s Scholium, which is the locus classicus of
absolutism and also that there are almost as many versions of relationism as there are
relationists, for simplicity he proposes the following statements to define relationism;
R1 : “All motion is the relative motion of bodies, and consequently, space-time does
not have, and cannot have, structures that support absolute quantities of motion”; and,
above all: R2 : “Spatiotemporal relations among bodies and events are direct; that is
they are not parasitic on relations among a substratum of space points that underlie
bodies or space-time points that underlie events.”
    As Earman himself warns, the philosophical discussion about the nature of space
and time has the character of a Tower of Babel. I believe that the following quota-
tions [4, 11] are instructive in this connection: (i) John Earman: ‘Why Space is not a
Substance (at Least Not to First Degree)’, (ii) Andreas Bartels: “What is Spacetime if
not a Substance? Conclusions from the New Leibnizian Argument”. Moreover, there
is also disagreement over what the debate is about; some authorities see the issue of
whether space or space-time is a substance as central to the debate [47] while others
are skeptical that the issue admits a clear and interesting formulation [32]. Finally,
some authors have begun to suggest that the absolute-relational dichotomy is not the
best way to parse the issues and that a tertium quid needs to be articulated [10, 50]. On
the other hand, the tentative conclusion of Earman himself is that ‘a correct account
of space and time may lie outside of the ambit of the traditional absolute-relational
controversy’. So I will skip all the subtleties of the various accounts to center my
attention to what seems to me the main issue, namely the ontological elusiveness of
the concept of space itself.
    Prima facie, according to Earman (A1 ), the Newtonian tradition of absolute space
would therefore appear to include a substantivalist, or more generically, a realistic
conception too. However, some of Newton’s works themselves reveal some signifi-
cant vagueness in relation to the notion of space. Therefore, the widespread opinion,
mainly due to the Leibnizian tradition, which considers Newton’s absolutism as nec-
essarily implying an ontological substantivalism of points in space, in accordance
with Earman’s A1 definition, does not appear to be justified. I shall quote some ex-
tracts taken from De Gravitatione et Aequipondio Fluidorum4 which, while exempli-
fying the revolutionary role played by the concept of space in the process of eman-
cipation from classical ontology, contextually and enigmatically entail some specific
ontological elusiveness of the concept itself.
   Perhaps now it may be expected that I should define extension as substance, or
   accident, or else nothing at all. But by no means, for it has its own manner of
   existing which is proper to it and which fits neither substances nor accidents. It
   is not a substance: on the one hand, because it is not absolute in itself, but is
   as it were an emanative effect of God and an affection of every kind of being;

4 Beth Jo Teeter Dobbs proposes that it was written in 1684 or 1685 while Newton was preparing the first
edition of the Principia (1687). (I am indebted to the Referee for this information). See also Janiak [24]:
21,22 and 25 (italics mine).
Found Phys

   on the other hand, because it is not among the proper affections that denote
   substance, namely actions, such as thoughts in the mind and motions in body.
   . . . Moreover, since we can cleanly conceive extension existing without any
   subject, as when we may imagine spaces outside the world or places empty of
   any body whatsoever, and we believe [extension] to exist wherever we imagine
   there are no bodies and we cannot believe that it would perish with the body
   if God should annihilate a body, it follows that [extension] does not exist as an
   accident inhering in some subject. And hence it is not an accident. And much
   less may it be said to be nothing, since it is something more than an accident,
   and approaches more nearly to the nature of substance. There is no idea of
   nothing, nor has nothing any properties, but we have an exceptionally clear
   idea of extension by abstracting the dispositions and properties of a body so that
   there remains only the uniform and unlimited stretching out of space in length,
   breadth and depth. And furthermore, many of its properties are associated with
   this idea; these I shall now enumerate not only to show that it is something, but
   also to show what it is . . . Space is an affection of a being just as a being.
   On the other hand, five pages later, Newton writes:
   For just as the parts of duration are individuated by their order, so that (for
   example) if yesterday could change places with today and become the later of
   the two, it would lose its individuality and would no longer be yesterday, but
   today; so the parts of space are individuated by their positions, so that if any two
   could change their positions, they would change their individuality at the same
   time and each would be converted numerically into the other as individuals.
   The parts of duration and space are understood to be the same as they really
   are only because of their mutual order and position [‘propter solum ordinem et
   positiones inter se’]; nor do they have any principle of individuation apart from
   that order and position, which consequently cannot be altered.
   As can be seen, the only ontological characterization explicitly adopted by New-
ton is space as ‘emanative effect of God and an affection of every kind of being’.5
Such theistic characterization has understandably provoked an interesting and lively
historical-epistemological debate which may lie outside the scope of the present pa-
per, but reveals the extraordinary nature of the problems raised by the conceptual-
ization of space. The relevance of the issue to my discussion forces me to further

5 In this connection, Howard Stein’s comments are very interesting (see [48, 49]). “I confess that, until
recently, this did indeed seem to me a quaint, even bizarre-sounding doctrine”. Bearing in mind the no-
tion of spacetime of GTR, thus within the current scientific image, he then refers to Newton’s view as an
‘objective structural characteristic of the world’ and adds ‘I believe we may reasonably understand ema-
native effect to signify something that is not created or produced by causal agency, in accordance with
causal laws, but that entailed by (or ‘flows from’) the nature of something’. However, he is afterwards
forced to specify that “space is a non-causally generated fact, with little or no ontological associations”
i.e. almost nothing. Again, from a modern perspective, DiSalle [8] defined Newton’s position as an exem-
plification of proto-structuralism. Yet, I must object that space—as conceived by Newton—was uniform,
or homogeneous, and strictly speaking it has no structure at all! I suggest a comparison with the rich phys-
ical (gravitational) structure of certain general-relativistic spacetimes (see [30, 31, 35] and Sect. 2.2). Of
course, once formalized, Newton’s space is characterized by a well-defined mathematical structure.
                                                                                                 Found Phys

expand on the topic. We can now state that Newtonian space is an unlimited and im-
material entity in which any Euclidean construction can be implemented. However,
it clearly lies outside the categories of traditional ontology. Spatial points need to
be conceived as specific entia per se in order to be in some way ‘realistically’ in-
terpreted. Certainly, they ought to be individuated solo numero and not—given their
uniformity—according to distinctive qualities. Yet Newton explicitly excludes any
‘principle of individuation apart from that order and position’. Therefore the points
in space are not intrinsically individuated at all apart from in a merely verbal way.
It is like suggesting some kind of internal relationism in space, if that. Any true re-
lationism indeed presupposes the independent existence of the entities to be put into
relation. In this case, however, the distinguishability of the entities is actually only
and already spatial. Therefore all we have is a mere principle of distinguishability.
Actually, the most crucial, meaningful property of Newtonian space, which emerges
in any debate on its nature, mainly consists in its uniformity, or homogeneity,6 and
this is precisely the basis of Leibniz’s subsequent criticism, which is very difficult to
object to.
    In conclusion, the extracts quoted above from De Gravitatione prove the difficulty
to find an ontological grounding for space in any case. Therefore, the thesis of space
having the nature of a substance or accident appears to be untenable. On the other
hand, this situation does not jeopardize the validity of the spatial-temporal foundation
of mechanics at all, since it is based on the methodological components of Newton’s
thought rather than on his ontology.
    Leibniz: Leibniz’s conception is the only fully relational position ever articulated.
As well known Leibniz identified the foundation of Being, both physical and ideal, in
an infinite continuity of substantial units, intrinsically single and isolated (‘monads’),
a kind of ‘metaphysical points’, whose essence is a ‘force’ or ‘activity of represen-
tation’, i.e. essentially a process. Space and time become phenomena, i.e. modes of
appearance of reality, generated by the process of monadic representation, and their
unit only consists in the hypostatization of order relations. According to Leibniz,
space (and time) do not possess any substantiality, or objective extensionality in the
Cartesian sense: they are not real entities, i.e. they do not include the principle of
their own reality. Therefore, in addition to its relational perspective, Leibniz’s view
is fundamental precisely because for the first time space and time are conceived as
idealities, i.e.—in current terms, perhaps a little far-fetched—as essential features of
subjectity. Obviously, the fact that Leibniz’s conception can be purely relational is
due to the non-spatiotemporal nature of the monads. This involves a price to pay:

6 It is well known, however, that the points of an n-dimensional homogeneous space cannot have any
intrinsic individuality. As Hermann Weyl puts it (see [52], mine emphasis): “There is no distinguishing
objective property by which one could tell apart one point from all others in a homogeneous space. At
this level, fixation of a point is possible only by a demonstrative act as indicated by terms like ‘this’ and
‘there’.” Quite aside from the phenomenological stance implicit in Weyl’s words, there is only one way to
individuate points at the mathematical level: namely by coordinatization, which transfers the ‘individual-
ity’ of n-tuples of real numbers to the elements (points) of the topological set. It should be clear, however,
that what is about here is a purely mathematical individuation rather than a physical one, an operation that,
by its very nature, is quite arbitrary. This problem becomes a fundamental issue for the non-homogeneous
and structurally very rich space-time of (GTR) in certain cases (see Sect. 2.2, Hole Argument).
Found Phys

namely that it is purely metaphysical and was never translated by Leibniz, or any-
one else, in a concrete scientific programme. I report here two significant glances at
Leibniz’s views:
   Space, like time, is something not substantial, but ideal, and consists in pos-
   sibilities, or in order of co-existents, that is, in some way, possible. And thus
   there are no divisions in it, but such as are made by the mind, and the part
   is posterior to the whole. In real things, on the contrary, units are prior to the
   multitude, and multitudes exist only through units. The same holds for changes,
   which are not really continuous’ ([29], italics mine).
   And also
   Space being uniform, no reason whatsoever can exist, external or internal, for
   distinguishing among its parts and for making any choice whatsoever among
   them. Indeed, any external reason for distinguishing among the parts of space
   can only be founded upon some internal reason. Otherwise we should discern
   what is indiscernible, or choose without discerning ([2], italics mine).
From the perspective of the problem of objectity and realism (in the sense of Aga-
zzi) [1]. Leibniz’s position is undoubtedly anomalous. We are dealing with strong
metaphysical realism according to which space and time are not real, and at the
same time with maximum objectivity in the sense of intersubjectivity or invariance of
possible descriptions according to the current meaning of the term. Indeed, Leibniz
is an important forerunner of relativistic thought. Let us note that invariance with
respect to possible descriptions, referred to Leibniz, is based on the uniformity of
space, that is, according to his own point of view, on the characteristic itself which
guarantees its metaphysical irreality.
    There exists extensive contemporary literature which refers to Leibniz to support
relational theories in connection with relativistic theories (GTR mainly). Such liter-
ature, however, actually refers to the ‘Leibniz of positivists’, as correctly defined by
Michael Friedman, and gives rise to a falsification of the terminology of Leibniz’s re-
lationism. Apart from some structural analogies, the argumentations made by current
Leibnizians are (obviously) unrelated to Leibniz’s original metaphysical premises
and lead to a kind of incomplete or impure reduction of spatial ontology. Their rela-
tional theses are actually forced to consider relationships between (real or possible)
empirical objects which are already extended and, above all, already distinguish-
able as regards extension. Such theses cannot therefore avoid elements of ‘spatiality’
amongst the primitive ideas which the reduction should lead to. Incidentally, this lim-
itation of the relationist viewpoint shows the specific resilience of the extensionality
of space. Similarly, current substantivalist theses ([4, 12] and bibliography therein)
are criticizable when they expect to transfer Newtonian absolutism into the so-called
‘manifold substantivalism’, i.e. the thesis according to which relativistic points in
spacetime void of matter and fields be ‘substances’.
    Since the Euclidean catastrophe caused by the disgregation of Kantian a priori, a
profound divergence has taken place between the levels of the ontological grounding
of the concepts of space and time, and the physical-mathematical description of such
concepts. Riemann’s [42] fundamental works gave rise to a crucial generalization of
                                                                               Found Phys

the concept of space, from the tridimensional Raum of our experience to the multi-
dimensional space as abstract Mannigfaltigkeit which, being the basis of differential
geometry, constitutes an essential premise for relativistic theories. For my subsequent
argument, it is important to realize that the concept of space as Mannigfaltigkeit in-
troduces a complexification of the scientific image in which axiomatization acquires
increasing relevance. Actually, the new notion of space includes a whole stratifica-
tion of polyadic predicates which cannot be reduced to extensional ones, such as, e.g.
(local and global) topology, with its companions of orientability, connectivity, enan-
tiomorphisms, orientation-entanglement, non-commutative geometry, which would
be better defined as intensional and require a base of axiomatic structures. However,
as Weyl stressed [53] the transition to the new conception of space, which gives rise
to the modern scientific image of spatiotemporality, entails overcoming a philosoph-
ical ‘abyss’:7 precisely the jump from the notion of space as an external continuum,
understood as real and sensed intuition (just the ‘Raum’ of experience), to the ab-
stract set-theoretical notion of it, by means of which theoretical physics reconstructs
the continua of space and time.
    On the basis of an objective current analysis of the classical debate, we should
conclude that—setting aside the level of supernatural explanations inherited by New-
ton from Cambridge Neo-Platonism—neither the absolutist viewpoint, nor the rela-
tional one can provide a satisfactory ontological grounding to the notion of space.
The concept of space does appear to have a peculiar fate: it has the strength to gen-
erate emancipation from Platonian-Aristotelian ontology, yet it does not have the so-
lidity to stand metaphysically. I do believe, in fact, that a metaphysical issue of space
remains open.

2.2 Remarks on the Status of Space-Time in the Scientific Image (GTR)

The structure of spacetime in the scientific image provided by the General Theory of
Relativity (GTR) is by far more complex than one could believe on the basis of the
historical view based on the manifestly covariant scenario expressed by the invari-
ance under arbitrary transformations of coordinates (passive diffeomorphisms). We
have shown ([30, 31, 35] and bibliography therein, also [9]). that ‘the last remnant
of physical objectivity of space-time’ that Einstein thought (in 1916) [14] was ‘taken
away by the requirement of general covariance’ (essentially on the basis of the fa-
mous ‘Hole Argument’ or Lochbetrachtung) can indeed be recovered, at least in a
continuous family of models of GTR, by exploiting the intrinsic degrees of freedom
of the gravitational field in vacuum (viz. the so-called Dirac Observables (DO)). The
remaining functional part of the metric field (viz. the gauge variables) identifies a
global non-inertial extended space-time laboratory (NIF) playing the function of a
global Observer. The resultant physical individuation of point-events is obtained in
terms of non-local functionals of the DO which show a rich structure of spacetime so
that the latter—unlike Newton’s space—maintains ‘its own way of existence’. Such
individuation, however, turns out to be NIF-dependent so that it can only be con-
strued as a weak form of objectivity. Correspondingly, one could interpret the result-
ing ontology of spacetime in the scientific image as a weak kind of structuralism

7 Often defined as Platonic Gap.
Found Phys

that inherits some elements of both substantivalism and relationism. In any case any
form of substantivalism turns out to be falsified. Our position has been examined by
other authors within a more general philosophical context and redefined as moderate
structural realism [16]. However, apart from the lack of generality of our results, I do
not believe that the analysis of the ontology of spacetime of GTR can be confined
to this level. In any case we have admittedly solved a problem about the characteri-
zation of the intrinsic spacetime structure rather than an ontological issue about the
existence of spacetime. I shall limit myself to making the following remarks: (1) The
very fact that GTR predicts singularities—in which the equivalence principle does
not hold—indicates that it cannot be a universal theory of spacetime. (2) The non-
locality shown by our individuation procedure is an unclear, yet profound feature of
the theory: for example the total energy is a non-local thing and resides non-locally
through space. The same gravitational energy is a rather elusive thing.8 (3) Many
authors believe now that the incompatibility between GTR and QT could only be
resolved by abandoning the idea that space is a fundamental entity and that, corre-
spondingly, the debated issue of Quantum Gravity must be dealt with by forgetting
in the first place about space and movements within it, and by starting from a purely
quantum core. From this point of view space itself should be viewed as an emerging
entity and the same GTR should be considered as a purely effective theory arising
from a quantum substrate. Thus gravity should turn out to be a non-fundamental,
rather an induced, residual, emergent and intrinsically classical interaction, and the
quantization of GTR would not lead to any fundamental theory. Of course, the ex-
planatory power of GTR or its experimental success are not at stake here. The point
is that all these features provide some indication that the ontological elusiveness of
the concept of space infects—as it were—even the spacetime representation in the
current scientific image.

2.3 The Kantian Legacy

Why we cannot exercise the intellect on any object
absolutely apart from the continuous, or apply it
even to non-temporal things unless in connexion
with time, is another question.
Aristotle9



The philosophical configuration characterizing the unsolved classical opposition of
absolutism and relationism also justifies the strength of the lasting suggestion ex-
ercised by Kant concerning the conceptions of space and time in spite of the dis-
gregation of the a priori and even in spite of the fact that the Kantian notion of
pure intuition as necessary intermediate element between sensation and intellect has

8 It should be stressed, however, that this non-locality has nothing to do, at least at our present level of
knowledge, with the quantum non-locality discussed later.
9 In Aristotle: On Memory and Reminiscence, written 350 B.C. (translated by J.I. Beare): 450a 7–9 of the
standard Bekker edition.
                                                                                                   Found Phys

been empirically reduced in terms of the theory of vision10 or absorbed within the
constructive symbolic forms of neo-Kantians. The strength of the Kantian position
concerning space and time, resides in the evidence of the fact that, within any criti-
cal formulation concerning such issues, an intuitive representation of extension and
duration is always in some way already epistemically presupposed. The scientific ir-
relevance of Leibniz’s fully relational view can in fact be traced to the impossibility of
deriving or constructing space and time starting from elements that are—as it were—
completely ‘isolated’. In other words, spatial and temporal relations seem unable to
take shape starting from the union of simple elements.11 Of course Kant’s notion of
intuition cannot be re-proposed today with all its implications, in particular in rela-
tionship to its connection with intellectual schemata, as generating a priori synthetic
judgments, which, as such, are apodictic and constitutive of the mathematical struc-
ture of space and time. Nevertheless, I do believe that the legacy of the Kantian notion
of pure intuition of homogeneous extension, as an essential feature of the real (sen-
sible) notion of space-and-time should not be jettisoned altogether. In the first place
I observe that this legacy actually survives in various forms within phenomenologi-
cal thinking.12 On the other hand, the universal form of the homogeneous intuition
has the nature of an epistemic substrate for all the particular sensible intuitions and
is essentially characterized by the fact that the sensible spatial continuum cannot be
linguistically coded.13 In conclusion it should be clear that we must not confuse the
vague continuity of perceptual wholes (let me call this the psychological continuum)
with the ideal continuum of homogeneous extension, which is a presupposition of our
notion of the continuum in general, before its bifurcation in spatial and temporal con-
tinuity. Surely, we cannot think of space and time, hence of the external continua, as
‘objects’. As a matter of fact, we do not perceive space or time; we perceive and think
of inhomogeneities and variations over an extended homogeneous background. The

10 I would like to stress that, lacking a true causal theory of perception, this move only amounts to a shift
of the surviving problem of the intuition of extension.
11 The essential point being the unrestrainable and spontaneous nature of the intuition of the continuous
extensionality. Recall what Einstein said in this connection: ‘to give up the continuous . . . is like to breath
in airless space’.
12 As a first instantiation I would like to mention Husserl’s notion of pre-phenomenal continuum as a
primary, non-inferential grasp of pure extension, which is neither based on nor reducible to perception,
let alone memory or introspection. In Husserl’s words: (see [23]) “There exists a Primacy of Extension”,
and “Pure spatiality can be acquired as a fundamental form of thingness”. Also “Pure extension is con-
ceived as a singular substratum for all intuitions and perceptions of particular objects”. Analogous notions
concerning the continuum as perfect qualitative, non-compositional homogeneity, can be found in Peirce,
Brentano, Stumpf, Salanskis, Weyl and Poincarè too. See [40].
13 All efforts to represent an abstract entity through a schematization unavoidably lead to the visualization
of something prominent over a continuous background (or memory of a process acting in space). The
points which are ideally introduced into the homogeneous extension are only preliminary elements for the
axiomatic categorization of space. Only within the axiomatic structure do they become monadic referents
of symbols and objects of quantification, and thereby ‘individuals’ in that they are ‘numbered’ (though
almost all non computable in the algorithmic sense of the word). It is only within this construction that we
can pose the problem of the potential or actual infinity of elements, while the pure intuition of the homo-
geneous extension appears to be necessary ‘in act’ only as a singular datum. We can conclude with [40]
that the continuum possesses an intrinsic bi-modality, that of the homogeneous pre-phenomenal intuition
and that of the axiomatic structure, both fundamental.
Found Phys

latter—as singular intuition—realizes the idea of a homogeneous spatial extension
with no body positioned in it. The pre-Cartesian synthetic continuum of geometry is
just a conceptual abstraction of this intuition.
    Finally, I wish to close this survey of Kantian legacy by emphasizing that we
are transparently reminded of the unique way in which the conception of space is
strictly connected to the issues of subjectivity by the following passages in the Cri-
tique of Pure Reason: ([26], italics mine). “In order that certain sensations be referred
to something outside me (that is, to something in another region of space from that in
which I find myself), and similarly, in order that I may be able to represent them as
outside and alongside one another, and accordingly not only as different but as in dif-
ferent places, the representation of space must be presupposed”. Thus, not only is the
presupposition of the representation of space necessary to recognize things as spa-
tial, distinct and next to each other but, above all, to recognize them as “outside the
subject”. Furthermore, “I am conscious of my own existence as determined in time.
All determination of time presupposes something permanent in perception. This per-
manent cannot, however, be something in me, since it is only through this permanent
that my existence in time can itself be determined. Thus perception of this permanent
is possible only through a thing outside me and not through the mere representation
of a thing outside me; and consequently the determination of my existence in time is
possible only through the existence of actual things which I perceive outside me. . . .
In other words, the consciousness of my existence is at the same time an immediate
consciousness of the existence of other things outside me.” ([26], added in the 2nd
edition p. 245.)
    The representation of space is therefore essential even to the self-individuation of
the subject and to recognize the plurality of conscious subjects. I cannot disentangle
such considerations from the well-known fact that conscious states themselves do
not belong to the spatial order. They are per sé metaphysically irrepresentable and,
in order to be referred to, they require linguistic reference to space (note that ‘inner
sense’, referring to time, is a spatial locution, like outer sense). What matters for my
subsequent argument is that it clearly appears that perceptibility of distinguishable
objects in spatial extension must be seen as a necessary precondition of subjectivity.


3 The Quantum

3.1 Essential Quantum Physics

I believe that the great majority of people belonging to the science community at
large, mainly influenced by the complexity and operational efficacy of the formal-
ism of QT, may not be fully aware of the philosophical radicality of the historical
event represented by Planck’s discovery. Namely the physical fact that the action
is made up of indivisible units (quantum), measured by the Planck constant h. It is
important to realize in the first place that the action is a theoretical entity (of the
classical description) which is neither a spatial nor a temporal quantity, nor is it a
property of things, yet it encodes both spatiotemporal and dynamic components. In
other words, what turned out to be atomized are processes instead of things: the true
                                                                                                     Found Phys

atom (‘indivisible’) of contemporary physics is then the quantum of action. Thus we
have a dramatic shift from the naïve or spatio-temporal atomism (atoms as simple and
indivisible spatial entities) to action-atomism (atoms as indivisible elementary pro-
cesses). The consequence is that it is not the small physical size (i.e. a spatiotemporal
characterization) that defines the quantum level, but something more subtle concern-
ing processes in terms of time and energy differences (see later).
    Let me stress the main immediate outcomes of this revolution. Let us consider a
whole as an aggregate of putative parts and an inner dynamical process of interac-
tions among such putative parts. In traditional classical terms, this process would be
conceived as a variety of exchanges of energy E at some intervals of time t, as
well as transfers of linear momentum P along some intervals of space x. The
expression A = Et − P x = μ x μ is just the relativistic invariant expres-
sion14 of the action phase, and the putative parts of the whole are then thought of
as exchanging action among themselves. Now, the atomization of the action entails
that there cannot exist real processes corresponding to exchanges of action smaller
than the Planck constant. Even more, the elementary quantum act (corresponding to
a single quantum of action exchanged between two putative parts of a whole) is sim-
ple: literally it has no spatial extension nor duration. More generally, all the genuine
quantum processes, in a deep sense do not belong in the extensional space and time
(I mean in the sense of the Raum and clock time of our real macroscopic experi-
ence),15 so that they cannot be represented as taking place in spatial extension during
lapses of time. Since the action is, classically, a continuous functional of the physical
system’s configuration, were a continuous spatiotemporal description of the interact-
ing parts conceivable, there would be real intermediate states, and one would be able
to reconstruct processes corresponding to actions of arbitrary measure. In conclusion,
stricto sensu: (i) the parts cannot be described in any local way as entities in the ex-
tension (and time) of our experience so that they simultaneously lose their traditional
individuality. In fact, the parts can no longer be conceived as distinguishable individ-
uals, i.e., they are no longer objects in the ordinary sense of perceivable things. If the
parts were objects, the action could not be atomized! Furthermore (ii) any genuine
quantum phenomenon is an undivided whole and cannot be broken up into physically
well-defined steps; (iii) ‘Quantum ontology is one of abstract entities, though not of
mental ones’ (as stressed by Quine). Only the revelations or measurements of the ef-
fects of quantum processes are phenomena in the Raum and time of our experience.16
Revelations, however, are not genuine quantum processes. They are highly compli-
cated semi-macroscopic processes magnifying quantum events to the classical level
by producing irreversible traces in ordinary Raum and time so that they are indeed
characterized by quantitative measures of extension and duration and are perceived

14 Note that, unlike action, energy is not a relativistic invariant and its quantization is derivative.
15 It is essential to be clear on this point. To assert that quantum processes do not belong to the extensional
Raum and time of our experience does not mean that they remain within an unphysical realm or a blurred
metaphysical Nothing at all. Simply, due to action atomization, they cannot be described in the Raum and
time of our macroscopic experience. See Sect. 4.1.
16 It is important to stress, with John Bell [5], that at the end in physics, and in quantum theory in particular,
the only measurements we must consider are position observations in space.
Found Phys

as actual occurrences. However, they fail to be describable by quantum theory. At
this point I must assume that the reader is sufficiently aware of the main technical
elements of QT, in particular (according to a rather rough description): (A) (1) An
individual quantum system S is described by a state vector V (or wave function)
belonging to a complex vector space H (Hilbert Space); (2) The physical observ-
ables are described by suitable operators acting on V and furnishing the a priori
possible values (‘eigenvalues’) of the properties of S, as described by V ; (3) A typ-
ical textbook description17 of a measurement cycle concerning a process of S is a
man-made laboratory procedure defined by the following operations: (3a) ‘prepara-
tion’ of the state of the system at time t0 , as represented by a V constructed after
the determination of the values of the measured properties of a so-called ‘maximal
set of commuting observables: A, B, C, . . . , P ’. Note that V , as interpreted in the
standard view I am sharing here,18 is a pure informational entity (a “probability cat-
alogue”, according to Schrödinger) and does not represent directly a real physical
quantity in space and time. It is a mathematical device that collects all the theoret-
ically possible information that we have about the state of the individual system S
(‘pure state’ V ); (3b) temporal development of the process, as described in a purely
symbolic and abstract way by means of a linear, deterministic and unitary evolution
‘operator’ U in terms of the standard time indicated by a macroscopic clock T (time
dependent Schrödinger equation in the so-called Schrödinger representation) until a
given time t; (3c) ‘measurement’ M of a physical property ‘p’ of S at time t, which
must be one among the a priori possible ‘eigenvalues’ of an operator observable P .
The rules of QT then furnish the a priori probabilities for finding a given real ‘eigen-
value’ ‘p’ among the possible ones. Note that, by embodying the completeness of
the information inscribed in V , such probabilities are ontological or intrinsic, and
not epistemic probabilities that could follow, e.g., from some ignorance about the
definition of V . Such intrinsic probabilities emerge from the fact that, in order to be
measured, any genuine quantum entity (like S) is forced to assume manifest object-
like appearances (i.e. a spatial and temporal shape, e.g. as ‘particle’ or ‘wave’) in the
extensional Raum and time. Corresponding to the measurement M, the state vector V
‘jumps’ and coincides by definition with the ‘eigenvector’ of the observable P corre-
sponding to a definite ‘eigenvalue’ or property ‘p’ of the system S. Note that M (also
called reduction of the state vector or wave function collapse) is a pragmatic ad hoc
operation (Postulate of the ‘Wave Packet Reduction’: WPR) which instantaneously
redefines the state as represented by the State Vector Vp , which embodies the new
information about the system.
   Here is where a main issue lies, however. For, if taken outside the formal set of
postulates of QT, it is not clear in the first place what the difference is between a
‘measurement’ belonging to the list of postulates or to the set of highly idealized lab-
oratory man-made operations, on the one hand, and the ‘measurement-like’ processes
that are going on, more or less all the time, more or less everywhere [6], on the other
hand. In the latter case, the state vector V (or the wave function) should be better
interpreted as representing something physically real, and the variation of the state

17 I am obviously describing a typical but simplified situation.
18 The choice of this interpretation—-at least in certain definite circumstances—will be justified later on.
                                                                                               Found Phys

vector under such generalized ‘measurement’ should be intended as describing a real
physical process as ruled by a second kind of evolution law (called R by Penrose).
R would enter into play when different macroscopic effects are triggered by different
microscopic situations, and—in the current status of the theory—is supposed to be
described (in principle and only elliptically) in a pure phenomenological way by a
non-linear and stochastic process (still reduction of the state vector or wave func-
tion collapse). However, for reasons that will become clear at the end, from here on
I shall stick to the standard interpretation. Thus, the laboratory quantum theoretical
description of any genuine quantum process begins and ends with a spatio-temporal
revelation.The Heisenberg inequalities then enforce the necessary linguistic compro-
mise between the description of the unavoidable object-like nature of the revelations
in extensional Raum and time, and the fact that quantum entities or processes are
not object-like (neither ‘particles’ nor ‘wave’, nor any other spatio-temporal model
of object whatsoever). I believe that nothing better than the following passage by
Werner Heisenberg can render the essence of the whole state of affairs: “Während
also die klassische Physik ein objectives Geschehen in Raum und Zeit zum Gegen-
stand hat, für dessen Existenz seine Beobachtung völlig irrelevant war, behandelt
die Quantentheorie Vorgänge, die sozusagen nur in den Momenten der Beobachtung
als raumzeitliche Phänomene aufleuchten, und über die in der ‘Zwischenzeit’ an-
schauliche physikalische Aussagen sinloss sind” ([21], italics mine).
    There are two important instantiations of quantum states, namely: (B) A ‘pure’
state , defined by the so-called ‘coherent superposition’ of two distinct ‘pure’ states
 = c1 V1 (+) c2 V2 , (c1 , c2 complex numbers with fixed relative phase), is called a
superposition state and has the following fundamental property: if an observable A
possesses with certainty the distinct values a1 in V1 and a2 in V2 , the observable A
for the state  does not possesses an a priori definite value, i.e. no intrinsic property
qualified by A. The value of A in  is mere potentiality which is actualized only by
means of a measurement, that furnishes the values a1 or a2 with probabilities given
by the squared moduli of c1 , or c2 , respectively. The fundamental point is that the
operation (+) can never be translated into a logical disjunction, so that it is incom-
patible with assertions like ‘the observable A possesses (before the measurement) one
or the other of the properties associated with the pure states V1 and V2 . The so-called
Principle of Superposition shows the most direct consequences of the atomicity of
the action and the intrinsic limitations of the role played by spatiotemporal concepts
at the quantum level. Indeed, it provides the technical representation of the fact that
a transition to actuality is never spatiotemporally described since the formalism fur-
nishes only the probability P (t) that at time t the actualization has taken place, and
the probability 1 − P (t) that it has not taken place.19 (C) A state E which is an en-
tangled state (firstly defined in [45]) of a compound quantum system S = S1 [+] S2 ,

19 Correspondingly, in the case of a spatial superposition of two possible paths, p and p , followed by,
                                                                                   1     2
say, a photon γ in an interferometer, the condition of γ being in a state of superposition is incompatible
with the following statements (which exhaust all the logical possibilities according to a standard spa-
tiotemporal representation of the process): (1) γ does follow p1 , or p2 ; (2) γ does follow both p1 and
p2 ; (3) γ does follow neither of the two. In this connection, one also realizes the fundamental fact that,
unlike the mere auxiliary role played in classical physics, complex numbers have an essential, irreplaceable
role at the quantum level of reality.
Found Phys

where S1 and S2 are non interacting and (arbitrarily) space-like separated, is such
that the potentialities of the component subsystems are interconnected, so that the
potentiality of one subsystem is instantaneously actualized as soon as the transition
to actuality is induced in the other subsystem (for a brief and clear presentation of
the issue see [36, pp. 279–299]). In other words, the subsystems cannot be consid-
ered as separate and independent entities until they are eventually disentangled by
a measurement.20 The entanglement lies at the basis of the so-called EPR type phe-
nomena21 and expresses an intrinsic non-locality of quantum theory. What matters
here is that not only has such phenomenon actually been experimentally verified up
to a distance of 144 km [51], but that nothing exists in quantum theory that could
in principle introduce any limitation concerning such kind of extensional separation!
From this lack of limitations22 it further follows that even the temporal order of the
disentangling measurements is observer dependent. We can conclude that, provided
a so-called realistic interpretation of the state vector is excluded [38, pp. 290–296,
388–391], neither entanglement or disentanglement heed spatial extension or tempo-
ral ordering. In other words: no story in space as a function of time can tell us how
nonlocal correlations happen, hence nonlocal quantum correlations seem to emerge
somehow from outside space. Note that the essence of the entanglement is strictly
ontological and cannot be explained epistemically by saying e.g. that our knowledge
of S1 is inseparable from that of S2 .
    G.C. Ghirardi [20] has recently shown that any theory which (a) reproduces the
experimental consequences of quantum theory, and (b) satisfies certain very general
conditions concerning the composition of probabilities, is necessarily non-local (ba-
sically the probabilities must be defined before the experiments take place). Quantum
nonlocality then holds independently of the specific formal structure of the theory and
follows uniquely from the atomicity of action. This means, however, that Nature itself
is essentially non local, even if this fundamental property only surfaces when few
action quanta are exploited in entanglement type conditions. In other words, there
is necessarily some kind of ‘influence’ that connects quantum microentities across
spatiotemporal unlimited space-like separations. Nonlocality, however, taken at face
value, is only a technical way of speech which, in my reading, is a sign of the fact
that although our intuitive representation of the underlying spatial continuum has an
epistemic primacy for the sensory experience and ordinary perception in the Raum,
it fails to possess a sound ontological basis. This should be read as a confirmation
of its already historically recognized elusiveness. It is also important to stress that
non-locality and process atomization only clash with the intuition of pre-phenomenal
continuum, and not with all the axiomatic structures which constitute the concept
of physical space-time of the contemporary scientific image. Finally, although there
is no operational conflict between quantum theory and, e.g., STR, still—as Penrose
thinks—there is a conflict with the ‘spatiotemporal spirit’ of STR.

20 Note that it is not correct to characterize the transition from potentiality to actuality occurring in a
subsystem as an ‘event’, just because it fails to share one or more of the classical properties of events,
notably that of being loci of permanent actuality.
21 The possibility of such phenomena was indeed suggested by Einstein, Podolski and Rosen in a famous
paper. See [15].
22 In a more general, relativistic, context, from the space-like character of the relation between S and S .
                                                                                                    1     2
                                                                               Found Phys

3.2 Remarks on the Status of Spacetime in Relativistic Quantum Field Theory

The difficulties of Relativistic Quantum Field Theory (RQFT) are well known. Above
all, for our purposes, we must stress that a consistent relativistic interpretation of the
quantum collapse of the vector state has not even been touched in RQFT. Quite in-
dependently of these important limitations, however, one should ask how it is that, if
extensionality of spacetime is so elusive, background relativistic space-time is thor-
oughly been used so successfully for the phenomenological description of elementary
particles. Let me call the spacetime utilized in RQFT ‘micro-space time’. My answer
is that, although quantum theory imposes no limitations on the utilization of space-
time continuum, its epistemological status has been already substantially altered in
a peculiar way. From the chrono-geometric point of view, the micro-space-time is
a universal classical deterministic macro space-time (actually Minkowski’s space-
time) used without any scale limitation from below. As a matter of fact, however, it
is introduced into the theory through the group-theoretical requirement of relativis-
tic invariance of the statistical results of measurements as regards the choice of the
macro reference frames. Therefore, this micro space-time is anchored, so to speak,
to the macroscopic medium-sized objects that asymptotically define the experimental
laboratory conditions so that its concept is parasitic of the perception of distinguish-
able macroscopic objects in the Raum. It is in fact in this asymptotic sense that a
physical meaning is attributed to the classical space-time coordinates on which the
quantum fields’ operators depend as parameters. Thus, the spatiotemporal properties
of the micro Minkowski manifold, including its basic causal structure, are, as it were,
projected on it from outside. Also, the limitations posed by quantum theory on the
procedures for measuring microscopic space-time intervals (easily reducible to time
intervals) are very strong indeed. Actually, it can be shown that every possible kind
of clock is necessarily a non-microscopic object and, in particular, that even the so-
called atomic clocks can be considered microscopic devices only on the basis of a
rough idealization which conflicts with the fundamental concepts of measurability.
There exists no way of measuring microscopic intervals (e.g. intra-atomic)23 in a di-
rect operational manner. All measurements are then based on indirect procedures that
involve a theoretical interpolation. However, while this is true of nearly all physical
measurements, the special aspect of the microscopic case is that the theory involved
is precisely the quantum theory with its inherent spatio-temporal limitations. In this
connection see [39, 43].
    Thus, we are led to distinguish between physical space-time, on the one hand, and
physical ‘analogical’ micro-space-time, on the other. The former as operationally
founded on the behavior of (macroscopic) clocks, the latter as a purely mathemati-
cal structure whose empirical meaning rests on a theory that in principle excludes a
spatiotemporal representation of its ontology. Far from worrying about a direct and
operational justification, what I wish to emphasize is that the empirical meaning of
the ‘analogical’ micro-space-time is conferred on it solely by the macroscopic (clas-
sical) level of control of quantum theory on the basis of an abstract extrapolation

23 Not to mention “cosmological” intervals!
Found Phys

from the ‘macro’ space-time of STR.24 In conclusion, the role of this ‘analogical’
micro-space-time seems essentially that of a translator from the symbolic and ab-
stract structure of the theory into the language of the macroscopic irreversible traces
that constitute the experimental findings within the Raum and time of our experi-
ence.25 The conceptual status of this external translator then fits in very well with
the role of an epistemic precondition for the formulation of relativistic quantum field
theory in Bohr’s sense. Finally, a further sign of the uncertain status of the ‘ana-
logical’ micro spacetime in RQFT comes from the so-called ‘peaceful coexistence’
between the latter and the STR, but I will not elaborate on this point further. I will
simply conclude with Penrose [36, p. 290] that: “Despite the undoubted power and
impressive accuracy of quantum field theory (in those few cases where the theory
can be fully carried through), one is left with a feeling that deeper understandings are
needed before one can be confident of any ‘picture of physical reality’ that it may
seem to lead to”.

3.3 The Z-Mysteries and the X-Mysteries of Quantum Theory

On May 15, 2010, seventy five years had elapsed since the publication of the Einstein-
Podolsky-Rosen paper in Physical Review (vol. 47, May 15, 1935). From then on-
wards, foundational debates about quantum theory essentially centered around two
distinct issues. The former deals with questions such as non-locality, non-separability,
indefiniteness of property attributions, and the EPR phenomenon, with the con-
nected idiosyncratic debate about the so-called ‘spacetime realism’. It concerns the
quantum behavior of entangled systems involving only quantum-level entities, such
as electrons, photons, atoms or molecules.The latter is about the so-called macro-
objectification problem, that is the formulation of a quantum theory of measurement,
and a resolution of related paradoxes (Schrödinger Cat and the like). Roger Penrose
[38, pp. 237–240] called these two classes of problems and paradoxes Z-mysteries
and X-mysteries, respectively, and I will adopt his terminology throughout. The Z-
mysteries, which are directly experimentally supported, depend on the action atom-
ization together with the linearity of the theory at the underlying quantum level.


24 Note, furthermore, that in the literature about classical field theories space-time points are usually taken
to play the role of individuals, but it is often implicit that they can be distinguished only by the physical
fields they carry. No such possibility, however, is consistently left open in a non-metaphorical way in
RQFT. From this point of view, Minkowski’s micro-space-time is in a worse position than the space-time
of GTR: it lacks the existence of the Riemannian intrinsic pseudo-coordinates exploited in GTR, not to
mention all the non-dynamical (better, operational and pragmatic) additional elements that have often been
used for the individuation of its points, like rigid rods and clocks in rigid and un-accelerated motion, or
various combinations of genidentical world-lines of free test particles, light rays, clocks, and other devices
in macroscopic STR. The instrumental nature of micro-space-time seems to be further confirmed by the
fact that the quantum field physical observables are not defined in terms of point-events but over extended
regions of space-time and that the interacting quantum fields are essentially quantities that interpolate
asymptotically defined states.
25 Furthermore, it is true that this micro-space-time appears to be ‘really’ classically Minkowskian with

respect to all non-gravitational interactions up to the length scale of ≈ 10−16 cm; yet, it should be noted
that this fact is checked by collision experiments that involve only a limited number of real micro-entities.
                                                                                               Found Phys

They refer to counterintuitive and unavoidable features of microprocesses26 which—
I believe—should be incorporated in any future possible theory. The X-mysteries,
instead, call into play the fundamental problem of the objectivity of the macroworld
as would be described by quantum theory. For the rules of QT imply that not only
must there be indefiniteness of property attributions to the microstructure in case of
superpositions, but also that—if no additional and pragmatic assumptions are made
(viz. WPR)—this lack of definiteness should be propagated to the macro-realm. As a
matter of fact, the main difficulty lies in the attempt to find—within the theory as it
stands—a definite scale at which the quantum level of activity, characterized by the
persistence of quantum superpositions of different alternatives, actually gives way to
the classical level. Thus, besides the atomization of the action, the X-mysteries follow
from the requirement that the present structure of the quantum formalism, which was
invented for the level of molecules, atoms and the subatomic level, be valid without
modifications even at the level of macroscopic extensional world, and, in particular,
for the description of the very macroscopic measuring detectors.27 If, on the other
hand, the measuring detectors are excluded from the quantum theoretical description
without further qualification, and the informational interpretation of the state vector
is refuted toward a ‘realistic’ view, it seems difficult to explain how the apparatuses
can behave as required by WPR itself, an issue which appears to admit a pragmatic
solution only. Finally, there exists Bohr’s original solution which assumes the purely
classical behavior of the apparatuses and a strict informational interpretation of the
state vector. This view, however, does not resolve in a transparent way the question
of why, and at what stage, ‘classical’ behavior might arise for large and complicated
structures such as detecting apparatuses.28
    A conclusive and very general result about the restrictions following from the lin-
earity of quantum evolution for the measurement process, was obtained by Bassi and
Ghirardi [3], who showed that such linearity necessarily entails that, at the end of any
measurement process on an individual quantum system, there must be ‘superpositions
of macroscopically distinct states of the detector, and, in general, of a macro-system’,
with the consequence that the result cannot match our definite spatial perceptions.
This in turn implies that ‘the reality of definite perceptions in spatial extensionality
requires that linearity of QT must be broken somehow and somewhere’. It is essential
to stress the generality of this result, which is immunized against all criticisms based,
e.g., on the so-called quantum decoherence argument, as well as against subtleties
concerning technical details of measurements.
    It is impressive that decades of debate about the X-mysteries have not yielded
any agreed upon, satisfactory solution. Therefore I shall end this section by stressing

26 More precisely, not only processes at the underlying quantum level, but also processes such as the
EPR phenomena involving revelations of microentities in extension at macrodistances, so long as energy
differences E between alternative possibilities remain very small (in terms of /T , where T is the
time scale of the phenomenon).
27 Whose accurate theoretical description is an almost impossible task due to the number of degrees of
freedom involved and the unavoidable entanglement with the environment which is out of control.
28 Yet Bohr asserted very explicitly that: ‘For the discussion of the quantum description problem it is not
relevant that the existence of the quantum of action is ultimately responsible for the properties of the
materials of which the measuring instruments are built and on which the functioning of the recording
devices depends’, see [7].
Found Phys

(with Shimony) [45] that “if sustained efforts to provide a realistic account of the
actualization of quantum mechanical potentialities should prove to be unsuccessful,
then there would be a posteriori reasons to conclude that the program itself is mis-
conceived and to return via some new route to Bohr, by justifying a dualistic picture
of the world: quantum and classical”.




4 The Quantum and Space


4.1 The Main Conjecture: Is There a Primary ‘Spatial’ Reduction
    on an Evolutionary Basis?

Est aliquid praeter extensionem, imo extensione prius.
G.W. Leibniz [28]


Let me first summarize the relevant conclusions reached in the previous sections:

 (1) The ontological elusiveness or, rather, inconsistency of spatial extensionality
     resulting from the classical debate; also, the very ontological vagueness of the
     extensionality of spacetime in GTR.
 (2) The Kantian legacy within the phenomenological tradition, concerning the epis-
     temic primacy and unavoidability of the pre-phenomenal extensional contin-
     uum.
 (3) The relevance of perception of distinct material objects in the extensional Raum
     of our experience, and its role as a precondition for subjectivity and self-
     consciousness in particular.
 (4) The suggestions according to which the spacetime of the classical scientific im-
     age could be an emergent reality from a quantum substrate.
 (5) The fact that micro entities lack object-like properties and that genuine quantum
     processes do not belong to the spatial extension of the Raum, except for the re-
     sults of specific ‘measurement procedures’ which take place according to large
     scale irreversible amplifications.
 (6) The intrinsic non-locality of Nature at the quantum level independently of the
     specific formalism of the theory; a property that, extending at macroscopic dis-
     tances, gives a further impressive blow against the ontological robustness of
     the extensionality of space: non-local quantum correlations somehow seem to
     emerge from outside space and time.
 (7) The nature of the X-mysteries and the conflicting views about their clarification.
 (8) The fact that linearity of quantum evolution is a very well confirmed phe-
     nomenon only at the quantum level.
 (9) The generality of the implications of Bassi and Ghirardi’s results concerning the
     X-mystery of macro-objectification.
                                                                                                    Found Phys

(10) Some heterodox suggestions made by physicists like Wigner,29 Shimony [45,
     46], and in a certain sense even Roger Penrose30 about the special role that
     conscious or, more generally, living beings could play in the quantum riddle.31
(11) Finally, the fundamental recognition that ‘quantum ontology is one of abstract
     entities’ (Quine), which I take mainly to mean that quantum ontology is a non-
     spatial ontology (again, in the sense of the Raum of our experience) and, there-
     fore, in some sense inscrutable. This entails, however, in my opinion, that the
     macro-objectification problem, far from being a purely technical case, has all
     the marks of a deep technical and philosophical issue concerning the human
     (and animal) forms of acquaintance of ‘material’ reality.
    To summarize, at this point, I will accordingly make the following assumptions:
(a) The linearity of the quantum dynamical evolution U does not apply in the central
    nervous system of living beings at a certain level of the evolutionary ramification,
    even very low.32 For the sake of clarity, I assume that this happens in the human
    brain at a level that—from the point of view of subjectivity—corresponds to a
    pre-conscious or unconscious stage. From my point of view—which is neither
    trivially subjectivistic nor instrumentalist—it is essential to exclude any active
    role of consciousness or, more generally, subjectivity, in this mechanism. The ba-
    sic justification of this conjecture is that, since we perceive distinct macroscopic
    objects in the extensional Raum, the linear nature of U somewhere and somehow
    must be broken. Thus, apart from realistic collapse theories like GRW, the choice
    of locating the violation within the neural system of living organisms seems to
    be the most natural one. Obviously, I will not even try to sketch the concrete
    quantum action on neural or subneural structures of living organisms in order to
    ‘understand’ perception.
(b) Corresponding to the onset of a non-linear dynamic evolution, a primary ‘spatial’
    reduction is ‘continually’ taking place33 to the effect that, starting from the non-
    extensional and abstract structure of the quantum world, the result be that of

29 See [54]: ‘The way out of the difficulties of the measurement problem is to postulate that the equations
of motion of QT cease to be linear, in fact they are grossly non-linear if conscious beings enter the picture
. . . it follows that the being with a consciousness must have a different role in quantum mechanics than the
inanimate measuring devices.’
30 Penrose has repeatedly suggested that a fundamental link should exist between the possible violation of
the linear Schroedinger evolution and perception processes (see [37, 38]).
31 More specifically, Shimony [46] writes: ‘The scientific community is contemplating seriously the idea
that one should give up the unrestricted validity of the linear nature of the dynamical evolution. If this is the
case, the physical processes which present themselves as the most natural candidates . . . are mesoscopic
processes, processes involving the neural structure of the brain and processes in which definite perceptions
seem to require for fundamental reasons that reductions actually take place’.
32 It is not relevant here to identify a limit or scale of complexity concerning the gradation of subjectivity
that is distributed almost with continuity within the living world. I am prepared to believe that subjectivity
and even consciousness are a matter of degree, and not simply something that exists or does not. As
Penrose notes, ’what evidence do we have that lizards and codfish do not possess some low level form of
subjectivity? . . . After all, all I ask is that they sometimes simply feel!’ (See [37, p. 383].)
33 Technically, this unorthodox reduction model could mimic what has been called continual observation
within the formalism of the so-called measurements with ‘effect’ values of Ludwig. See [41].
Found Phys

    constituting the neural precondition for the intuition of extensional space and for
    the experience of distinguishable macroscopic objects (as well as of any other
    spatially distinguishable source of perception), at the subjective level.
(c) At this point, my further and consequent suggestion is that—as perceived by
    living organisms—all quantum superpositions of alternative ‘macroscopically’
    distinguishable states are accordingly suppressed. Therefore, one or the other
    alternative would be resolved out, explaining the fact that events do actually
    occur, whether or not they had done so before the existence of living beings (the
    gain of using the inverted commas here and before will be explained shortly). In
    this way, consequently, the X-mysteries of QT should be crossed out, at least for
    what concern effects which are in principle perceivable by living organisms.
(d) This primary reduction would concern the state of affairs of physical processes
    (including the so-called ‘measurement-like’ processes) which ‘are going on more
    or less all the time, more or less everywhere’ in Bell’s sense, though, of course,
    always as perceivable in principle by living organisms. The important point is,
    however, that such primary reduction would have no effect on the standard quan-
    tum processes concerning micro-entities which are the object of laboratory man-
    made experiments. So far no isolated microscopic system has been observed as
    not behaving in accordance with the linear U evolution, and correspondingly as
    undergoing wave function collapses. In other words, all the standard reduction
    processes of QT—which we could rename as secondary or z-reductions—will
    continue to take place, in connection with the standard informational interpreta-
    tion of the wave function. In this way, all the Z-mysteries of QT would survive
    unaltered. Accordingly, “the procedures of measurements will maintain an essen-
    tial influence on the conditions on which the very definition of the physical quan-
    tities in question rests” (à la Bohr). Note, moreover, that the distinction between
    genuine quantum measurements and the rest of the state of affairs is accordingly
    established in principle.
    It is now time to try to redress and clarify some evident ‘lop-sidedness’ of this con-
jecture with some important qualifications. Beforehand, however, while once again
acknowledging that my conjecture is rather hazardous, I wish to point out that, when
confronted with the ‘oddness’ of QT, Heisenberg himself was prepared to admit
something analogous when he wrote: “The a priori character of the classical con-
cepts may be similar to that of the forms of behavior that in animal psychology are
called inherited or innate schemes. It is quite plausible that for some primitive ani-
mals space and time are different from those of the species man and, above all, may
not belong to the world independently of man” [22, p. 91].
    In a series of works on the issue of Emergence, Herbert Feigl, Wilfrid Sellars
and Paul Meehl [17, 33] introduced a remarkable distinction concerning physical
language. Precisely: (1) Physical-1: an event, entity or process is physical-1 if it be-
longs in the coherent and adequate descriptive and explanatory account of our spatio-
temporal causal world. (2) Physical-2: an event, entity or process is physical-2 if
it is definable in terms of theoretical primitives adequate to completely describe the
actual states, though not necessarily the potentialities, of the universe before the ap-
pearance of life (say, perhaps, our world in the pre-Cambrian period). It is evident
that although useful for examining the logical structure of the concept of Emergence,
                                                                                                Found Phys

the physical-2 language is a purely metaphoric instrument in the present case since
its semantical content is empirically beyond reach in principle.34 It can nevertheless
be instrumental for some comments on my conjecture. First of all, although we are
doomed to using the physical-1 language, even in the formulation of a modified QT,
an implicit use of language physical-2 would be obligatory for the very formulation
of my conjecture, and the use of ‘inverted commas’ (in ‘b’ and ‘c’) had the very pur-
pose of hiding this impossibility. Let us denote with SQ and TQ the notions of space
and time, respectively, which in language physical-2 are the necessarily abstract and
symbolic precursors of the corresponding concept in our physical-1 scientific image.
We are assuming that the latter emerge in some way from the former as the concept of
macroscopic body emerges from its quantum structure. In this sense, ‘spatial’, ‘con-
tinually’ and ‘macroscopic’ in ‘b’ and ‘c’ above are the physical-2 counterparts of
what becomes physically-1 describable after the primary reduction has taken place.35
It should be recognized and stressed that we here have a huge explanatory gap. An
explanatory gap of some sort, however, is present whenever one tries to lay a bridge
from the scientific image to subjectivity in any of its forms. The specific philosophical
content of such explanatory gap, however, is just a matter of dispute. Yet, I will not
elaborate on this topic further in the present paper.

4.2 The Main Conjecture is Falsifiable: A Possible Negative Experimental Test

Of course, we cannot practically obtain quantum superpositions of macroscopic
states to put the conjecture to the empirical test. However, an experimental test could
be imagined if the following situation could be realized. Assume that at the neu-
ronal or subneuronal level of the central nervous system a perceptual process could
be triggered by a purely quantum, and sufficiently persistent, coherent superposition
of different microscopic states36 which, emerging from macroscopic different spatial
locations, when considered by themselves would be mutually exclusive and would
give rise to distinguishable spatial perceptions. Such a situation could indeed put the
conjecture to the test, as we shall presently see. It is very interesting to find that a situ-
ation of this kind has been proposed in literature [19] and declared37 actually feasible
by quantum optics techniques. I shall limit myself to the essential, inviting the reader
to see Ghirardi’s paper [19]. First of all, it is known that the threshold for human vi-
sual perception is approx 7 photons. According to the accepted physiological knowl-
edge, this is the only firmly established case in which a truly microscopic system can

34 Imagine that a physical process that occurred on a planet at a distance corresponding in time to our pre-
Cambrian period had been generated by amplification of a true quantum event and (possibly?) involved a
physical-2 “macroscopic” superposition. That physical process would be humanly unobservable in prin-
ciple, yet no differently from to an analogous process that had occurred on a planet at a distance in time of
four light years.
35 It is worth noting that it is not by chance that, e.g., in the GRW model, the (real) reduction can be made
only on spatial observables; a circumstance that enlights the essential role played by space within the
problematic transition from the shifty quantum level to the classical one. See [18].
36 Microscopic states here means states describing a few quantum entities (e.g. photons, electrons); see
later.
37 I hereby thank prof. Francesco De Martini for an illuminating discussion on the experimental aspects of
the problem.
Found Phys

trigger a definite perception directly. We then consider a bunch of say 10 photons
coming from a definite spatial region A and another bunch of 10 photons coming
from a macroscopically distinct region B. Each of the two bunches propagate inde-
pendently at different times towards the eye of a human observer O who will have
two different perceptions, seeing a luminous spot in A and one in B, even though
the states refer to microscopic systems. At this point, the experimentalist prepares a
quantum state which is the coherent superposition of the two states considered and
which is assumed to persist up to the moment in which O ‘looks’ at it. Using a pho-
tomultiplier, we can firstly test that the superposition is still there; this is a test that,
‘making a measurement’, will reduce the superposition into a 50% result of photons
coming from A or from B. We then replicate the experiment with O replacing the
photomultiplier. We will have two different possibilities: either (i) O replicates the
behavior of the photomultiplier seeing a luminous spot in A or a luminous spot in B,
each with 1/2 probability and reducing the superposition; or, (ii) O will end up with
a confused spatial perception and unable to distinguish the macroscopically separate
regions A and B, a result that would prove that O’s neural system does not reduce the
superposition. The conclusion is that even if case (i) does not obviously constitute per
sé a proof of the main conjecture, case (ii) will blatantly disprove it. The existential
and philosophical import of this experience, however, will be incalculably disrupting!



5 Concluding Remarks: A Naturalized Transcendentalism

What results from my conjecture, if sound, is a naturalization of that part of Kant’s
Transcendental Aesthetics that can survive the Euclidean catastrophe.38 The result is
a new kind of transcendentalism to which a famous statement by Boltzmann aptly ap-
plies, namely [25]: “Space can well be transcendental without the axioms being so”.
It is a benign form of transcendentalism which, unlike Kant’s, is open to include liv-
ing organisms as entities having an internality and therefore a ‘unity per sé’, whereas
Kant can only admit a ‘unity’ depending on the human transcendental Self, i.e. organ-
isms as ‘entia rationis’ like machines.39 Living organisms, however, act immediately
and ontologically in nature without waiting to be ‘constructed’ by the intellect.
    Another gain is the understanding of the ontological elusiveness of the concept
of space. In conclusion, we could rephrase Kant’s fundamental question upon the


38 For the sake of comparison, it is worth recalling here, freely quoting from [34], some well-known Kan-
tian theses in terms that appear particularly adjusted to my previous quantum argument: (1) space is a pure
form of perception which we bring to the matter of appearances and impose on it. (2) Only by making
appearances spatial can we experience them as objective, outer and interrelated, but we make them spa-
tial without the aid of empirical instruction from the appearances. (3) Appearances come from ‘things in
themselves’ and what they instruct in us is always a-posteriori; therefore, if space is a priori, it does not
come from things. (4) Things themselves are not spatial, they are not extended and they have no spatial
relationship to each other. In conclusion, space is purely a gift of the mind, not of things. It is ideal, not
real.
39 See Kant’s frustrated efforts in this direction (‘the phenomenon of a phenomenon’) in Opus Postumum
(1936–1938) [27].
                                                                                              Found Phys

synthetic a priori judgments by asking ‘How is QT possible (as a theory of atom-
ized processes) if our sensible experience presupposes the intuition of the phenome-
nal continuum as epistemic precondition?’ Answer: ‘QT is possible because—as far
as we know—it concerns an ontology of abstract entities (Quine) which can be de-
scribed only in symbolic terms, together (of course) with well-experienced physical
correspondence rules’. The specific nature of this transcendentalism depends on its
being generated by a natural process like the suggested primary reduction. Of course,
in my conjecture, a fundamental role is played by Natural Evolution.
   From the point of view of QT, the conjecture, if sound, entails that a scheme for
quantum measurement of the von Neumann type cannot even ‘leave the ground’. As
a matter of fact, macroscopic apparatuses are continuously being reduced40 so that
their effectiveness, as measuring quantum devices interacting with the quantum sys-
tem to be measured, cannot be described by a WPR of entangled states in a Hilbert
space. In other words, the conjecture supports—on a different basis41 —Bohr’s atti-
tude concerning the measurement process.42 A quantum theory of measurement, in
this sense, turns out to be unnecessary and in fact impossible.

Acknowledgements I thank warmly my friends Profs. Mario Casartelli and Antonio Scotti for many
stimulating discussions.



References

 1. Agazzi, E.: Temi e Problemi di Filosofia della Fisica. Abete, Roma (1974)
 2. Alexander, H. (ed.): The Leibniz-Clarke correspondence. Fourth paper. Manchester University Press,
    Manchester (1956)
 3. Bassi, A., Ghirardi, G.C.: A general argument against the universal validity of the superposition prin-
    ciple. Phys. Lett. A 275, 373–381 (2000)
 4. Bartels, A.: What is spacetime if not a substance? Conclusions from the new Leibnizian argument.
    In: Mayer, U., Schmidt, H.J. (eds.) Semantical Aspects of Spacetime Theories, pp. 41–51. B.I. Wis-
    senshaftverlag, Mannheim (1994)
 5. Bell, J.S.: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics: Collected Papers in Quantum Philos-
    ophy, p. 166. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1987)
 6. Bell, J.S.: Against ‘Measurement. In: Milled, A. (ed.) Sixty-Two Years of Uncertainty, pp. 17–31.
    Plenum, New York (1990)
 7. Bohr, N.: Discussion with Einstein on epistemological problems in atomic physics. In: Schillp, P.A.
    (ed.) Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, p. 199. The Library of Living Philosophers, Evanston
    (1949)
 8. DiSalle, R.: On dynamics, indiscernibility, and spacetime ontology. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 45, 265–287
    (1994)


40 One should be careful in not misunderstanding this sentence as a nonsensical assertion preventing the
description of macroscopic bodies as having a quantum structure in terms of molecules, atoms, elementary
particles etc. Fundamental scientific advancements as the formulations of Bose-Einstein condensation and
Superfluidity are a impressive vindication of the quantum nature of macroscopic bodies. Their description,
however, is not a purely quantum one and is based on skilled theoretical treatments which in any case
involve a semi-classical approximation. So they are not literally ‘macroscopic quantum objects’.
41 Note that my conjecture is immunized against the critique raised by Shimony [46, Vol. 1] against Bohr’s
implicit renunciation to the traditional program of mutual support between epistemology and metaphysics.
42 Note that even the intrinsic distinction between true measurements and ‘measurement-like’ processes
reinforces Bohr’s attitude.
Found Phys

 9. Dorato, M., Pauri, M.: Holism and structuralism in classical and quantum general relativity. In: Rick-
    les, D., French, S., Saatsi, J.T. (eds.) The Structural Foundations of Quantum Gravity, pp. 121–151.
    Clarendon, Oxford (2005)
10. Earman, J.: Was Leibniz a relationist. In: French, P., Wettstein, H. (eds.) Studies in Metaphysics.
    Midwest Studies in Philosophy, vol. 4. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (1979)
11. Earman, J.: Why space is not a substance (at least not to first degree). Pac. Philos. Q., 67, 225–244
    (1986)
12. Earman, J., Norton, J.: What price spacetime substantivalism? The hole story. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 38,
    515–525 (1987)
13. Earman, J.: World Enough and Space-Time. MIT Press, Cambridge (1989)
14. Einstein, A.: Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Ann. Phys. 49, 769–822 (1916)
15. Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., Rosen, N.: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be
    considered complete?. Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935)
16. Esfeld, M., Lam, V.: Moderate structural realism about spacetime. Synthèse, 160, 27–46 (2006)
17. Feigl, H.: The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical. In: Feigl, H., Scriven, M., Maxwell, G. (eds.) Minnesota
    Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2, pp. 370–497. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
    (1958)
18. Ghirardi, G.C., Rimini, A., Weber, T.: Unified dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic systems.
    Phys. Rev. D 34, 470 (1986)
19. Ghirardi, G.C.: Quantum superpositions and definite perceptions: envisaging new feasible experimen-
    tal tests. Phys. Lett. A 262(1), 1–4 (1999). Erratum: ibid. 263, 465 (1999)
20. Ghirardi, G.C.: Does quantum nonlocality irremediably conflict with special relativity? Found. Phys.
    40, 1379 (2010)
21. Heisenberg, W.: Atomtheorie und Naturerkenntnis. Mitt. Univ. Bundes, Gött. 16(1), 9–20 (1934)
22. Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Philosophy. Dover, New York (1958)
23. Husserl, E.: Ding und Raum: Vorlesungen 1907. Husserliana, vol. 16. Nijhoff, The Hague (1973).
    Edited by U. Claesges
24. Janiak, A.: Newton: Philosophical Writings: De Gravitatione. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
    bridge (2004)
25. Kahl, R.: Selected Writings of Hermann von Helmholtz. Wesleayan Press, Middletown (1971)
26. Kant, I.: Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Johann Friedrich Hartknoch, Riga (1781); 2nd edn. 1787. English
    translation by N.K. Smith: The Critique of Pure Reason. Macmillan, London (1963)
27. Kant, I.: Opus Postumum, Handschriftlicher Nachlass, vols. VIII, IX. de Gruyter, Berlin (1936–1938).
    Sez III
28. Leibniz, G.W.: Specimen dynamicum. In: Gerhardt, C.J. (ed.) Leibnizens Mathematische Schriften,
    vol. VI, p. 235. Halle (1850–1863)
29. Leibniz, G.W.: Philosophical Papers and Letters. Reidel, Dordrecht (1956). Edited by L.E. Loemker
30. Lusanna, L., Pauri, M.: Explaining Leibniz equivalence as difference of non-inertial appearances: dis-
    solution of the hole argument and physical individuation of point-events. Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod.
    Phys., 37(4), 692–725 (2006)
31. Lusanna, L., Pauri, M.: Dynamical emergence of instantaneous 3-spaces in a class of models of gen-
    eral relativity. In: Petkov, V. (ed.) Relativity and Dimensionality of the World. Springer, Berlin (2007)
32. Malament, D.: Review of Sklar 1976. J. Philos. 73, 306–323 (1976)
33. Meehl, P.E., Sellars, W.: The concept of emergence. In: Feigl, H., Scriven, M. (eds.) Minnesota Studies
    in the Philosophy of Science, vol. I, pp. 239–252, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (1956)
34. Nerlich, G.: The Shape of Space. Cambridge University Press, London (1976)
35. Pauri, M., Vallisneri, M.: Ephemeral point-events: is there a last remnant of spatiotemporal objec-
    tivity? Festschrift in honor of Roberto Torretti on his 70th Birthday. Dialogos, 79, 263–303 (2002).
    Special Issue
36. Penrose, R.: The Emperor’s New Mind—Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics.
    Oxford University Press, New York (1989)
37. Penrose, R.: The Emperor’s new mind—concerning computers, minds, and the laws of physics. In: Be-
    havioural and Brain Sciences, vol. 13, pp. 643–705. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1990).
    With Open Peer Commentary by other authors. ‘The nonalgorithmic mind’, author’s response to crit-
    icisms of the Précis, in Behavioural and Brain Sciences, ibid., 692–705 (1990)
38. Penrose, R.: Shadows of the Mind—A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness. Oxford
    University Press, Oxford (1994)
39. Peres, A.: Measurement of time by quantum clocks. Am. J. Phys., 48(7), 552 (1980)
                                                                                                Found Phys

40. Petitot, J.: Continu et objectivité. La bimodalité objective du continu et le platonisme transcendental.
    In: Salanskis, J.-M., Sinaceur, H. (eds.) Le Labyrinthe du Continu (Colloque de Cerisy). Springer,
    Berlin (1993)
41. Prosperi, G.M.: Theory of measurement in quantum mechanics and macroscopic description. Int. J.
    Theor. Phys. 33, 115 (1994)
42. Riemann, B.: Über die Hypothesen, welche die geometrie zu grunde liegen. In: Weber, H. (ed.)
    Gesammelte Mathematische Werken. Dover, New York (1953)
43. Salecker, H., Wigner, E.P.: Quantum limitations of the measurement of spacetime distances. Phys.
    Rev. 109, 571 (1958)
44. Schrödinger, E.: Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantemmechanik. Naturwissenschaften 23, 807–
    812, 823–828, 844–849 (1935). English translation by Trimmer, J.D.: The present situation in Quan-
    tum Mechanics. Proc. Am. Phillos. Soc. 124, 3–338 (1980)
45. Shimony, A.: Search for a Naturalistic World View, vol. 1 and vol. 2, pp. 291–309. Cambridge Uni-
    versity Press, Cambridge (1993)
46. Shimony, A.: On mentality, quantum mechanics and the actualization of potentialities. In: The Large,
    the Small and the Human Mind, Reply to Penrose, pp. 144–160. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
    bridge (1997)
47. Sklar, L.: Incongruous counterparts, intrinsic features, and the substantiality of space. J. Philos. 71,
    187–215 (1976)
48. Stein, H.: Newtonian space-time. Tex. Q. 10, 174–200 (1967)
49. Stein, H.: Newton’s metaphysics. In: Cohen, I.B., Smith, G.E. (eds.) The Cambridge Companion to
    Newton, pp. 256–307. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2002)
50. Teller, P.: Space-time as a physical quantity. In: Aichinstein, P., Kagon, M.P. (eds.) Kelvin’s Baltimore
    Lectures and Modern Theoretical Physics. MIT Press, Cambridge (1987)
51. Ursin, R., et al.: Entanglement-based quantum communication over 144 K. Nat. Phys. 3, 481–486
    (2007) www.nature.com/naturephysics
52. Weyl, H.: Groups, Klein’s Erlangen program. Quantities. In: The Classical Groups, Their Invariants
    and Representations, 2nd edn. pp. 13–23. Princeton University Press, Princeton (1946). Chap. I, §4
53. Weyl, H.: Das Kontinuum. Kritische Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Analysis. de Gruyter,
    Berlin (1932)
54. Wigner, E.P.: Remarks on the mind-body question. In: Good, I.J. (ed.) The Scientist Speculates.
    Heinemann, London (1961). Reprinted in J.A. Wheeler, W.H. Zurek (eds) Quantum Theory and Mea-
    surement. Princeton University Press, Princeton (1983)
