        Institute for Clinical Neuroanatomy
             Dr. Senckenbergische Anatomie
        J.-W. Goethe Universität, Frankfurt am Main




Quantum stochasticity and neuronal
         computations

             Peter Jedlička, MD
                              Definition

A stochastic system is one whose behavior is indeterministic in that its inputs
and initial state do not fully determine its next state (output)



   • The only intrinsically (objectively) stochastic (indeterministic)
     processes in physical world are quantum processes

   • Does quantum indeterminism affect the dynamics of neuronal
     networks? Is our brain a deterministic machine or an indeterministic
     system?
1. Criticism of quantum brain hypothesis

2. Two ways of taking advantage of quantum events in biology

3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
   quantum computations in neuronal networks
1. Criticism of quantum brain hypothesis

2. Two ways of taking advantage of quantum events in biology

3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
   quantum computations in neuronal networks
           1. Criticism of quantum brain hypothesis


Two main arguments:


A. neurons and neural networks are too large for quantum phenomena to play a
    significant role in their functioning.

     all quantum events are self-averaging, so that fluctuations among
    quantum particles are not important

    “Most biologists think that quantum effects all just cancel out in the brain.”
                                                       Daniel Dennett

B. interaction of neurons/neuronal networks with their (noisy and warm)
     environment will destroy any coherent quantum states
                1. Criticism of quantum brain hypothesis




“Molecular machines, such as ... pre- and post-synaptic receptors and the voltage-
and ligand-gated channel proteins that ...underpin neuronal excitability, are so
large that they can be treated as classical objects.”


“The critical question...is whether any components of the nervous system - a 300-
degrees Kelvin tissue strongly coupled to its environment - display
macroscopic quantum behaviours, such as quantum entanglement“


“A neuron either spikes ...or it does not, but is not in a superposition of spike and
nonspike states.”
1. Criticism of quantum brain hypothesis

2. Two ways of taking advantage of quantum events in biology

3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
   quantum computations in neuronal networks
        2. Two ways of quantum biological computations



• nervous system probably cannot display macroscopic quantum (classically
impossible) behaviours such as quantum entanglement, superposition or tunnelling

however:

• there are two alternative (mutually related) ways in which quantum events might
influence the brain activity
2. Two ways of quantum biological
         computations




1.   quantum dynamics speeds up and modulates the computational processes at
     microscopic and mesoscopic levels for which quantum effects are directly
     present

     (biomolecules, e.g. enzymes, have intrinsic, classically impossible, quantum
     properties which are necessary for life to be possible at all)


2.   because the brain is a complex nonlinear system, capable of chaotic
     dynamics, it can amplify lowest scale quantum fluctuations upward,
     modulating larger-scale macroscopic activity patterns
                        Quantum enzymology




• empirical evidence shows that biomolecules (proteins, DNA) take direct
advantage of quantum effects (in particular of tunneling)


• protein folding (into its functional three-dimensional structure) is a
minimization problem
          quantum tunneling of electrons and protons speeds up proper
protein folding (even in a warm and noisy intracellular environment!)
         quantum tunneling effects are involved in the conformational
changes required for enzyme-mediated catalysis
Photosynthesis:

1. light excites electrons in pigment molecules (chlorophyll)

2. electronic excitation moves downhill from higher energy level to lower energy
   level through the pigment molecules

3. the excitation is trapped in a reaction centre, where its remaining energy is
   used to produce energy-rich carbohydrates


Computing problem: to establish the easiest route for the electronic excitation
  (which transfers the energy downhill) to the reaction complex
Solution:

• a clever quantum computation built into the photosynthetic algorithm

• (quantum) coherent energy transfer allows the ‘wavelike’ sampling of the
energy landscape to find the easiest route for the electronic excitation

• the electronic excitation samples two or more states simultaneously

• much faster than the semi-classical (incoherent) mechanism

• the process is analogous to Grover’s algorithm in quantum computing

Conclusion: it is possible that evolution selected inherently quantum-mechanical
process for the fast and efficient mechanism of light energy harvesting
deterministic molecular mechanics vs. quantum molecular ‚mechanics‘
                                         (Density functional theory)



• whenever electrons and their associated energies need to be considered explicitly,
quantum physics steps in ( Schrödinger‘s equation)


• DFT replaces the individual electrons of a molecule with a single electronic density
function


• examples: enzymatic reactions, photoreception, molecular motor proteins
           Nested hierarchy of nonlinear complex networks


Extreme sensitivity to initial
conditions




                                                                       Satinover 2001


   • In iterative hierarchies with nonlinear dynamics (prone to chaos), small
   (even infinitesimal) fluctuations are not averaged away, they can be
   amplified!
   • Brain structure is iterative and its activity is prone to chaos
    Quantum nonlinear (chaotic) systems




•     4 kinds of dynamic systems:
1.    nonchaotic: a) classical – regular, objectively predictable
                   b) quantum – irregular, objectively unpredictable
2.    chaotic      a) classical – irregular, subjectively unpredictable
                   b) quantum – probabilistic and regular, upredictable


•     Paradoxically, quantum effects stabilize the behavior of (classically) chaotic
      systems
•     At finite temperatures, quantum coherence can create new patterns at a
      mesoscopic scale
•     Quantum chaotic systems can exhibit persistent „fuzzy“ regular patterns
                              Summary I


1. Quantum effects are directly present at microscopic and mesoscopic levels
speeding up biological processes (protein folding, enzymatic reactions, etc.)


2. Lowest scale quantum effects influence the initial state of the next scale,
while the higher levels shape the boundary conditions of the lower scales. This
hierarchy of nested networks with many feedback loops amplifies the
quantum events

Conclusion: quantum dynamics influences the computation at all levels
(proteins, metabolic pathways, cells, cellular networks, etc.) – not by producing
classically impossible solutions but by having a profound effect on which of
many possible solutions are selected (Satinover 2001)
1. Criticism of quantum brain hypothesis

2. Two ways of taking advantage of quantum events in biology

3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
   quantum computations in neuronal networks
     3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
          quantum computations in neuronal networks

Neuronal signaling:        1. electric                 2. biochemical

   A. transmembrane:       synaptic transmission (receptors)
                           intrinsic excitability (ion channels)

   B. cytoplasmic:         biochemical networks (kinases, phosphatases)

   C. nuclear:             genetic networks (gene expression)

 Where can we find stochastic processes?

 Everywhere…

  Small number of molecules (vesicles for release, postsynaptic receptors,
  signaling molecules in spines)  stochastic nature of synaptic plasticity
  regulation
     3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
          quantum computations in neuronal networks




• probabilistic gating of voltage-dependent ion channels is a source of electrical
‘channel noise’ in neurons

• channel noise limits the reliability (repeatability) of neuronal responses

• channel stochasticity increases the range of spiking behaviors

• channel noise enhances information coding abilities of neurons
     3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
          quantum computations in neuronal networks


Synaptic transmission in the central nervous system has a stochastic character:

• when an action potential invades the presynaptic terminal there is a low release
  probability (20%)

    vesicular neurotransmitter release as a random Poisson-like process

• some synapses possess a small number of postsynaptic receptors, receptor
  fluctuations can influence postsynaptic responses
      3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
           quantum computations in neuronal networks




Stochastic neurotransmitter
release




• Stochastic modeling of transmitter release can account for the synaptic
plasticity data better than a deterministic model (Cai et al. J Neurophysiol
2007)
     3. Quantum neurophysiology – putative mechanisms of
          quantum computations in neuronal networks
Impact of synaptic noise on input-output relationships of single neurons




                                             Destexhe and Contreras Science 2006


  • in quiescent conditions: input-output curve is all-or-none
  • with synaptic noise, subthreshold stimuli are boosted, while suprathreshold
  stimuli are attenuated
Postsynaptic trafficking of receptors




                 Choquet and Triller 2003
        Postsynaptic membrane as a stochastic nanomachine




            PSD



                         Choquet and Triller 2003
                         Holcman & Triller 2006 Biophys J


• Receptors traffic by random motion in and out from the PSD
• In the PSD they can be stabilized by binding to scaffolding proteins
• When a few (<15) receptors are involved, a stochastic model is necessary
            Stochastic calcium signaling in synaptic spines




• Stochastic nature of signaling becomes important
  when the number of molecules is small

• E.g., a 50 nm calcium concentration in a dendritic
  spine  3 free calcium ions;
  1 mM (calcium able to induce biochemical
  changes)  60 free ions                          Franks & Sejnowski, Bioessays 2002

 Stochastic modeling (Monte-Carlo simulations) is
  needed to represent the postsynaptic calcium
  signaling realistically
   Stochastic signaling in biochemical intraneuronal networks


 Nodes:
 molecules
 Links:
 interactions




• nonlinearities (many feedback loops)
                                              modified after Bhalla, Curr Op Genet Develop 2004
• self-similar, scale-free structure
• functional modules (amplifiers, filters, switches, oscillators, etc.)
• stochastic events
Network of interacting proteins/genes is a dynamic
system
State: a point in a multidimensional system
Change: vectors defined by kinetic equations
Bifurcation points: thresholds


Feedback loops  instabilities  state transitions
                                                     Tyson et al. Nat Rev Mol Biol 2001

Stochastic kinetic equations: quantum phase transitions? (Coleman, Nature 2007)
Biochemical regulation at the nanomolar scale: it‘s a noisy business!
    • Stochastic genetic expression has been observed directly (intrinsic vs.
      extrinsic noise)

    • Molecular stochastic fluctuations play an important role in
      determining cellular functions by inducing spontaneous state
      transitions (e.g. in a bistable molecular LTP/LTD switch in synaptic
      plasticity )

    • A theory combining cellular regulatory modules and stochastic
      dynamics is emerging

    • Nonintuitive cellular/organismal responses driven by molecular
      fluctuations  powerful new signaling and regulatory modes

                    McAdams and Arkin, Trends in Genet 1999
                    Goutsias, Biophys J 2007
                    Samoilov, Price & Arkin, Sci. STKE 2006
                    Song et al. Biophys J 2006
              Biological benefits of stochastic mechanisms

• Increase of variability, diversity, flexibility, novelty  increase of survival

   (unpredictabile behavior in a competitive environment,
   better adaptation over a wide range of environments,
   broader spectrum of internal states)

• Interaction of stochasticity with nonlinearities leads to novel and even
  paradoxical neuronal dynamics! (Swain and Longtin, Chaos 2006, Destexhe and
  Contreras 2006):

         - boosts the propagation of complex waves of activity
         - enhances input detection abilities
         - benefitial to associative memories by avoiding convergence to spurious
           states
                    Summary II


Neuronal computations are inherently stochastic at all levels:
transmembrane (ion channel noise and synaptic noise)
cytoplasmic (stochastic protein interactions)
nuclear (stochastic gene expression)



„Membrane voltage is the product of interactions at the atomic level,
many of which are governed by quantum physics.

… interactions between action potentials and transmitter release as
well as interactions between transmitter molecules and postsynaptic
receptors … seem likely to be fundamentally indeterminate.“

                                 Glimcher Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2005
Thank you for your attention
