               Jamesian Free Will
    The Two-Stage Model of William James
      The History and Status of an Idea


                      Bob Doyle
                Information Philosopher
            Associate, Astronomy Department
  Visiting Scholar (2010-2011), Philosophy Department
                    Harvard University


Information Philosopher              William James Symposium
                          A Short Poll
How many of you think that science can find causal
laws for everything, including our minds, so that a
super-intelligence would be able to predict our futures?




Information Philosopher              William James Symposium
                  Why William James?
140 years ago, William James simply asserted that his will was
free. As his first act of freedom, he said, he chose to believe his will
was free. In his diary entry of April 30, 1870, he wrote,

"I think that yesterday was a crisis in my life. I finished the first part
of Renouvier's second Essais and see no reason why his definition
of free will — 'the sustaining of a thought because I choose to
when I might have other thoughts' — need be the definition of an
illusion. At any rate, I will assume for the present — until next year
— that it is no illusion. My first act of free will shall be to believe
in free will."

(The Thought and Character of William James (Boston, Little, Brown, 1936) vol.1, p.323)




 Information Philosopher                                     William James Symposium
    Most Books On Free Will Deny That It Exists




Information Philosopher          William James Symposium
The Will to Believe – in Free Will
William James thought that an individual act of will
could make a difference in a causal and
deterministic universe.

That the strength of his beliefs increased the chance
of their being true was perhaps wishful thinking.

But James was not just a believer. He had an idea of
how free will actually worked – as opposed to what
he called hard determinism and soft determinism.

Information Philosopher           William James Symposium
          Hard and Soft Determinism
"Old-fashioned determinism was what we may call hard
determinism. It did not shrink from such words as fatality,
bondage of the will, necessitation, and the like.
Nowadays, we have a soft determinism which abhors
harsh words, and, repudiating fatality, necessity, and
even predetermination, says that its real name is
freedom; for freedom is only necessity understood, and
bondage to the highest is identical with true freedom."
("The Dilemma of Determinism," The Will to Believe (New York, Dover, 1956), p. 149.)


Today, Soft Determinism is called Compatibilism


   Information Philosopher                                     William James Symposium
  Hard and Soft Determinism Today




Information Philosopher   William James Symposium
         Compatibilism and Voluntarism
Thomas Hobbes and David Hume defined freedom of action as the
absence of external coercion. It's called "negative freedom."

Though the will be determined, as long as the will is one of the
causes in the great causal chain, that would be enough freedom for
them. They found “free will” to be compatible even with a complete
pre-determinism since the beginning of time.

Hobbes said “the cause of the will is not the will itself, but something
else not in his own disposing …voluntary actions have all of them
necessary causes and therefore are necessitated.” For Hobbes, talk
of free agents was nonsense - if free means uncaused and random.

Hume said "tis impossible to admit of any medium betwixt chance
and an absolute necessity."

  Information Philosopher                      William James Symposium
     William James Embraced Chance
"The stronghold of the determinist argument is the antipathy to the
idea of chance. As soon as we begin to talk indeterminism to our
friends, we find a number of them shaking their heads. This notion
of alternative possibility, they say, this admission that any one of
several things may come to pass is, after all, only a roundabout
name for chance; and chance is something the notion of which no
sane mind can for an instant tolerate in the world. What is it, they
ask, but barefaced crazy unreason, the negation of intelligibility
and law? And if the slightest particle of it exists anywhere, what is
to prevent the whole fabric from falling together, the stars from
going out, and chaos from recommencing her topsy-turvy reign?"

("The Dilemma of Determinism," The Will to Believe (New York, Dover, 1956), p. 153.)




 Information Philosopher                                     William James Symposium
               Indeterminism Today




Information Philosopher      William James Symposium
            Again, Why William James?
James was the first thinker to enunciate clearly a two-stage
decision process for free will, with chance in a present time of
random alternatives, leading to a choice which grants consent
to one possibility and transforms an equivocal ambiguous
future into an unalterable and simple past.

James described a temporal sequence of undetermined
alternative possibilities that "present themselves" followed by
adequately determined choices and decisions.

And James saw a strong similarity between genetic evolution
and the evolution of ideas.


  Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
           The Heart of William James
In his new book, Bob Richardson says James
gives us "a clever and hard to dislodge argument
that in many, perhaps most, of our life situations,
we are free to choose between alternatives."

James attacks "all forms of determinism, such as
the philosophic-theological, the behavioural, or genetic."

"Accepting the possibility of chance does not mean accepting
a world that is random. It means realizing that chance is
another word for freedom."



 Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
                 William James and Darwin
James's two-stage model was clearly inspired by Darwin.

In 1880 James suggested a strong similarity between
Darwinian evolution and the evolution of ideas.

"A remarkable parallel, which I think has never been noticed, obtains
between the facts of social evolution on the one hand, and of zoölogical
evolution as expounded by Mr. Darwin on the other… "

"I can easily show...that as a matter of fact the new conceptions, emotions,
and active tendencies which evolve are originally produced in the shape of
random images, fancies, accidental out-births of spontaneous variation in
the functional activity of the excessively instable human brain."
("Great Men, Great Thoughts, and the Environment", Atlantic Monthly, vol.46, p.441)



   Information Philosopher                                  William James Symposium
              In the Footsteps of William James
"What is meant by saying that my choice of which way to
walk home after the lecture is ambiguous and matter of
chance?... It means that both Divinity Avenue and
Oxford Street are called but only one,
and that one either one, shall be chosen."
("The Dilemma of Determinism," The Will to Believe (New York, Dover, 1956), p. 153)




   Information Philosopher                                     William James Symposium
                     William James Hall
The occupants of William James
Hall today, with the notable
exception of Stephen Kosslyn,
who occupies the William James
chair, are determinists and
compatibilists.

They are the hard and
soft determinists of
James's 1884 "Dilemma
of Determinism"
lecture, given just
one block away.

   Information Philosopher          William James Symposium
    The Standard Argument Against Free Will
Either Determinism is True or Indeterminism is True.

1) If Determinism is True, We Are Not Free.
2) If Indeterminism is True, our Will is Random,
so we cannot be responsible for our actions.

Logical philosophers conclude that Free Will is Incompatible
with both Determinism and Indeterminism.

No Free Will either way.




  Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
             The Standard Argument is Old
William James quoted his determinist contemporary,
John Fiske (1842-1901), in the Principles of Philosophy.

" Volitions are either caused or they are not. If they are not caused,
an inexorable logic brings us to absurdities… If they are caused, the
free-will doctrine is annihilated." (Principles, vol.2, p.577.)

Here is Harvard psychology professor Steven Pinker today,

"A random event does not fit the concept of free will any more than a
lawful one does, and could not serve as the long-sought locus of
moral responsibility." (How The Mind Works, 1997, p.54)




  Information Philosopher                     William James Symposium
        Flaws in the Standard Argument
First, Free Will is NOT Incompatible with Indeterminism.

For James, some indeterminism is a requirement, needed to
break the causal chain of determinism.

And we will see that time matters. Another flaw in the simple
logical argument is that it has no time in it.

Indeterminism comes in the early stage of decision making.

The later stage can be adequately determined, even though
physics now shows us that the universe is fundamentally and
irreducibly indeterministic at the microscopic scale.

  Information Philosopher                William James Symposium
             James on Indeterminism

Free Will would be Incompatible with any Indeterminism or
Chance that directly caused a decision of the will.

If our decisions are random, they are not caused by our
reasons and desires and we are not responsible for them.
(Robert Kane's "torn decisions" are an exception)

The genius of William James was to limit the indeterminism to
the generation of alternative possibilities for thought and
action that "present themselves" for evaluation.

In the later evaluation stage we need some determinism.

 Information Philosopher               William James Symposium
                James on Determinism
The incompatibility is not with "determinism" or some
determination, according to James, but with Pre-Determinism.

Pre-determinism means that our actions are determined by
causal chains from the ancient past long before our births.

But Free Will is not incompatible with our actions being
determined by our motives, reasons, desires, and feelings.

An effort of will, James says, grants consent, to one of the
alternative possibilities, answering the question –

Will you or won't you have it so?
 Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
      The Two-Stage Model for Free Will
Since William James in 1884, Henri Poincaré (1905), Arthur Holly
Compton (1931, 1955), Karl Popper (1965, 1977), Henry
Margenau (1968, 1982), Daniel Dennett (1978), Robert Kane
(1984), John Martin Fischer (1995), Alfred Mele (1995), Stephen
Kosslyn (2004), Bob Doyle (2005), and most recently Martin
Heisenberg(2009), have discussed Jamesian two-stage models.

They all include:

Stage 1) Alternative possibilities generated by chance.
Stage 2) An adequately determined evaluation of those
alternatives resulting in a willed decision.


  Information Philosopher                William James Symposium
           Two Distinct Temporal Stages
I would like to separate "free" from "will."

Can we say - first a “free” stage, then a “willed?”

First spontaneous generation of possibilities, then selection.

First chance, then choice.

Our thoughts come to us freely. They "present themselves."

Our actions go from us willfully. We are the authors of our lives.



  Information Philosopher                  William James Symposium
                  Free Will on
           InformationPhilosopher.com

On my informationphilosopher.com website, you will find
extensive web pages on 130 philosophers from Democritus to
Robert Kane, editor of the Oxford Handbook of Free Will, and
Alfred Mele, director of a $4.4 million Templeton Foundation
project called "Big Questions in Free Will."

You will also find pages on 60 scientists, from Pierre-Simon
Laplace to Martin Heisenberg, son of Werner Heisenberg, the
creator of quantum mechanics and the uncertainty principle.

Blue hyperlinks in this presentation open my web pages.

  Information Philosopher               William James Symposium
                   Is Free Will an Illusion?
In an essay in the May issue of Nature magazine
last year titled "Is Free Will an Illusion?,"
Martin Heisenberg challenged the premise of
Harvard psychology professor Daniel Wegner's
book "The Illusion of Conscious Will."
(Wegner the APS William James Fellow for 2010!)


Heisenberg proposed a two-stage model of
random plus lawful behavior in animals
as primitive as bacteria and fruit flies.

Nature then published a letter from me, pointing out that
Heisenberg was just the latest of a dozen thinkers since
William James with the idea of a two-stage model.
  Information Philosopher                         William James Symposium
        The Barcelona Meeting on Free Will
In October, the Social Trends Institute of New York and
Barcelona will hold an "Experts Meeting" on the question –
"Is Science Compatible with our Desire for Freedom?"

Four of the five leading thinkers who have seriously discussed
two-stage models will be there, including Robert Kane,
Alfred Mele, Martin Heisenberg, and myself.

Only Daniel Dennett of Tufts will be missing. Dennett is
perhaps the most famous living compatibilist/determinist.

Bob Kane is the leading free willist. Al Mele is agnostic.


  Information Philosopher                  William James Symposium
    Help Me Prove Priority for William James?
My William James Studies paper on "Jamesian Free Will" aims
to establish priority for James's two-stage model.

I need research help to show that no one before James had the
idea for this most plausible and practical model for free will.

Few philosophers think that this 2400-year old classic problem
will be solved in our lifetime. Yet my goal is to show that
William James had the best solution over 125 years ago.

Reviewers for WJS asked me how I could be sure some other
thinker did not anticipate James. Let's review what I know.
(My thanks to Mark Moller, editor of WJS, and anonymous reviewers.)


   Information Philosopher                          William James Symposium
           Who Else Before William James?
The ancients? Epicurus and Lucretius said the atoms swerve to
make room for freedom. The Stoics said chance was atheistic.

I think no one for a couple of centuries after Newton's Laws,
which imply complete causality and physical determinism.

Charles Darwin? - he introduced chance and indeterminism.

Charles Sanders Peirce? – the champion of tychism.

Charles Renouvier and Alfred Fouilleé advocated absolute
chance and free will, and were known influences on James.


  Information Philosopher                William James Symposium
                              Epicurus/Lucretius
The ancients? Epicurus and Lucretius said the atoms swerve to
make room for freedom, but they could not defend themselves
against the randomness objection in the standard argument.

The Stoics said chance was atheistic, and the Stoic Chrysippus
said a chance event would destroy the cosmos…
   Everything that happens is followed by something else which depends
   on it by causal necessity. For nothing exists or has come into being in
   the cosmos without a cause. The universe will be disrupted and
   disintegrate into pieces and cease to be a unity functioning as a single
   system, if any uncaused movement is introduced into it.
   (Cicero, De Fato, X, 20)

 For more, see my web page on Free Will in Antiquity.

  Information Philosopher                          William James Symposium
                             Charles Darwin
Could Darwin himself have seen that his two-step process of
evolution – spontaneous variation plus natural selection -
might be applied to "mental evolution?"

Robert J. Richards says no:
"Darwin, rather like Huxley, considered mental faculties to be
completely determined by brain patterns."

"But James could not have known this, since Darwin expressed
this interpretation only in his private notebooks."
(Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and Behavior, p.435)
(This reference thanks to Jim Kloppenberg's Uncertain Victory, p. 39)




   Information Philosopher                           William James Symposium
                        Charles Renouvier
Renouvier's five-volume Essay on General Critique was inspired by
Kant's three great critiques of Reason. But unlike Kant's noumenal
freedom, Renouvier's was in the phenomenal world, with contingent
events. Absolute chance was a requirement for human freedom.

Renouvier's ultimate foundation for free will was based, like Kant's
analysis of practical reason, on a moral requirement for freedom. And
like Kant, he connects freedom to God and immortality.

Renouvier's "proofs" of liberty and free will turn out to be formal
"antinomies," equally applicable to "proving" determinism.

Renouvier lacks James's practical insight that chance must be limited
to generating alternative possibilities.



   Information Philosopher                      William James Symposium
                            Alfred Fouillée
Alfred Fouillée's 1872 book La Liberté at le Determinisme made a
powerful claim for the existence of absolute chance (hasard absolu)
in the universe, and for the importance of chance in human free will.

Fouillée's influence on Charles Sanders Peirce and William James is
well known. Peirce credited Fouillée and Charles Renouvier with the
origin of his ideas for Tychism. And William James' personal copy of
Fouillée's book (now in Harvard's Houghton Library, perhaps thanks
to Eugene Taylor) is well-marked with passages he found important.

But Fouillée was not specific about how chance could help (beyond
breaking the causal chain of determinism), nor did he address how
chance would be prevented from making our decisions random.




  Information Philosopher                     William James Symposium
                  Charles Sanders Peirce
More than any other philosopher, Peirce understood that determinism
was a hypothesis that cannot be proved by error-prone experiment or
observation. And Peirce, following Renouvier and Fouillée, embraced
absolute chance in his theories about tychism.

But tychism was only one-third of the story. For Peirce, there was
also anancasm (determinism) and agapasm (or synechism) .

Peirce tried to force Darwin's two-step evolutionary process of
random spontaneous variation followed by natural selection into the
Procrustean bed of a three-step process –

"first, the principle of individual variation or sporting; second, the
principle of hereditary transmission, which wars against the first
principle; and third, the principle of the elimination of unfavorable
characters."
("A Guess at the Riddle," Collected Papers of C.S.P., vol.I, p.214.)
  Information Philosopher                          William James Symposium
                              Peirce's Triads
Like Hegel, Peirce arranged his arguments in triads.

Peircean evolution has three levels, the Darwinian (random and
indeterminate), the Spencerian (mechanical and determinate), and
Peirce's synechism (union of the two first levels).

               Chance            Mechanism             Continuity and Community
               Indeterminism     Determinism           Synthesis and Aufhebung
Peirce on      Tychism,          Necessity,            Synechism,
evolution      Darwin theory     Spencer theory        Peirce theory
Peirce three   Tychastic,        Anancastic,          Agapastic,
levels of      Purposeless and   Determined by causes Continuity, sympathy, with
thought        unconstrained                          others and God
Hegel on       Indeterminacy,    Determination, object Unity of first two moments
Free Will      subject


    Information Philosopher                          William James Symposium
                      Peirce on Free Will
Necessitarianism cannot logically stop short of making the whole
action of the mind a part of the physical universe. Our notion that we
decide what we are going to do, if, as the necessitarian says, it has
been calculable since the earliest times, is reduced to illusion.
("The Doctrine of Necessity Examined," The Monist, vol.2, pp.321-337 (1892))

[T]he question of free-will and fate in its simplest form, stripped of
verbiage, is something like this: I have done something of which I am
ashamed; could I, by an effort of the will, have resisted the
temptation, and done otherwise?... it is perfectly true to say that, if I
had willed to do otherwise than I did, I should have done otherwise.
On the other hand, arranging the facts so as to exhibit another
important consideration, it is equally true that, when a temptation has
once been allowed to work, it will, if it has a certain force, produce its
effect, let me struggle how I may.
("Synechism and Agapism," The Monist, vol. 3, pp 176-200 (1893))


   Information Philosopher                             William James Symposium
                            After James…
So I have been able to find no one before William James with a
two-stage model for free will.

Let's look at thinkers after James with a two-stage model and
see if we can detect any influence of his thought.

Few of these thinkers give any explicit credit to their
immediate predecessors, let alone going back to James.

I find it hard to believe that they would not have known about
the author of the source article for hard and soft determinism,
the "iron block" universe, and the "quagmire of evasion."


  Information Philosopher                William James Symposium
           The Strange Case of R.E.Hobart
R.E.Hobart is the pseudonym of Dickinson S. Miller, who was a
student of William James around 1892 and later his colleague in the
philosophy department.

Hobart published an article in Mind in 1934 that Is often cited by
determinists as establishing the need for determinism.
(‘Free Will as Involving Determination and Inconceivable Without It’. Mind, 43, p.1)

"We say,’ I can will this or I can will that, whichever I choose ‘. Two courses of
action present themselves to my mind. I think of their consequences, I look
on this picture and on that, one of them commends itself more than the other,
and I will an act that brings it about. I knew that I could choose either. That
means that I had the power to choose either.” (p. 8)

“I am not maintaining that determinism is true...it is not here affirmed that
there are no small exceptions, no slight undetermined swervings, no
ingredient of absolute chance.” (p. 2)

   Information Philosopher                                William James Symposium
                           Henri Poincaré
Poincaré speculated on how his mind works when he is solving
mathematical problems. Random combinations and possibilities are
generated, some unconsciously, then they are selected among.

"In the subliminal ego, there reigns what I would call liberty, if one could give
this name to the mere absence of discipline and to disorder born of chance."

"It is certain that the combinations which present themselves to the mind in a
kind of sudden illumination after a somewhat prolonged period of
unconscious work are generally useful and fruitful combinations."

"A few only are harmonious,…useful and beautiful, and they will be capable
of affecting the geometrician's special sensibility [and] will direct our attention
upon them, and will thus give them the opportunity of becoming conscious."
(Science and Method, chapter 3, 1914, pp.58)




   Information Philosopher                            William James Symposium
                    Arthur Holly Compton
In 1931, just a few years after quantum theory, Compton proposed that
there might be a way that the nervous system acts to amplify quantum
events so as to break the causal chain of determinism.
(Science, 74, p.1911)

In a 1955 Atlantic Monthly article, Compton saw randomness as
producing a "range of events" – from which a choice is made.

"A set of known physical conditions is not adequate to specify precisely
what a forthcoming event will be. These conditions, insofar as they can
be known, define instead a range of possible events from among which
some particular event will occur. When one exercises freedom, by his
act of choice he is himself adding a factor not supplied by the physical
conditions and is thus himself determining what will occur."
(The Cosmos of Arthur Holly Compton, p.121)


   Information Philosopher                    William James Symposium
                               Karl Popper
In 1965, Popper gave the Arthur Holly Compton Memorial Lecture.
He objected to Compton's ideas about amplified quantum events.

In 1977, Popper compared free will to evolution, as James had done.

"New ideas have a striking similarity to genetic mutations. ..they are also
probabilistic and not in themselves originally selected or adequate, but on
them there subsequently operates natural selection which eliminates
inappropriate mutations. Now we could conceive of a similar process with
respect to new ideas and to free-will decisions."
(Popper and Eccles, The Self and Its Brain, p.540)

"The selection of a kind of behavior out of a randomly offered repertoire may
be an act of free will. I am an indeterminist… A choice process may be a
selection process, and the selection may be from some repertoire of random
events, without being random in its turn. "
(The Darwin Lecture, Darwin College, Cambridge, November 8, 1977)


   Information Philosopher                           William James Symposium
                        Henry Margenau
In 1968, Margenau lectured on Scientific Indeterminism and Human
Freedom. He accepted indeterminism as the first step toward a
solution of the problem of human freedom.

Then in 1982, he offered his "solution" to what had heretofore been
seen as mere "paradox and illusion."

" Our thesis is that quantum mechanics leaves our body, our brain, at any
moment in a state with numerous (because of its complexity we might say
innumerable) possible futures, each with a predetermined probability.

“Freedom involves two components: chance (existence of a genuine set of
alternatives) and choice. Quantum mechanics provides the chance, and we
shall argue that only the mind can make the choice by selecting…among the
possible future courses. "
(Einstein's Space and Van Gogh's Sky. p.240)



   Information Philosopher                        William James Symposium
                           Daniel Dennett
In 1978, Dennett wrote most clearly and convincingly on the strength
of a two-stage model for free will. Sadly, he did not endorse it.

"The model of decision making I am proposing, has the following feature:
when we are faced with an important decision, a consideration-generator
whose output is to some degree undetermined produces a series of
considerations, …those considerations ultimately serve as predictors and
explicators of the agent's final decision."
(Brainstorms, p.295)

Dennett gives six excellent reasons why this is the kind of free will
that libertarians say they want. He says,

"First...The intelligent selection, rejection, and weighing of the considerations
that do occur to the subject is a matter of intelligence making the difference."

"Second, I think it installs indeterminism in the right place for the libertarian, if
there is a right place at all."

   Information Philosopher                             William James Symposium
       Daniel Dennett's Six Good Reasons
"Third...from the point of view of biological engineering, it is just more efficient
and in the end more rational that decision making should occur in this way."

"A fourth observation in favor of the model is that it permits moral education to
make a difference, without making all of the difference."

"Fifth - and I think this is perhaps the most important thing to be said in favor
of this model - it provides some account of our important intuition that we are
the authors of our moral decisions."

"Finally, the model I propose points to the multiplicity of decisions that encircle
our moral decisions…the decision, for instance, not to consider any further, to
terminate deliberation; or the decision to ignore certain lines of inquiry.

("On Giving Libertarians What They Say They Want," Brainstorms, p.295-7)




   Information Philosopher                             William James Symposium
                              Robert Kane
Kane is the editor of the Oxford Handbook of Free Will and the world's
leading libertarian or free willist. In 1984, Kane focused on the role of
indeterminism in the free actions that form our character:

"Indeterminism does not have to be involved in all acts done "of our own free
wills" for which we are ultimately responsible, only those acts by which we
made ourselves into the kinds of persons we are — namely, the "will-setting"
or "self-forming actions" (SFAs) that are required for ultimate responsibility."
(Free Will and Values, 1984, p.144-6)

"Our thoughts, images, memories, beliefs, desires, and other reasons may be
causes of our choices or actions without necessarily determining choices and
actions…Such a view, for example, provides for an "open future," such as we
think we have when we exercise free will. We would not have to think that our
choices and the future direction of our lives had somehow been decided long
before we were born."
(A Contemporary Introduction to Free Will, 2005, p.64-5)



   Information Philosopher                                 William James Symposium
                             Alfred Mele
In his 1995 book Autonomous Agents, Mele proposed a "Modest
Libertarianism" for consideration by libertarians. He himself did not
endorse the idea. Following Dennett's model, he says that the
indeterminism should come early in the overall process. He describes
the latter - decision - part of the process as compatibilist (effectively
determinist). This of course could only be adequate determinism.

Then in 2005, he says:

"The modest indeterminism at issue allows agents ample control over their
deliberation…That a consideration is indeterministically caused to come to
mind does not entail that the agent has no control over how he responds to
it…And given a suitable indeterminism regarding what comes to mind in an
assessment process, there are causally open alternative possibilities for the
conclusion or outcome of that process. "
(Free Will and Luck, p.11)



   Information Philosopher                         William James Symposium
                         Stephen Kosslyn
Kosslyn is the John Lindsley Professor of Psychology in Memory of
William James at Harvard University.

In a foreword to Benjamin Libet's 2004 book Mind Time, Kosslyn notes
that the opposite of being "determined" is not necessarily being
"random," - a distinct departure from the standard logical argument.

"one constructs rationales and anticipated consequences, as appropriate for
the specific situation at hand. This construction process may rely in part on
chaotic processes. Such processes are not entirely determined by one's
learning history (even as filtered by one's genes). "

"Given the choices, rationales, and anticipated consequences, one decides
what to do on the basis of …one's knowledge, goals, values, and beliefs."

(Foreword to Mind Time, by Benjamin Libet, 2002, Harvard U. Press), pp.xii-xv)



   Information Philosopher                             William James Symposium
                        Martin Heisenberg
Heisenberg says that the debate on free will…

"has focused on humans and ‘conscious free will’. Yet when it comes to
understanding how we initiate behaviour, we can learn a lot by looking at
animals… The idea that animals act only in response to external stimuli has
long been abandoned, and it is well established that they initiate behaviour on
the basis of their internal states, as we do. "
(Nature, vol. 459, 2009, p.164)

Heisenberg proposes a two-stage model of random plus lawful behavior,
even in animals as primitive as bacteria (actually prokaryotes) and fruit flies.

"As with a bacterium’s locomotion, the activation of behavioural modules is
based on the interplay between chance and lawfulness in the brain…Their
brains, in a kind of random walk, continuously preactivate, discard and
reconfigure their options, and evaluate their possible short-term and long-term
consequences." (p.165)


   Information Philosopher                          William James Symposium
         Behavioral Freedom in Bacteria
Heisenberg identifies two states for bacteria:
1)Random tumbling motion when the flagella rotate clockwise.




  Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
         Behavioral Freedom in Bacteria
Heisenberg identifies two states for bacteria:
1) Random tumbling motion when the flagella rotate clockwise.
2) Lawful forward motion when the flagella rotate counter-
   clockwise and wrap together.




  Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
         Behavioral Freedom in Bacteria
After a random tumble, which generates alternative possibilities,
    the bacterium moves forward and evaluates the gradients of
    temperature, nutrients, toxins, etc, along its body.

If things look good, it "decides" to continue in that direction.




  Information Philosopher                  William James Symposium
         Behavioral Freedom in Bacteria
After a random tumble, which generates alternative possibilities,
    the bacterium moves forward and evaluates the gradients of
    temperature, nutrients, toxins, etc, along its body.

If things look good, it "decides" to continue in that direction.

If not,
it tumbles again




  Information Philosopher                  William James Symposium
How Behavioral Freedom Evolves To Free Will
Indeterminism is always the source for first-stage
spontaneous variations, whether it is bacteria tumbling or the
human mind generating new ideas.

In biological evolution, the second stage is natural selection.

But unlike biological evolution, in behavioral freedom it is the
organism itself that “purposefully” does the second-stage
selection according to its goals.

The means of selection is what distinguishes behavioral
freedom in lower animals from free will in humans and
higher animals. We see four levels of selection.

 Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
   The Four Levels of Second-stage Selection

Instinctive selection - by animals with little or no learning
capability. Selection criteria are transmitted genetically.

Learned selection - for animals whose past experiences guide
current choices. Selection criteria are acquired through
experience, including instruction by parents and peers.

Predictive selection - using imagination and foresight to
evaluate the future consequences of choices.

Reflective (normative) selection – in which conscious
deliberation about values influences the choice of behaviors.

 Information Philosopher                  William James Symposium
        "Free Will" as first "Free," then "Will."
All our thinkers separate free and will into two stages.

1) Freedom arises unpredictably from the creative and
indeterministic generation of alternative possibilities, which
present themselves to the will for evaluation and selection.

2) The Will is adequately determined by our reasons, desires,
and motives - by our character - but it is not pre-determined.

Note that already in 1690, John Locke had separated free from will,
because the adjective "free" applies to the agent, not to the will.
"I think the question is not proper, whether the will be free, but whether a
man be free."
(Essay Concerning Human Understanding , Bk. II, Ch.XXI, On Power, section 14)



   Information Philosopher                           William James Symposium
       What If We Had Just One Stage?

Determinist philosophers say an action could not have been
otherwise, given the “laws of nature” and the “fixed past,” i.e.,
the exact circumstances immediately preceding the decision.




This is because their decision is a single point in time.



 Information Philosopher                  William James Symposium
    We Need Time To “Do Otherwise”
In a two-stage model, the decision is a process with
a temporal sequence, first “free,” then “will.”




Our thoughts come to us freely.

Our actions go from us willfully.


Information Philosopher             William James Symposium
 We Can Even Have “Second Thoughts”
Note that a decision is not determined once we
generate the alternative possibilities.

If our evaluation finds the alternative possibilities
unacceptable, and if time permits, we can always go
back to generate more creative ideas.




Information Philosopher           William James Symposium
        But We Are Not Always "Free"
Daniel Wegner is right that many of our decisions are made
automatically and for reasons we may not understand.

Our "conscious will" often makes up reasons for our actions,
after the fact. There are always many possible causes for any
event in the world, and human actions are no exception.

But we can identify the kinds of causes, and see how the
two-stage model leaves room for creativity and free will,
despite the existence of causal chains that go back to our
childhood and even before we were born.



Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
          Multiple Causes in the Mind
    Bernard Baars’ audience in his Theater of Consciousness ≈
    Dan Dennett’s functional homunculi with their causal chains




Information Philosopher                       William James Symposium
          Multiple Causes in the Mind
    Bob Kane’s Self-Forming Actions add their own causal chains




Information Philosopher                     William James Symposium
             Multiple Causes in the Mind
         The Two-Stage Model adds new alternative possibilities,
         - after the Circumstance and before the Decision




Information Philosopher                       William James Symposium
      How I Improve the Two-Stage Model
Previous two-stage models could not locate a single quantum
event in the brain or synchronize it to make a decision free
(uncaused) yet provide agent control.

My model does not rely on a single quantum event for each
willed decision. That would make the decision random.

The source of randomness in my model is the ever-present
quantal and thermal noise that affects the creation, storage,
maintenance, and retrieval of information in the mind, as it
does in any information-processing system.

Compare James’s “blooming, buzzing, confusion”

 Information Philosopher                William James Symposium
   Random Quantum Events in the Brain?

Molecular biologists are understandably very skeptical about
quantum indeterminacy in the brain-mind. Neurons are
macroscopic objects with the order of 1020 atoms. How could
one random atom affect anything?, they ask.

One answer is that there are trillions of quantum events in
the brain every second. Another is that biological systems
have evolved to the quantum limit. An eye can detect a single
photon. A nose can smell a single molecule.

We argue that the brain has found an evolutionary advantage
in quantum indeterminacy and thermal noise.


 Information Philosopher                William James Symposium
           Creativity and Free Will
Normally random noise is the enemy of information, but it
can be the friend of freedom and creativity.

Noise generates alternative possibilities that are the source
of human creativity. They make us the authors of our lives.

We normally suppress this creative noise.

But we are perhaps most free when we let the noise in,
when we dream, when we imagine, when we create.




Information Philosopher                 William James Symposium
                          To Sum Up

Free Will is Incompatible with Pre-determinism and
with Indeterminism in the Choice itself.

Free Will is Compatible with a Limited Indeterminism
and with an Adequate Determinism
(i.e., determination by reasons, values, and desires).

Might compatibilist philosophers accept the model?



Information Philosopher               William James Symposium
  On Giving Compatibilists What They Need

Given the stark choice between determinism and indeterminism,
compatibilists understandably choose determinism,
so that their decisions are "determined" by evaluations of their
reasons, motive, and desires, in short, by their character.

The Two-Stage Model provides all the "determination" of the will
the compatibilist wants and needs, but none of the
"pre-determinism" that threatens agent freedom.

But can compatibilists accept the limited indeterminism that we
have in quantum physics and the real world? It provides the
creativity without threatening agent control and responsibility.


 Information Philosopher                  William James Symposium
               Compatibilism Corrected (1)

Free Will is Compatible with what I call Adequate Determinism,
the everyday determinism of classical physics, by which I mean
the Newtonian mechanics that we use to send men to the
moon, with no concerns about quantum indeterminacy.

Adequate determinism provides the determination (but not
pre-determination) of the will required for responsibility.

R. E. Hobart’s 1934 Mind article was actually titled
“Free Will as Requiring Determination and Inconceivable Without It.”




  Information Philosopher                      William James Symposium
             Compatibilism Corrected (2)


  Free Will is also Compatible with some chance,
  the Limited Indeterminism that is required for the
  generation of new ideas.

  Indeterminism provides alternative possibilities, one
  of which can be selected by a will that is adequately
  determined by our reasons, motives, and desires.




Information Philosopher                William James Symposium
      Comprehensive Compatibilism?
   Compatibilists might like to call this model
   Comprehensive Compatibilism because it is
   compatible with both…

   the Adequate Determinism they always
   wanted - to provide determination by our
   motives, reasons, values, and desires,

   but also the Limited Indeterminism we need
   to generate alternative possibilities.


Information Philosopher           William James Symposium
              The Question of "Free-Will"
In the chapter on Will in the Principles (which Bob Richardson
described so well this morning), James said: (his italics)

Free will, "if it existed, could only be to hold some one ideal object,
or part of an object, a little longer or a little more intensely before
the mind. Amongst the alternatives which present themselves as
genuine possibles, it would thus make one effective."

"And although such quickening of one idea might be morally and
historically momentous, if considered dynamically, it would be an
operation amongst those physiological infinitesimals which
calculation must forever neglect."
(Principles of Psychology, vol.2, ch.XXVI, p.576)


   Information Philosopher                          William James Symposium
             The Answer for "Free-Will"
The Will to Believe in Free Will of William James may have
been physiologically infinitesimal dynamically, but it was
indeed morally and historically momentous.

Amongst the many free-will alternatives which present
themselves as genuine possibles, it is my hope that
members of the William James Society and others here
will help me to make his two-stage model "effective."

Thank you.

bobdoyle@informationphilosopher.com
informationphilosopher.com/presentations/wjs-2010.ppt

  Information Philosopher            William James Symposium
