                276   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                     f Ti m e
                                 w o
                             Arro
Chapter
   Chapter
        22 24




                                                                         This chapter on the web
                                             informationphilosopher.com/problems/arrow_of_time
                                                      Arrow of Time       277


The Arrow of Time
   The laws of nature, except the second law of thermodynamics,
are symmetric in time. Reversing the time in the dynamical equa-
tions of motion simply describes everything going backwards.
The second law is different. Entropy must never decrease in time,
except statistically and briefly, as Ludwig Boltzmann showed.
   Many natural processes are apparently irreversible. Irreversibility
is intimately connected to the direction of time. Identifying the
physical reasons for the observed irreversibility, the origin of
irreversibility, would contribute greatly to understanding the
apparent asymmetry of nature in time, despite nature's apparently
perfect symmetry in space.1
The Thermodynamic Arrow
   In 1927, Arthur Stanley Eddington coined the term "Arrow
of Time" in his book The Nature of the Physical World. He con-
nected "Time's Arrow" to the one-way direction of increasing
entropy required by the second law of thermodynamics.2 This is
now known as the "thermodynamic arrow."
  In his later work, Eddington identified a "cosmological arrow,"



                                                                            Chapter 24
the direction in which the universe is expanding,3 which was dis-
covered by Edwin Hubble about the time Eddington first defined
the thermodynamic arrow.
   There are now a few other proposed arrows of time, includ-
ing a psychological arrow (our perception of time), a causal arrow
(causes precede effects), and a quantum mechanical arrow (elec-
troweak decay asymmetries). We can ask whether one arrow is a
"master arrow" that all the others are following, or perhaps time
itself is just a given property of nature that is otherwise irreducible
to something more basic, as is space.
   Given the four-dimensional space-time picture of special rela-
tivity, and given that the laws of nature are symmetric in space, we
may expect the laws to be invariant under a change in time direc-
tion. The laws do not depend on position in space or direction,

  1     See chapter 25.
  2     Nature of the Physical World, 1927, p.328-9
  3     New Pathways in Science, 1937, p.328-9
                278     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                      they are invariant under translations and rotations, since space
                      is seen to be uniform and isotropic. But time is not just another
                      spatial dimension. It enters into calculations of event separations
                      as an imaginary term (multiplied by the square root of minus 1).
                      Nevertheless, all the classical dynamical laws of motion are sym-
                      metric under time reversal.
                         So the basic problem is - how can macroscopic irreversibil-
                      ity result from microscopic processes that are fundamentally
                      reversible?
                        Long before Eddington, scientists asked deep questions about
                      the direction of time. Perhaps the first to explore the connection
                      with physics was Boltzmann, who with James Clerk Maxwell
                      investigated the statistical motions of the atoms and molecules of
                      gases.
                         If the laws of nature are time symmetric, perhaps the "arrow of
                      time" is to be found in the "initial" conditions, although this may
                      be a circular concept, since "initial,"current," and "final" states are
                      all defined with respect to time. Since the dynamical laws are time
                      reversible, scientists as early as Isaac Newton understood that
Chapter




                      one could calculate all the motions of a system by assuming "final
                      conditions" and working backwards in time.
   Chapter




                        Nevertheless, many if not most physicists have assumed the
        22 24




                      universe must have begun in a highly ordered (low entropy) state
                      and it has been "running down" (entropy or disorder increasing)
                      ever since. In the nineteenth century, this was called the "heat
                      death" of the universe. This view has the unfortunate implication
                      that all the information in the current universe was present at the
                      beginning, which is friendly to some theological ideas like pre-
                      destination, but distinctly unfriendly to ideas of human free will.
                         Boltzmann assumed that the universe was infinitely old and
                      that our current state is the consequence of a massive statistical
                      fluctuation away from equilibrium and maximum entropy, a con-
                      dition to which we must ultimately return.
                         Would time itself be reversed if we could make the entropy
                      decrease? That is unlikely, since entropy decrease anywhere (cre-
                      ating negative entropy or negentropy, a term coined by Leon
                                                            Arrow of Time              279

Brillouin) must be accompanied by an increase elsewhere, to
satisfy the second law. Otherwise we could use the local reduction
in the entropy to build a perpetual motion machine.
   Put another way, if we could reverse the time, would entropy
decrease? What can time reversal really mean? A thought experi-
ment suggests not. Consider a closed perfume bottle inside a large
empty container. Remove the bottle top and what would happen
assuming that time is flowing backwards? It seems likely that the
perfume molecules would leave the bottle whatever time is doing.




    Figure 24-29. Information physics has shown that at each collision of a gas par-
ticle with another particle, the path information of where that particle has been is
erased, so that time reversal would not return all the perfume to the bottle. .

   For Aristotle, time was a measure of motion and change and



                                                                                         Chapter 24
for practical purposes, many scientists have thought that time
reversal can be approximated by the reversal of all the velocities
or momenta of material particles at an instant, starting from their
current positions.
   If we could perfectly reverse the motions of every material body
(a practical impossibility, and perhaps a violation of Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle), would that make the entropy decrease?
Boltzmann agreed that it might, but only for a while. His intuition
was that a system could not return to a highly ordered original
state, such as every molecule getting back in the perfume bottle.
   J. Willard Gibbs thought otherwise, if the detailed path
information in all the macroscopic motions is still available as
microscopic information (if information is a conserved quantity),
then reversal of all the motions should be exactly like a movie
played backwards.
                280         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                         The fundamental question of information philosophy is cosmo-
                      logical and ultimately metaphysical. What is the process that creates
                      information structures in the universe?
                         Given the second law of thermodynamics, which says that any
                      system will over time approach a thermodynamic equilibrium of
                      maximum disorder or entropy, in which all information is lost, and
                      given the best current model for the origin of the universe, which
                      says everything began in a state of equilibrium some 13.75 billion
                      years ago, how can it be that living beings are creating and com-
                      municating new information every day? Why are we not still in that
                      state of thermal equilibrium?
                         It is perhaps easier for us to see the increasing complexity and
                      order of information structures on the earth than it is to notice
                      the increase in chaos that comes with increasing entropy, since the
                      entropy is radiated away from the earth into the night sky, then away
                      to the cosmic microwave background sink of deep space.
                         David Layzer is a Harvard cosmologist who in the early 1970's
                      made it clear that in an expanding universe the entropy would
                      increase, as required by the second law of thermodynamics, but
Chapter




                      that the maximum possible entropy of the universe might increase
                      faster than the actual entropy increase. This would leave room for
   Chapter




                      an increase of order or information at the same time the entropy is
        22 24




                      increasing!4
                         Layzer pointed out that if the equilibration rate of the matter
                      (the speed with which matter redistributes itself randomly among
                      all the possible states) was slower than the rate of expansion, then
                      the "negative entropy" or "order" (defined as the difference between
                      the maximum possible entropy and the actual entropy) would also
                      increase. Claude Shannon identified this negative entropy with
                      information, though visible structural information in the universe
                      may be much less than this "potential" information.
                        4     See appendix B for more on Layzer’s work.
                                                            Arrow of Time            281


The Historical Arrow
   Layzer called the direction of information increase the "historical
arrow." In a 1975 article for Scientific American called “The Arrow
of Time,” he wrote:
      the complexity of the astronomical universe seems puzzling. Isolated
      systems inevitably evolve toward the featureless state of thermodynamic
      equilibrium. Since the universe is in some sense an isolated system, why
      has it not settled into equilibrium? One answer, favored by many cos-
      mologists, is that the cosmological trend is in fact toward equilibrium
      but that too little time has elapsed for the process to have reached com-
      pletion... I shall argue that this view is fundamentally incorrect. The uni-
      verse is not running down, and it need not have started with a marked
      degree of disequilibrium; the initial state may indeed have been wholly
      lacking in macroscopic as well as microscopic information.
      Suppose that at some early moment local thermodynamic equilibrium
      prevailed in the universe. The entropy of any region would then be as
      large as possible for the prevailing values of the mean temperature and
      density. As the universe expanded from that hypothetical state the local
      values of the mean density and temperature would change, and so would
      the entropy of the region. For the entropy to remain at its maximum
      value (and thus for equilibrium to be maintained) the distribution of
      energies allotted to matter and to radiation must change, and so must
      the concentrations of the various kinds of particles. The physical pro-
      cesses that mediate these changes proceed at finite rates; if these "equili-




                                                                                       Chapter 24
      bration" rates are all much greater than the rate of cosmic expansion,
      approximate local thermodynamic equilibrium will be maintained; if
      they are not, the expansion will give rise to significant local departures
      from equilibrium.5
   This is Layzer's seminal theory of the growth of order in the
universe These departures represent macroscopic information; the
quantity of macroscopic information generated by the expansion is
the difference between the actual value of the entropy and the theo-
retical maximum entropy at the mean temperature and density.
  5       Scientific American, December, 1975, p.68
                282         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                        In his 1989 book The Emperor's New Mind, Roger Penrose
                      speculated on the connection between information, entropy, and
                      the arrow of time.
                            Recall that the primordial fireball was a thermal state — a hot gas in
                            expanding thermal equilibrium. Recall, also, that the term 'thermal
                            equilibrium' refers to a state of maximum entropy. (This was how we
                            referred to the maximum entropy state of a gas in a box.) However, the
                            second law demands that in its initial state, the entropy of our universe
                            was at some sort of minimum, not a maximum!
                            What has gone wrong? One 'standard' answer would run roughly as
                            follows:
                            True, the fireball was effectively in thermal equilibrium at the begin-
                            ning, but the universe at that time was very tiny. The fireball repre-
                            sented the state of maximum entropy that could be permitted for a uni-
                            verse of that tiny size, but the entropy so permitted would have been
                            minute by comparison with that which is allowed for a universe of the
                            size that we find it to be today. As the universe expanded, the permit-
                            ted maximum entropy increased with the universe's size, but the actual
                            entropy in the universe lagged well behind this permitted maximum.
                            The second law arises because the actual entropy is always striving to
                            catch up with this permitted maximum.6
                        Penrose's "standard" answer is a clear reference to the pioneer-
Chapter




                      ing work of David Layzer.
   Chapter




                      The Radiation Arrow
                        Whether they be electromagnetic waves or waves in water, we
        22 24




                      only observe wavelike disturbances that propagate outwards in
                      space away from the disturbance. These waves are described by
                      what is called the retarded potential. In his 1909 discussion of
                      waves and particles, Albert Einstein described the very remote
                      possibility of incoming spherical waves:
                            According to our prevailing theory, an oscillating electron generates a
                            spherical wave that propagates outwards. The inverse process does not
                            exist as an elementary process. A converging spherical wave is math-
                            ematically possible, to be sure; but to approach its realization requires

                        6       The Emperor’s New Mind, p.328-9
                                                            Arrow of Time              283

    a vast number of emitting entities. The elementary process of emission
    is not invertible. In this, I believe, our oscillation theory does not hit the
    mark. Newton's emission theory of light seems to contain more truth
    with respect to this point than the oscillation theory since, first of all, the
    energy given to a light particle is not scattered over infinite space, but
    remains available for an elementary process of absorption.7
   In 1945, John Wheeler and his student Richard Feynman
attempted to symmetrize Maxwell's equations for electromagnetic
fields with an "Absorber Theory of Radiation," that combined
retarded potentials (outgoing spherical waves) and advanced poten-
tials (incoming spherical waves) for radiation. They later described
the theory as a mistake. There are no incoming spherical waves.
The Cosmological Arrow
   We can define a cosmological direction of time as the direction
in which the universe is expanding. There are excellent reasons for
seeing this as the most fundamental of all arrows, even the one driv-
ing some of the others. Without expansion, a static universe would
settle into thermal equilibrium and there would be no changes.
There would be no entropy increase to show Eddington's thermo-
dynamic arrow. There would be no information increase, as seen in
Layzer's historical arrow.




                                                                                         Chapter 24
  Without the cosmological arrow, the thermodynamic, radiation,
and historical arrows could not have been realized.
  7       “On the Development of Our Views Concerning the Nature and Constitution of
Radiation,” Einstein Collected Papers, vol.6, p.213
