         234      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                   m inis        m
                                          De t e r

                                                            t i b i l i s m
                                                  Co    mpa                 ism
                                                                   rmin
                         ter  minism               Sof   t D e t e
                  De
             Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                    o m p atibi
                                                            S oft C
                                  ilism
       n         co   m p a t i b
                                i o l o  g  y                                            In
Chapter 16




Hard I
                           e  B
                        Th eSeemW      icoimll
                                             p a t i b ilism

               on i s m  o f Fr
  Illusi
                                                                 p atib ilism
                                                        In c o m
                                                    w
                        sm                 Narro
   Impo         ssibili
                                                                 p atib   ilism
                                                      t In c o m
                                                 Sof                                      y
                         del                                                      Leewa
                   an Mo
             Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                           a
                                          r c e I ncom nce)
                                      Sou          l S e que
                                        (Actu   a
                                                                             i m i t e d
                                                      e lw             ith L
                                                  o d
                                - S t      a ge M
                           Tw o                       This chapter on the web
                                  informationphilosopher.com/freedom/biology
                            m inis         m
                   de t e r                                     The Biology            235
              In
              The Biology of rFree
                              ianisWill
                                   m
                                            a
                                Libert
                    Perhaps physics now puts no limits on human freedom, but
               what about biology? Each of us gets a significant amount of genetic
               information from our parents, which at least predisposesCusau                tosa
                                                                                                  l
               certain behaviors that have evolved to improve A                n t -
                                                                           gereproductive
                                                                         our

                                                 usal
               success, sexual behavior, for example.
                                   n   t - C  a“determined”
               biological E
                                ve
                    Are we completely                        by a combination of our
                              nature and the social nurture of our environmental
               conditioning? Is biology itself all a causal process that is simply
                                                                                       - C   a u sal
                                                                              Non
               unfolding from a distant past that contained all the information
               about the one possible biological future?
                    Information biology says S
                                                      FA
          t i b i lis       m                       no. While the stability of biological

    omp a      systems is extraordinary, and while their error-free performance
                                                                            s a lity
nc                                                                      a u




                                                                                           Chapter 16
               of vital functions over many-year lifetimes
                                                            S   o ft C
                                                                     is astonishing,   their
               dependence on randomness is clear. Biological laws, like physical

                          m p  a  bilism determined, statistical laws.
               laws, are onlytiadequately
                                                                                              n ism
               I n  c  o                                                            t a r i a
      Broad stochastic, depending on thermal and quantal                   Libetor deliver
                    At   the  atomic  and     molecular  level, biological  processes    are
                                                                   Softnoise
               the “just-in-time” parts needed by assembly lines for the basic
                                   r i a  n   smsuch as the amino acids needed by the ertaria
                                            ilife,
                                 a
                             ert to assemble proteins.
               structural elements
                          ibfactories
                                         of
                                                                                         ft Lib
              e  s   t
               ribosome L                                                      g   S  o
        Mod So our question is how the typical structuresDof                in brain have
                                                                         arthe
               evolved to deal with microscopic,
                                                C  ogitoatomic level, noise. Do they sim-
            p a t i    ilismit because they are adequately determined large objects,
               ply ignore
                    b
 Incom or           might they
                         c e s ) have remained sensitive to the noise because it pro-
                                                                              n is         m
                   e  n
               u some benefits?
            eqvides                                                   e r m i
a t i v e S
                                                 d In             det
                    We can expect that if quantum noise, or even ordinary ther-
                                               e
                                           i t
                                    nd Lim
               mal noise, offered benefits that contribute to reproductive success,

               ism               a
               there would have been evolutionary pressure to take advantage of

       r m i n the noise.
  Dete              Many biologists argue that quantum-level processes are just too
               small to be important, too small for the relatively macroscopic
               biological apparatus to even notice. But consider this evidence to
               the contrary.
         236     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Proof that our sensory organs have evolved until they are work-
               ing at or near quantum limits is evidenced by the eye’s ability to
               detect a single photon (a quantum of light energy), and the nose’s
               ability to smell a single molecule.
                  Biology provides many examples of ergodic creative processes
               following a trial-and-error model. They harness chance as a pos-
               sibility generator, followed by an adequately determined selection
               mechanism with implicit information-value criteria.
                  Darwinian evolution was the first and greatest example of a
               two-stage creative process, random variation followed by critical
               selection. Darwin’s example inspired William James to propose
               the original two-stage model of free will.
                  Here I will briefly consider some other such processes that are
               analogous to the two-stage Cogito model for the human mind.
Chapter 16




               Creativity in the Immune System
                  Consider the great problem faced by the immune system. It
               stands ready to develop antibodies to attack an invading antigen at
               any moment, with no advance knowledge of what the antigen may
               be. In information terms, it needs to discover some part of the an-
               tigen that is unique. Its method is not unlike Poincaré’s two-stage
               method of solving a mathematical problem. First put together lots
               of random combinations, then subject them to tests.
                  Biological information is stored in the “genetic code,” the
               sequence of genes along a chromosome in our DNA. “Sequencing”
               the DNA establishes the exact arrangement of nucleotides that
               code for specific proteins/enzymes. All the advances in molecular
               genetics are based on this sequencing ability.
                  The white blood cells have evolved a powerful strategy to dis-
               cover unique information in the antigen. What they have done is
               evolve a “re-sequencing” capability. Using the same gene splicing
               techniques that biologists have now developed to insert character-
               istics from one organism into another, the white blood cells have
               a very-high-speed process that shuffles genes around at random.
               They cut genes out of one location and splice them in at random in
                                         The Biology of Free Will      237

other locations. This combinatorial diversity provides a variation
in the gene pool very much like the Darwinian mutations that
drive species evolution.
   But the marvelous immune system gets even more random. It
has a lower-level diversity generator that randomly scrambles the
individual nucleotides at the junctions between genes. The splic-
ing of genes is randomly done with errors that add or subtract
nucleotides, creating what is called junctional diversity.
Bacterial Chemotaxis
   Some of the smallest organisms are equipped with sensors and
motion capability that let them make two-stage decisions about
which way to go. They must move in the direction of nutrients and
away from toxic chemicals. Some bacteria do this with tiny flagella
that rotate in two directions. Flagella rotating clockwise cause the




                                                                         Chapter 16
bacterium to tumble and face random new directions. Rotation
of the flagella counter-clockwise drives the bacterium straight
ahead. As the bacterium moves, receptors on the bacterium sur-
face detect gradients of chemicals. When the gradient indicates
“food ahead” or “toxic behind,” the bacterium keeps going. If the
gradients are not promising, the bacterium reverses the flagella
rotation direction, which makes it tumble again.
   In Nature Magazine,1 the German neurogeneticist Martin
Heisenberg challenged the idea, popular in the recent psychol-
ogy and philosophy literature,2 that human free will is an illusion.
Heisenberg suggested that a lot could be learned by looking at
lower animals. We can see that they do not merely respond to
stimuli mechanically, but originate actions. He said,
    “when it comes to understanding how we initiate behaviour,
    we can learn a lot by looking at animals. Although we do not
    credit animals with anything like the consciousness in hu-
    mans, researchers have found that animal behaviour is not as
    involuntary as it may appear. The idea that animals act only in
    response to external stimuli has long been abandoned, and it is
1       Nature, vol. 459, 2009, p. 164
2       Cf. especially Wegner (2002)
         238     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     well established that they initiate behaviour on the basis of their
                     internal states, as we do.”
                 One of Heisenberg’s examples was bacterial chemotaxis.
                     “Evidence of randomly generated action — action that is dis-
                     tinct from reaction because it does not depend upon external
                     stimuli — can be found in unicellular organisms. Take the way
                     the bacterium Escherichia coli moves. It has a flagellum that
                     can rotate around its longitudinal axis in either direction: one
                     way drives the bacterium forward, the other causes it to tumble
                     at random so that it ends up facing in a new direction ready for
                     the next phase of forward motion. This ‘random walk’ can be
                     modulated by sensory receptors, enabling the bacterium to find
                     food and the right temperature.” 3

               An Error Detection and Correction System?
Chapter 16




                  Errors in protein synthesis are arguably quantal. If errors pre-
               vent proper folding, the chaperone functions as an information
               error detection and correction system. If it succeeds in helping the
               protein to fold, the protein is released, otherwise the chaperone
               will digest and destroy the malformed protein.
                  Here the quantal noise will destroy the protein if the error
               cannot be corrected. It is of course not as if a new protein is be-
               ing generated analogous to the accidental variations that genetic
               mutations introduce to the gene pool.
                  But it is instructive as an example of a two-stage process none-
               theless, in that microscopic indeterministic errors are repaired by
               macroscopic, adequately determined, systems
               Neurotransmitter Release as a Noise Source
                  Since information flows across the synapses, randomness of
               release times for transmitter quanta may be a source of infor-
               mation noise in memory storage and recall. Neurotransmitter
               “quanta” are of course huge compared to atomic-level quantum
               processes - containing thousands of molecules.

                 3       Nature, vol. 459, 2009, p. 165
                                      The Biology of Free Will                  239

  John Eccles thought this to be a meaningful source of noise,
that it could help the brain make undetermined decisions, but
he did not have a coherent idea of the process, like the two-stage
model of free will.
Four Levels of Selection
   I propose that there have been four levels in the evolutionary
development of free will. In all four levels, the source of the
random generation of alternative possibilities in the first stage
of my two-stage model is the same. It is the essential chaos and
noise that is characteristic of information processes at the lower
levels of any organism.
   But in the second stage, I argue that new methods of selection
of the best alternative possibility get added at the upper levels.




                                                                                  Chapter 16
Instinctive Selection
  At the lowest level, selection is instinctive. The selection criteria
are transmitted genetically, shaped only by ancestral experiences.
Learned Selection
  At the second level are animals whose past experiences guide
their current choices. Selection criteria are acquired through
experience, including instruction by parents and peers.
Predictive Selection
   Third-level animals use their imagination and foresight to
estimate the future consequences of their choices.
Reflective (Normative) Selection
   At the highest level, selection is reflective and normative.4
Conscious deliberation about community values influences the
choice of behaviors.




  4     Compare Christine Korsgaard’s theory of normativity. Korsgaard (1996)
