         152   My God, He Plays Dice!
Chapter 20




                                 n s te i n
                         n - E i
                     Bor tistical
                       Sta etation
                       te r p  r
                     In
                                        Statistical Interpretation 153


Statistical Interpretation
   It is often said that Max Born gave us the “statistical
interpretation” of quantum mechanics that lies at the heart of Niels
Bohr’s and Werner Heisenberg’s principle of complementarity
and the “Copenhagen Interpretation” of quantum mechanics.
   But Born himself said many times he had only applied an idea of
Albert Einstein that had circulated privately for many years. To
be sure, Born and Einstein quarreled for years over determinism
and causality, but as we saw in chapter 11, it was Einstein who
discovered “chance” in the interaction of matter and radiation,
even if he considered it a “weakness in the theory.”




                                                                          Chapter 20
   As we showed in chapters 2 to 4, probability and statistics
were very important in the two centuries before Born’s work, but
most physicists and philosophers saw the implied randomness
to be “epistemic,” the consequence of human ignorance.
Random distributions of all kinds were thought to be completely
deterministic at the particle level, with collisions between atoms
following Newton’s dynamical laws. Ludwig Boltzmann’s
transport equation and H-Theorem showed that the increase of
entropy is statistically irreversible at the macroscopic level, even if
the motions of individual particles were time reversible.
   Boltzmann did speculate that there might be some kind of
molecular “chaos” or “disorder” that could cause particles traveling
between collisions to lose the “correlations” or information about
their past paths that would be needed for the paths to be time
reversible and deterministic, but nothing came of this idea.
   In his early career, Erwin Schrödinger was a great exponent
of fundamental chance in the universe. He followed his mentor
Franz S. Exner, who as a colleague of Boltzmann at the University
of Vienna was a great promoter of statistical thinking.
   In his inaugural lecture at Zurich in 1922, Schrödinger argued
that available evidence can not justify our assumptions that
physical laws are deterministic and strictly causal. His inaugural
lecture was modeled on that of Exner in 1908.
         154     My God, He Plays Dice!

                     Exner’s assertion amounts to this: It is quite possible that
                     Nature’s laws are of thoroughly statistical character. The
                     demand for an absolute law in the background of the statistical
                     law — a demand which at the present day almost everybody
                     considers imperative — goes beyond the reach of experience.
                     Such a dual foundation for the orderly course of events in
                     Nature is in itself improbable. The burden of proof falls on
                     those who champion absolute causality, and not on those who
                     question it. For a doubtful attitude in this respect is to-day by
                     far the more natural.1
                  Several years later, Schrödinger presented a paper on
               “Indeterminism in Physics” to the June, 1931 Congress of A Society
               for Philosophical Instruction in Berlin. He supported the idea of
Chapter 20




               Boltzmann that “an actual continuum must consist of an infinite
               number of parts; but an infinite number is undefinable..”
                     If nature is more complicated than a game of chess, a belief to
                     which one tends to incline, then a physical system cannot be
                     determined by a finite number of observations. But in practice
                     a finite number of observations is all that we can make.
                     All that is left to determinism is to believe that an infinite
                     accumulation of observations would in principle enable it
                     completely to determine the system. Such was the standpoint
                     and view of classical physics, which latter certainly had a right
                     to see what it could make of it. But the opposite standpoint
                     has an equal justification: we are not compelled to assume that
                     an infinite number of observations, which cannot in any case
                     be carried out in practice, would suffice to give us a complete
                     determination.
                  In the history of science it is hard to find ears more likely to
               be sympathetic to a new idea than Schrödinger should have been
               to Max Born’s suggestion that the square of the amplitude of
               Schrödinger’s wave function |ψ2| should be interpreted statistically
               as the likelihood of finding a particle. And Schrödinger should
               have known Einstein thought quantum mechanics is statistical.
                  Yet Schrödinger objected strenuously, not so much to the
               probability and statistics as to the conviction of Born and his
               brilliant student Heisenberg that quantum phenomena, like
                 1       ‘What Is a Law of Nature?,’ Science and the Human Temperament, p.142.
                                        Statistical Interpretation 155

quantum jumps between atomic energy levels, were only predictable
statistically, and that there is a fundamental indeterminacy in the
classical idea that particles have simultaneously knowable exact
positions and velocities (momenta). Born, Heisenberg, and Bohr
had declared classical determinism and causality untrue of the
physical world.
   It is likely that Schrödinger was ecstatic that his wave equation
implied a deterministic physical theory. His wave function ψ
evolves in time to give exact values for itself for all times and
places. Perhaps Schrödinger thought that the waves themselves
could provide a field theory of physics, much as fields in Newton's
gravitational theory and in Maxwell's electromagnetic theory
provide complete descriptions of nature. Schrödinger wondered




                                                                        Chapter 20
whether nature might be only waves, no particles?
   In July of 1926, Born used Louis de Broglie’s matter waves
for electrons, as described by Schrödinger’s wave equation, but he
interpreted the wave as the probability of finding an electron going
off in a specific collision direction, proportional to the square of
the wave function ψ, now seen as a "probability amplitude."
   Born's interpretation of the quantum mechanical wave function
of a material particle as the probability (amplitude) of finding the
material particle was a direct extension of Einstein's interpretation
of light waves giving probability of finding photons.
   To be sure, Einstein's interpretation may be considered only
qualitative, where Born's was quantitative, since the new quantum
mechanics now allowed exact calculations.
   Nevertheless, Born initially gave full credit for the statistical
interpretation to Einstein for the "ghost field" idea. Although
the original idea is pure Einstein, it is widely referred to today
as “Born’s statistical interpretation,” another example of others
getting credit for a concept first seen by Einstein.
   Born described his insights in 1926,
   Collision processes not only yield the most convincing
   experimental proof of the basic assumptions of quantum
   theory, but also seem suitable for explaining the physical
   meaning of the formal laws of the so-called “quantum
         156   My God, He Plays Dice!


               mechanics.”... The matrix form of quantum mechanics that was
               founded by Heisenberg and developed by him and the author of
               this article starts from the thought that an exact representation
               of processes in space and time is quite impossible and that
               one must then content oneself with presenting the relations
               between the observed quantities, which can only be interpreted
               as properties of the motions in the limiting classical cases. On
               the other hand, Schrödinger (3) seems to have ascribed a reality
               of the same kind that light waves possessed to the waves that
               he regards as the carriers of atomic processes by using the de
               Broglie procedure; he attempts “to construct wave packets that
               have relatively small dimensions in all directions,” and which can
               obviously represent the moving corpuscle directly.
               Neither of these viewpoints seems satisfactory to me. Here, I
Chapter 20




               would like to try to give a third interpretation and probe its
               utility in collision processes. I shall recall a remark that Einstein
               made about the behavior of the wave field and light quanta. He
               said that perhaps the waves only have to be wherever one needs
               to know the path of the corpuscular light quanta, and in that
               sense, he spoke of a “ghost field.” It determines the probability
               that a light quantum - viz., the carrier of energy and impulse
               – follows a certain path; however, the field itself is ascribed no
               energy and no impulse.
               One would do better to postpone these thoughts, when coupled
               directly to quantum mechanics, until the place of the electro-
               magnetic field in the formalism has been established. However,
               from the complete analogy between light quanta and electrons,
               one might consider formulating the laws of electron motion
               in a similar manner. This is closely related to regarding the
               de Broglie-Schrödinger waves as “ghost fields,” or better yet,
               “guiding fields.”
               I would then like to pursue the following idea heuristically:
               The guiding field, which is represented by a scalar function ψ
               of the coordinates of all particles that are involved and time,
               propagates according to Schrödinger’s differential equation.
               However, impulse and energy will be carried along as when
               corpuscles (i.e., electrons) are actually flying around. The paths
               of these corpuscles are determined only to the extent that they
               are constrained by the law of energy and impulse; moreover,
               only a probability that a certain path will be followed will be
                                           Statistical Interpretation 157

      determined by the function ψ. One can perhaps summarize this,
      somewhat paradoxically, as: The motion of the particle follows
      the laws of probability, but the probability itself propagates in
      accord with causal laws. 2
  This last sentence is a remarkably concise description of the
dualism in quantum mechanics, a strange mixture of indeterminism
and determinism, of chance and necessity.
  In his 1948 Waynflete lectures, Born elaborated on his
understanding of chance,
      There is no doubt that the formalism of quantum mechanics
      and its statistical interpretation are extremely successful in
      ordering and predicting physical experiences. But can our desire
      of understanding, our wish to explain things, be satisfied by a




                                                                            Chapter 20
      theory which is frankly and shamelessly statistical and indeter-
      ministic? Can we be content with accepting chance, not cause, as
      the supreme law of the physical world?
      To this last question I answer that not causality, properly
      understood, is eliminated, but only a traditional interpretation of
      it, consisting in its identification with determinism. I have taken
      pains to show that these two concepts are not identical. Causality
      in my definition is the postulate that one physical situation
      depends on the other, and causal research means the discovery
      of such dependence. This is still true in quantum physics, though
      the objects of observation for which a dependence is claimed
      are different: they are the probabilities of elementary events, not
      those single events themselves. 3
   Ever since 1930, when Born's young graduate student Heisenberg
had been selected for the Nobel Prize in physics although much of
the theory was his own work, Born felt he had been treated unfairly.
   He finally received recognition, with the Nobel Prize for physics
in 1954, for his "statistical interpretation." But Born's voluminous
correspondence with Einstein reveals that he had perhaps come to
think that Einstein's supposed determinism meant Einstein did not
believe in the statistical nature of quantum physics, so this idea may
now rightfully belong to Born. He called it "his own" in the 1950's.

  2       Born. 1926, p. 803.
  3       Born, 1964, p.102
