        10   My God - He Plays DIce!
Chapter 2




                       a n ce
                    Ch




                                                   This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/chance
                                                                    Chance           11


Chance
    We hope to develop your ability to visualize actual chance events




                                                                                      Chapter 2
and distinguish them clearly from the continuous mathematical
equations that predict very large numbers of them so perfectly.
This will be critical if you are to visualize the quantum wave
function and see it the way Einstein saw it.
    A continuous “bell curve” is an ideal analytic function with
values for each of the infinite number of points on the horizontal
axis. In the real material world of particles, a discrete histogram
approaches that ideal curve in the limit of large numbers of events.
A finite number of particles never gets there.
    The “binomial coefficients” in figure 1.1 were arranged by
Blaise Pascal in what is known as Pascal’s triangle. Each number
is the sum of the two numbers above, giving us the number of ways
from the top to reach each point in the lower rows.




  Figure 2-1. Pascal’s triangle. Plotting the numbers in the bottom row would show
how sharp and peaked the normal distribution is for 16 coin flips.
   To illustrate physically how random events approach the normal
distribution in the limit of large numbers, the sociologist and
statistician Francis Galton designed a probability machine, with
balls bouncing randomly left or right in an array of pins.
        12      My God - He Plays DIce!
Chapter 2




                Figure 2-2. Galton’s “Quincunx.” The number of ways to a bin in the bottom row is
             the binomial coefficient.
                The probability of reaching a bin is the number of ways to the
             bin divided by the total number of ways, 210 = 1024.
                Generalizing now to the cases of shuffling decks of cards, or
             throwing pairs of dice, the most probable outcomes are those that
             can be accomplished in the largest number of ways.
                Now we test your physical understanding of probability. Do
             you consider each bounce of a ball above as random? As really
             random? Or is it determined by the laws of nature, by the laws of
             classical mechanics?
                Is the use of probability just because we cannot know the exact
             details of the initial conditions, as the proponents of deterministic
             chaos maintain? Is the randomness only human ignorance, thus
             subjective and epistemological? Or is it objective and ontological?
                                                               Chance     13

   You may be surprised to learn that many physicists, and perhaps
most philosophers of science, think physics is deterministic, despite
the evidence for quantum indeterminism, following centuries of




                                                                           Chapter 2
tradition which were deep beliefs of Albert Einstein.
   To deny ontological chance is to commit to just one possible
future and to the belief that if we could reverse the velocities and
directions of all material particles from their current positions,
Newton’s laws say that all the particles would retrace their paths
back in time to the beginning of the universe.
The History of Chance
  For most of the history of philosophy and physics, ontological
chance has been strictly denied. Leucippus (440 B.C.E.) stated
the first dogma of determinism, an absolute necessity.
      “Nothing occurs by chance (maton), but there is a reason (logos)
      and necessity (ananke) for everything.”1
   Chance is regarded as inconsistent with reasons and causes.
   The first thinker to suggest a physical explanation for chance
in the universe was Epicurus. Epicurus was influenced strongly
by Aristotle, who regarded chance as a possible fifth cause.
Epicurus said there must be cases in which the normally straight
paths of atoms in the universe occasionally bend a little and the
atoms “swerve” to prevent the universe and ourselves from being
completely determined by the mechanical laws of Democritus.
   For Epicurus, the chance in his atomic swerve was simply a
means to deny the fatalistic future implied by determinism. As the
Epicurean Roman Lucretius explained the idea,
      “...if all motion is always one long chain, and new motion arises
      out of the old in order invariable, and if the first-beginnings
      do not make by swerving a beginning of motion such as to
      break the decrees of fate, that cause may not follow cause from
      infinity, whence comes this freedom in living creatures all over
      the earth.”2
  Epicurus did not say the swerve was directly involved in
decisions so as to make them random. His critics, ancient and
  1       Fragment 569 - from Fr. 2 Actius I, 25, 4
  2       De Rerum Natura, Book 2, lines 251-256
        14         My God - He Plays DIce!

             modern, have claimed mistakenly that Epicurus did assume “one
             swerve - one decision.” Some recent philosophers call this the
             “traditional interpretation” of Epicurean free will.
Chapter 2




                On the contrary, following Aristotle, Epicurus thought human
             agents have an autonomous ability to transcend the necessity
             and chance of some events. This special ability makes us morally
             responsible for our actions.
                Epicurus, clearly following Aristotle, finds a tertium quid, beyond
             the other two options, necessity (Democritus’ and Leucippus’
             determinism) and chance (Epicurus’ swerve).
                The tertium quid is agent autonomy. Epicurus wrote:
                    “...some things happen of necessity (ἀνάγκη), others by chance
                   (τύχη), others through our own agency (παρ’ ἡμᾶς)...necessity
                   destroys responsibility and chance is uncertain; whereas our own
                   actions are autonomous, and it is to them that praise and blame
                   naturally attach.”3
               Despite abundant evidence, many philosophers deny that real
             chance exists. If a single event is determined by chance, then
             indeterminism would be true, they say, undermining the very
             possibility of reasoning to certain knowledge. Some go to the
             extreme of saying that chance makes the state of the world totally
             independent of any earlier states, which is nonsense, but it shows
             how anxious they are about chance.
               The Stoic Chrysippus (200 B.C.E.) said a single uncaused cause
             could destroy the universe (cosmos), a concern shared by some
             modern philosophers, for whom reason itself would fail. He wrote:
                   “Everything that happens is followed by something else which
                   depends on it by causal necessity. Likewise, everything that
                   happens is preceded by something with which it is causally
                   connected. For nothing exists or has come into being in the
                   cosmos without a cause. The universe will be disrupted and
                   disintegrate into pieces and cease to be a unity functioning as a
                   single system, if any uncaused movement is introduced into it.” 4
               The core idea of chance and indeterminism is closely related
             to the idea of causality. Indeterminism for some is simply an
             event without a cause, an uncaused cause or causa sui that starts
               3       Letter to Menoeceus, §133
               4       Plutarch, Stoic. Rep., 34, 1050A
                                                                Chance       15

a new causal chain. If we admit some uncaused causes, we can
have an adequate causality without the physical necessity of strict
determinism - which implies complete predictability of events and




                                                                              Chapter 2
only one possible future.
   An example of an event that is not strictly caused is one that
depends on chance, like the flip of a coin. If the outcome is only
probable, not certain, then the event can be said to have been caused
by the coin flip, but the head or tails result itself was not predictable.
So this “soft” causality, which recognizes prior uncaused events as
causes, is undetermined and to some extent the result of chance.
   Even mathematical theorists of games of chance found ways to
argue that the chance they described was somehow necessary and
chance outcomes were actually determined. The greatest of these,
Pierre-Simon Laplace, preferred to call his theory the “calculus
of probabilities.” With its connotation of approbation, probability
was a more respectable term than chance, with its associations of
gambling and lawlessness. For Laplace, the random outcomes were
not predictable only because we lack the detailed information to
predict. As did the ancient Stoics, Laplace explained the appearance
of chance as the result of human ignorance. He said,
      “The word ‘chance,’ then expresses only our ignorance of the
      causes of the phenomena that we observe to occur and to succeed
      one another in no apparent order.” 5
   As we have seen, decades before Laplace, Abraham de Moivre
discovered the normal distribution (the bell curve) of outcomes for
ideal random processes, like the flip of a coin or throw of dice. But
despite this de Moivre did not believe in chance. It implies events
that God can not know. De Moivre labeled it atheistic.
      Chance, in atheistical writings or discourse, is a sound utterly
      insignificant: It imports no determination to any mode of existence;
      nor indeed to existence itself, more than to non existence; it can
      neither be defined nor understood...it is a mere word. 6
   We have seen that random processes produce a regular distribution
pattern for many trials (the law of large numbers). Inexplicably, the
discovery of these regularities in various social phenomena led
Laplace and others to conclude that the phenomena are determined,
not random. They simply denied chance in the world.
  5       Memoires de l’Academie des Sciences 1783, p. 424.
  6       The Doctrine of Chances, 1756, p.253.
        16         My God - He Plays DIce!

               A major achievement of the Ages of Reason and Enlightenment
             was to banish absolute chance as unintelligible and atheistic.
             Newton’s Laws provided a powerful example of deterministic
Chapter 2




             laws governing the motions of everything. Surely Leucippus’ and
             Democritus’ original insights had been confirmed.
               As early as 1784, Immanuel Kant had argued that the
             regularities in social events from year to year showed that they must
             be determined.
                   “Thus marriages, the consequent births and the deaths, since the
                   free will seems to have such a great influence on them, do not
                   seem to be subject to any law according to which one could cal-
                   culate their number beforehand. Yet the annual (statistical) tables
                   about them in the major countries show that they occur accord-
                   ing to stable natural laws.” 7
                In the early 1800’s, the social statisticians Adolphe Quételet
             and Henry Thomas Buckle argued that these regularities in social
             physics proved that individual acts like marriage and suicide are
             determined by natural law. Quételet and Buckle thought they had
             established an absolute deterministic law behind all statistical laws.
             Buckle went so far as to claim it established the lack of free will.
                The argument for determinism of Quételet and Buckle is quite
             illogical. It appears to go something like this:
                • As we saw above, random, unpredictable individual events (like
                     the throw of dice in games of chance or balls in a probability
                     machine) have a normal distribution that becomes more and
                     more certain with more events (the law of large numbers).
                • Human events are normally distributed.
                • Therefore, human events are determined.
                They might more reasonably have concluded that individual
             human events are unpredictable and random. Were they in fact
             determined, the events might show a non-random pattern, perhaps
             a signature of the Determiner?
                In the next chapter, we shall see that Quételet and Buckle had a
             major influence on the development of statistical physics.
                 In the nineteenth century in America, Charles Sanders Peirce
             coined the term “tychism” for his idea that absolute chance is the
             first step in three steps to “synechism” or continuity.
               7       Idea for a Universal History, introduction
                                                           Chance           17

   Peirce was influenced by Buckle and Quételet, by the French
philosophers Charles Renouvier and Alfred Fouillee, who
also argued for some absolute chance, but most importantly Peirce




                                                                             Chapter 2
was influenced by Kant and Georg W. F. Hegel, who saw things
arranged in the triads that Peirce so loved.
   Renouvier and Fouillee introduced chance or indeterminism
simply to contrast it with determinism, and to discover some way,
usually a dialectical argument like that of Hegel, to reconcile the
opposites. Renouvier argues for human freedom, but nowhere
explains exactly how chance might contribute to that freedom,
other than negating determinism.
   Peirce does not explain much with his tychism, and with his
triadic view that adds continuity, then evolutionary love, which is
supreme, he may have had doubts about the importance of chance.
Peirce did not propose chance as directly or indirectly providing
free will. He never mentions the ancient criticisms that we cannot
accept responsibility for chance decisions. He does not really care for
chance as the origin of species, preferring a more deterministic and
continuous lawful development, under the guidance of evolutionary
love. Peirce called Darwinism “greedy.” But he does say clearly that
the observational evidence simply does not establish determinism.
   It remained for William James, Peirce’s close friend, to assert that
chance can provide random unpredictable alternatives from which
the will can choose or determine one alternative. James was the
first thinker to enunciate clearly a two-stage decision process, with
chance in a present time generating random alternatives, leading to
a choice which selects one alternative and transforms an equivocal
ambiguous future into an unalterable determined past. There are free
and undetermined alternatives followed by adequately determined
choices made by the will.
   Chance allows alternative futures. The deep question is how the
one actual present is realized from potential alternative futures.
   Claude Shannon, creator of the mathematical theory of the
communication of information, said the information in a message
depends on the number of possibilities. If there is only one possibility,
there can be no new information. If information in the universe is
a conserved constant quantity, like matter and energy, there is only
one possible future.
