         294   My God, He Plays Dice!




                                 e i n' s
                          Einst uum
                          Co nt i n
Chapter 37




                                             This chapter on the web
                                        informationphilosopher.com/
                                              Einstein's Continuum      295


Einstein's Continuum
  Is the Nature of Reality Continuous or Discrete?
   Is it possible that the physical world is made up of nothing but
discrete discontinuous particles? Are continuous fields with well-
defined, arbitrarily accurate, values for the field at all places and
times simply theoretical constructs, confirmed only by averages
over large numbers of particles?
   Space and time themselves have well-defined values every-
where, but are these just the abstract information of the ideal
coordinate system that allows us to keep track of the positions
and motions of particles? Space and time are physical, but they
are not material.
   We use material things, rulers and clocks, to measure space
and time. We use the abstract mathematics of real numbers and
assume there are an infinite number of real points on any line
segment and an infinite number of moments in any time interval.
But are these continuous functions of space and time nothing but
immaterial ideas with no material substance?
   The two great physical theories at the end of the nineteenth
century, Isaac Newton’s classical mechanics and James Clerk
Maxwell’s electrodynamics, are continuous field theories.


                                                                          Chapter 37
   Solutions of their field equations determine precisely the exact
forces on any material particle, providing complete information
about their past and future motions and positions. Field theories
are generally regarded as deterministic and certain.
   Although the dynamical laws are “free inventions of the human
mind,” as Einstein always said, 1 and although they ultimately
depend on experimental evidence, which is always statistical, the
field theories have been considered superior to merely statistical
laws. Dynamical laws are thought to be absolute, based on
principles.
  1    “Geometry and Experience,” in Ideas and Opinions, p.234
         296     My God, He Plays Dice!

                  We will find that the continuous, deterministic, and analytical
               laws of classical dynamics and electromagnetism, expressible
               as differential equations, are idealizations that “go beyond
               experience.”
                  A continuum is approached in the limit of large numbers of
               particles, when the random fluctuations of individual events can be
               averaged over. But this is like the limit theorems of the differential
               calculus, when large numbers are allowed to go to infinity, and
               infinitesimals are assumed to reach zero.
                  All field theories use continuous functions that introduce
               mathematical infinities and infinitesimals. Einstein suspected
               these infinities may only “exist” in human minds. He learned
               this from the great mathematicians Leopold Kronecker and
               Richard Dedekind.
                  Einstein discovered his favorite phrase “free creations of the
               human mind” in the work of Dedekind (freie Schöpfungen des
               menschlichen Geistes) so Einstein also knew very well Dedekind’s
               argument that all the axioms of Euclid’s geometry can be proven
               with no reference to a continuum between geometric points. A
               discrete algebraic theory would be equally good, said Dedekind.
                     If anyone should say that we cannot conceive of space as anything
                     else than continuous, I should venture to doubt it and to call
Chapter 37




                     attention to the fact that a far advanced, refined scientific training
                     is demanded in order to perceive clearly the essence of continuity
                     and to comprehend that besides rational quantitative relations, also
                     irrational, and besides algebraic, also transcendental quantitative
                     relations are conceivable. 2
               God Created the Integers
                 Einstein was assuredly also familiar with Kronecker’s famous
               quote “God has made the integers, all else is the work of man.”
               (Die ganzen Zahlen hat der liebe Gott gemacht, alles andere ist
               Menschenwerk). These ideas must have given Einstein a healthy
               skepticism about his work on continuous field theories. In his later

                 2        Dedekind, 1901, p.38
                                                 Einstein's Continuum             297

years, Einstein gave thought to algebraic or discrete difference
equations, not continuous differential equations.
  Einstein may have even doubted the "existence" of the integers.
He and Leopold Infeld wrote in the book, The Evolution of Physics,
      Science is not just a collection of laws, a catalogue of unrelated facts.
      It is a creation of the human mind, with its freely invented ideas and
      concepts... “Three trees” is something different from “two trees.”
      Again “two trees” is different from “two stones.” The concepts of the
      pure numbers 2, 3, 4..., freed from the objects from which they arose,
      are creations of the thinking mind which describe the reality of our
      world. 3
   Experiments that support physical laws are always finite in
number. The number of particles in the observable universe
is finite. Experimental evidence is always statistical. It always
contains errors distributed randomly around the most probable
result, like the fluctuations of entropy around its maximum.
   The smooth Gaussian bell curve approached when a very large
number of independent random events is plotted is clearly an
idealization. That Bell curve is clearly an "idea," a "free creation of
the human mind. "
   Einstein was gravely concerned that there is nothing in his
"objective reality" corresponding to this continuum.
      From the quantum phenomena it appears to follow with certainty



                                                                                    Chapter 37
      that a finite system of finite energy can be completely described by a
      finite set of numbers (quantum numbers). This does not seem to be
      in accordance with a continuum theory, and must lead to an attempt
      to find a purely algebraic theory for the description of reality. 4
  To Leopold Infeld, Einstein wrote in 1941,
      “I tend more and more to the opinion that one cannot come further
      with a continuum theory.” 5




  3       Einstein and Infeld, 1961, p.294
  4       Einstein, 1956, p.165
  5       Pais, 1982, p.467
