         182   My God, He Plays Dice!
Preface
Chapter 24




                              h a g e n
                        p e n
                   Co retation
                   I nte r p
                                   Copenhagen Interpretation 183


Copenhagen Interpretation
   The idea that there was a Copenhagen way of thinking was
christened as the “Kopenhagener Geist der Quantentheorie” by
Werner Heisenberg in his 1930 textbook The Physical Principles
of Quantum Theory, based on his 1929 lectures in Chicago (given
at the invitation of Arthur Holly Compton).
   The basic ideas of Copenhagen thinking were presented by
Niels Bohr and Heisenberg at the 1927 Solvay conference on
physics entitled “Electrons and Photons.”
   It is a sad fact that Albert Einstein, who had discovered more
than any other scientist on the quantum interaction of electrons
and photons, was largely ignored or misunderstood when he
clearly described nonlocality at the 1927 conference. As we saw
in the previous chapter, Bohr said he could not understand what




                                                                         Chapter 24
Einstein was talking about.
   At the Solvay conference, Bohr and Heisenberg consolidated
their Copenhagen view as a “complete” picture of quantum
physics, despite the fact that they could not, or would not, visualize
or otherwise explain exactly what is going on in the microscopic
world of “quantum reality.” Electron paths (especially orbits) that
cannot be observed, they said, simply do not exist!
   Bohr and Heisenberg opposed Einstein’s concept of an
underlying “objective reality,” but they clearly knew and said that
the physical world is largely independent of human observations.
In classical physics, the physical world is assumed to be completely
independent of the act of observing the world.
   In quantum physics however, Heisenberg said that the result of
an experiment depends on the “free choice” of the experimenter as
to what to measure. The quantum world of photons and electrons
might look like waves or look like particles depending on what
we look for, rather than what they “are” as “things in themselves.”
   Copenhageners were proud of their limited ability to know
what is going on in the microscopic world.
         184         My God, He Plays Dice!

                 According to his friend Aage Petersen, Bohr said:
                     There is no quantum world. There is only an abstract quantum
Preface




                     physical description. It is wrong to think that the task of
                     physics is to find out how nature is. Physics concerns what we
                     can say about nature. 1
                  Bohr thus put severe epistemological limits on knowing the
               “things in themselves,” just as Immanuel Kant had put limits
               on reason in the phenomenal world. The British empiricist
               philosophers John Locke and David Hume had put the “primary”
               objects beyond the reach of our “secondary” sensory perceptions.
               In this respect, Bohr shared the positivist views of many other
               empirical scientists and philosophers, Ernst Mach for example.
                  Twentieth-century analytic language philosophers like
               Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein thought
               that philosophy (and even physics) could not solve some basic
Chapter 24




               problems, but only “dis-solve” them by showing them to be
               conceptual errors resulting from the misuse of language.
                  Neither Bohr nor Heisenberg thought that macroscopic
               objects actually are classical. They both saw them as composed
               of microscopic quantum objects. The information interpretation
               of quantum mechanics says there is only one world, the quantum
               world. Averaging over large numbers of microscopic quantum
               objects explains why macroscopic objects appear to be classical.
                  On the other hand, Bohr and Heisenberg insisted that the
               language of classical physics is essential as a tool for knowledge.
                  Heisenberg wrote:
                     The Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory starts
                     from a paradox. Any experiment in physics, whether it refers
                     to the phenomena of daily life or to atomic events, is to be
                     described in the terms of classical physics. The concepts of
                     classical physics form the language by which we describe the
                     arrangement of our experiments and state the results. We
                     cannot and should not replace these concepts by any others.
                     Still the application of these concepts is limited by the relations
                     of uncertainty. We must keep in mind this limited range of
                     applicability of the classical concepts while using them, but we
                     cannot and should not try to improve them. 2
                 1       Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Sep 1963, Vol. 19 Issue 7, p.12
                 2       Heisenberg, 1955, p. 44
                                  Copenhagen Interpretation 185

   Einstein wanted us to get beyond questions of logic and language
to get to an “objective reality” he saw as independent of the mind
of man. Logic alone tells us nothing of the physical world, he said.
   But since language has evolved to describe the familiar world
of “classical” objects in space and time, Bohr and Heisenberg
insisted that somewhere between the quantum world and the
classical world there must come a point where our observations
and measurements can be expressible in classical concepts. They
argued that a measurement apparatus and a particular observation
must be describable classically in order for it to be understood and
become knowledge in the mind of the observer.
   The exact location of that transition from the quantum to the
classically describable world was arbitrary, said Heisenberg. He
called it a “cut” (Schnitt). Heisenberg’s and especially John von
Neumann’s and Eugene Wigner’s insistence on a critical role




                                                                       Chapter 24
for a “conscious observer” has led to a great deal of nonsense
being associated with the Copenhagen Interpretation and in the
philosophy of quantum physics. Heisenberg may only have been
trying to explain how knowledge reaches the observer’s mind. But
for von Neumann and Wigner, the mind was actually considered
a causal factor in the behavior of the quantum system. It is not.
   Today, a large number of panpsychists, some philosophers,
some scientists, still believe that the mind of a conscious observer
is needed to cause the “collapse of the wave function.” We explore
von Neumann’s “psycho-physical parallelism” in the next chapter.
   In the mid-1950’s, Heisenberg reacted to David Bohm’s 1952
“pilot-wave” interpretation of quantum mechanics by calling his
work with Bohr the “Copenhagen Interpretation” and indeed
insisted it is the only correct interpretation of quantum mechanics.
A significant fraction of working quantum physicists today say they
agree with Heisenberg, though few have ever looked carefully into
the fundamental assumptions of the Copenhagen Interpretation.
   We’ll see that much of the Copenhagen interpretation is
standard quantum physics and correct. But it also contains a lot of
nonsense that has made understanding quantum physics difficult
and spawned several quantum mysteries that we hope to resolve.
         186       My God, He Plays Dice!

               What Exactly Is in the Copenhagen Interpretation?
                  There are several major components to the Copenhagen
Preface




               Interpretation, which most historians and philosophers of science
               agree on:
                  No Observer-Independent Quantum Reality. The most radical
               concept of the Copenhagen school is that because the wave function
               gives us only probabilities about quantum properties, that these
               properties do not exist in the sense of Einstein’s “objective reality.”
                  No Path? Bohr, Heisenberg, and others said we cannot describe a
               particle as having a path, or a definite position before a measurement.
               Indeed, it is said a particle can be in two places at once, like going
               through the two slits in the two-slit experiment.
                  But just because we cannot know the path does not mean it
               cannot exist. Einstein’s “objective reality” hoped for a deeper level
Chapter 24




               of physics in which particles do have paths (even if we cannot know
               them) and, in particular, the paths obey conservation principles.
                  Conscious Observer. This is the claim that quantum systems
               cannot change their states without an observation being made
               by a conscious observer. Does the collapse only occur when an
               observer “looks at” the system? How exactly does the mind of the
               observer have causal power over the physical world? (the mind-
               body problem). John Bell asked sarcastically, “does the observer
               need a Ph.D.?”
                  Einstein objected to the absurd idea that his bed had diffused
               throughout the room and only gathered itself back together when
               he opened the bedroom door and looked in. Does the moon only
               exist when somoone is looking at it?, he asked.
                  John von Neumann and Eugene Wigner seemed to believe
               that the mind of the observer was essential, but it is not found in the
               original work of Bohr and Heisenberg, so should perhaps not be a
               part of the Copenhagen Interpretation? It has no place in standard
               quantum physics today.
                  Wave-particle duality. Einstein’s 1909 insight into this dual
               aspect of quantum mechanics led to Bohr’s deep philosophical
               notion of complementarity, though Bohr did not mention Einstein.
                                  Copenhagen Interpretation 187

   Bohr wanted a synthesis of the particle-matrix mechanics theory
of Heisenberg, Max Born, and Pascual Jordan, with the wave
mechanical theory of Louis de Broglie and Erwin Schrödinger,.
Wave theory became critical to Bohr’s concept of complementarity,
which we sw in chapter 22.
   Heisenberg had to have his arm twisted by Bohr in 1927 to accept
the equal importance of the wave description.
   Copenhagen says quantum objects are both waves and
particles, that what you see depends on how you look at them. In
Einstein’s “objective reality,” physical objects are particles. Waves
are mathematical theories about their behavior, giving us the
probabilities of where they will be found, and with what properties.
   No Visualizability? Bohr and Heisenberg both thought we could
not produce models of what is going on at the quantum level. Bohr
thought that since the wave function cannot be observed we can’t




                                                                         Chapter 24
say anything about it. Heisenberg said it was a probability and the
basis for the statistical nature of quantum mechanics.
   Whenever we draw a diagram of waves impinging on the two-slits,
we are in fact visualizing the wave function as possible locations for
a particle, with calculable probabilities for each possible location.
   The Quantum Postulates. Bohr postulated that quantum
systems (beginning with his “Bohr atom” in 1913) have “stationary
states” which make discontinuous “quantum jumps” between the
states with the emission or absorption of radiation. Until at least
1925 Bohr insisted the radiation itself is continuous. Einstein had
said radiation is a discrete localized “light quantum” (later called a
photon) as early as 1905.
   Ironically, ignorant of the history (dominated by Bohr’s account),
most of today’s physics textbooks teach the “Bohr atom” as emitting
or absorbing photons - Einstein’s light quanta!
   Indeterminacy principle. Heisenberg sometimes called it
his “uncertainty” principle, which implies human ignorance,
making it an epistemological (knowledge) problem rather than an
ontological (reality) problem. Indeterminacy is another example of
complementarity, between the non-commuting conjugate variables
         188       My God, He Plays Dice!

               momentum and position, for example, Δp Δx ≥ h. Energy and time,
               as well as action and the angle variables, are also complementary.
Preface




                   Completeness. Copenhageners claim that Schrödinger’s wave
               function ψ provides a “complete” description of a quantum system,
               despite the fact that conjugate variables like position and momentum
               cannot both be known with arbitrary accuracy, as they can in classical
               systems. There is less information in the quantum world than
               classical physics requires. The wave function ψ evolves according
               to the unitary deterministic Schrödinger equation of motion,
               conserving that information. When one possibility discontinuously
               becomes actual, new information may be irreversibly created and
               recorded by a measurement apparatus.
                   Einstein, however, maintained that quantum mechanics is
               incomplete, because it provides only statistical information derived
               from ensembles of quantum systems.
Chapter 24




                   Correspondence principle. Bohr maintained that in the limit of
               large quantum numbers, the atomic structure of quantum systems
               approaches the behavior of classical systems. Bohr and Heisenberg
               both described this case as when Planck’s quantum of action h can
               be neglected. They mistakenly described this as h -> 0.
                   Planck’s h is a constant of nature, like the velocity of light. The
               quantum-to-classical transition is when the action of a macroscopic
               object is large compared to h. Bohr compared it to non-relativistic
               physics when the velocity v is small compared to the velocity of light.
               It is not an apt comparison because h never becomes small. It is when
               the number of quantum particles increases (as mass increases) that
               large macroscopic objects behave like classical objects. Position and
               velocity become arbitrarily accurate as h / m -> 0 .
                   Δv Δx ≥ h / m.
                   The correspondence between classical and quantum physics
               occurs for large numbers of particles that can be averaged over and
               for large quantum numbers. This is known as the quantum-to-
               classical transition.
                   Standard Quantum Physics. Paul Dirac formalized quantum
               mechanics with three fundamental concepts, all very familiar and
               accepted by Bohr, Heisenberg, and the other Copenhageners:
                                    Copenhagen Interpretation 189

   Axiom of measurement. Bohr’s stationary quantum states have
eigenvalues with corresponding eigenfunctions (the eigenvalue-
eigenstate link).
   Superposition principle. According to Dirac’s transformation
theory, ψ can be represented as a linear combination of vectors that
are a proper basis for the combined target quantum system and the
measurement apparatus.
   Projection postulate. The collapse of the wave function ψ, which is
irreversible, upon interacting with the measurement apparatus and
creating new information.
   Irreversibility. Without irreversible recording of information
in the measuring apparatus (a pointer reading, blackened photo-
graphic plate, Geiger counter firing, etc.), there would be nothing
for observers to see and to know.




                                                                              Chapter 24
   All the founders of quantum mechanics mention the need for
irreversibility. The need for entropy transfer to stabilize irreversibly
recorded information so it could be observed was first shown by Leo
Szilard in 1929, later by Leon Brillouin and Rolf Landauer.
   Classical apparatus. Bohr’s requirement that the macroscopic
measurement apparatus be described in ordinary “classical”language
is a third kind of “complementarity,” between the microscopic
quantum system and the macroscopic “classical apparatus.”
   But Born and Heisenberg never actually said the measuring
apparatus is “classical.” They knew that everything is fundamentally
a quantum system.
   Statistical Interpretation (probability and acausality). Born
interpreted the squared modulus of Schrödinger’s complex wave
function as the probability of finding a particle. Einstein’s “ghost field”
or “guiding field,” de Broglie’s pilot or guide wave, and Schrödinger’s
wave function as the distribution of the electric charge density were
similar views in earlier years.
   All the predicted properties of physical systems and the “laws of
nature” are only probabilistic (acausal). All the results of physical
experiments are purely statistical information.
   Theories give us probabilities. Experiments give us statistics.
   Large numbers of identical experiments provide the statistical
evidence for the theoretical probabilities predicted by quantum
mechanics. We know nothing about paths of individual particles.
         190       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  Bohr’s emphasis on epistemological questions suggests he thought
               that the statistical uncertainty may only be in our knowledge. It
Preface




               may not describe nature itself. Or at least Bohr thought that we
               can not describe a “reality” for quantum objects, certainly not with
               classical concepts and language. But we shall see that the concept of
               an abstract and immaterial wave function (ψ as pure information
               moving through space, determined by boundary conditions) makes
               quantum phenomena “visualizable.”
                  Ontological acausality, chance, and a probabilistic or statistical
               nature were first seen by Einstein in 1916, as Born acknowledged.
               He knew that “his statistical interpretation” was based entirely
               on the work of Einstein, who generously gave Born credit, partly
               because of his doubts about any theory in which “God plays dice!”
                  Two-slit experiment. A “gedanken” experiment in the 1920’s,
               but a real experiment today, exhibits the combination of wave and
Chapter 24




               particle properties.
                  Note that what the two-slit experiment really shows is
                  • first, the wave function deterministically and continuously
                      exploring all the possibilities for interaction, its values
                      determined by the boundary conditions of the experiment.
                  • second, the particle randomly and discontinuously chooses
                      one of those possibilities to become actual. In Einstein’s
                      “objective reality” view, the particle goes through one slit, and
                      the wave function, being different when two slits are open,
                      guides the particle to display the two-slit interference pattern.
                  Measurement problem. There are actually at least three
               definitions of the measurement problem not normally associated
               with the Copenhagen Interpretation..
                  1) The claim that the two dynamical laws, unitary deterministic
               time evolution according to the Schrödinger equation and
               indeterministic collapse according to Dirac’s projection postulate
               are logically inconsistent. They cannot both be true, it’s claimed.
                  The proper interpretation is simply that the two laws apply
               at different times in the evolution of a quantum object, one for
               possibilities, the other for an actuality (as Heisenberg knew):
                                  Copenhagen Interpretation 191

  •    first, the unitary deterministic evolution moves through space
       exploring all the possibilities for interaction, or may simply
       be defined at all positions by the boundary conditions of an
       experiment.
  • second, the indeterministic collapse randomly (acausally)
       selects one of those possibilities to become actual.
  2) The original concern that the “collapse dynamics” (von
Neumann Process 1) is not part of the formalism (von Neumann
Process 2) but an ad hoc element, with no rules for when to apply it.
  If there was a deterministic law that predicted a collapse, or the
decay of a radioactive nucleus, it would not be quantum mechanics!
  3) Decoherence theorists (chapter 34) define the measurement
problem as the failure to observe macroscopic superpositions, for
example, Schrödinger’s Cat (chapter 28).




                                                                         Chapter 24
Opposition to the Copenhagen Interpretation
   Einstein, de Broglie, and especially Schrödinger insisted on a
more “complete” picture, not merely what can be said, but what we
can “see,” a visualization (Anschaulichkeit) of the microscopic world.
But de Broglie and Schrödinger’s emphasis on the wave picture made
it difficult to understand material particles and their “quantum
jumps.” Indeed, Schrödinger and more recent physicists like John
Bell and the decoherence theorists H. D. Zeh and Wojciech Zurek
deny the existence of particles and the collapse of the wave function.
   Perhaps the main claim of those today denying the Copenhagen
Interpretation (as well as standard quantum mechanics) is that
“there are no quantum jumps.” Decoherence theorists and others
favoring Hugh Everett’s Many-Worlds Interpretation reject
Dirac’s projection postulate, a cornerstone of quantum theory.
   Heisenberg had initially insisted on his own “matrix mechanics” of
particles and their discrete, discontinuous, indeterministic behavior,
the “quantum postulate” of unpredictable events that undermine
the classical physics of causality. But Bohr told Heisenberg that
his matrix mechanics was too narrow a view of the problem. The
“complementary” wave picture must be included, Bohr insisted.
This greatly disappointed Heisenberg and almost ruptured their
         192       My God, He Plays Dice!

               relationship. But Heisenberg came to accept the criticism and he
               eventually endorsed all of Bohr’s deeply philosophical view that
Preface




               quantum reality is unvisualizable.
                  In his September Como Lecture, a month before the 1927 Solvay
               conference, Bohr introduced his theory of “complementarity”
               as a “complete” theory. It combines the contradictory notions of
               wave and particle. Since both are required, they complement (and
               “complete”) one another, he thought.
                  Although Bohr is often credited with integrating the dualism
               of waves and particles, it was Einstein who predicted a “fusion”
               of these would be necessary as early as 1909. But in doing so,
               Bohr obfuscated further what was already a mysterious picture.
               How could something possibly be both a discrete particle and a
               continuous wave? Did Bohr endorse the continuous deterministic
               wave-mechanical views of Schrödinger? Not exactly, but that Bohr
Chapter 24




               accepted Schrödinger’s wave mechanics as equal to and comple-
               menting his matrix mechanics was most upsetting to Heisenberg.
                  Bohr had astonished Heisenberg by deriving (in Bohr’s Como
               Lecture) the uncertainty principle from the space-time wave picture
               alone, with no reference to the causal dynamics of Heisenberg’s
               picture! After this, Heisenberg did the same derivation in his
               1930 text and subsequently completely accepted complementarity.
               Heisenberg spent the next several years widely promoting Bohr’s
               views to scientists and philosophers around the world.
                  Bohr said these contradictory pictures were “complementary”
               and that both were needed for a “complete” picture. He vigorously
               denied Einstein’s claim that quantum mechanics is “incomplete,”
               despite Bohr’s acceptance of the fact that simultaneous knowledge
               of exact position and momentum is impossible. Classical physics
               has twice the number of precisely knowable variables (and thus
               twice the information) as quantum physics. In this sense, classical
               physics seems more “complete,” quantum physics “incomplete.”
                  Many critics of Copenhagen thought that Bohr deliberately
               embraced logically contradictory notions - of continuous
               deterministic waves and discrete indeterministic particles - perhaps
               as evidence of the Kantian “antinomies” that put limits on reason and
               human knowledge. These “contradictions” only strengthened Bohr’s
                                      Copenhagen Interpretation 193

epistemological resolve and his insistence that physics requires a
subjective view unable to reach Einstein’s “objective reality” - the
Kantian “things in themselves.”
   Subject and object were prominent examples of Bohr’s
complementarity. As Heisenberg described it in his 1955 explanation
of the Copenhagen Interpretation
      This again emphasizes a subjective element in the description of
      atomic events, since the measuring device has been constructed
      by the observer, and we have to remember that what we observe
      is not nature in itself but nature exposed to our method of
      questioning. 3
    Some critics object to the idea that the “free choice” of the
experimenter determines what properties appear, but this is correct.
If we measure the z-component of spin, we get a definite answer for
z, and know nothing about x- or y-components.




                                                                            Chapter 24
    Key objections to the Copenhagen Interpretation include:
    • The many unreasonable philosophical claims for
        “complementarity,” e.g., that it solves the mind-body problem?
    • The basic “subjectivity” of the Copenhagen interpretation. It
        deals with epistemological knowledge of things, rather than
        the objectively real “things themselves.”
    • Bohr’s strong claim that there is no quantum world, or at least
        that we can know nothing about it.
    • The idea that nothing exists until an observer measures it.
    There is in fact only one world. It is a quantum world. Ontologically
it is indeterministic, but epistemically, common sense and everyday
experience inclines us to see it as only adequately deterministic.
    Bohr and Heisenberg’s Copenhagen Interpretation insists we
use classical (deterministic?) concepts and everyday language to
communicate our knowledge about quantum processes.
    This may be a desirable goal when we begin to teach lay persons
about the mysteries of quantum mechanics, but there comes a time
when our deeper goal is for them to learn about the nature of the
“objective reality” that Einstein wanted us to see.

  3       Heisenberg, 1955, p. 58
