         338   My God, He Plays Dice!




                              te i n’s
                          Eins ology
                          Cosm
Chapter 41
                                          Einstein’s Cosmology 339


Einstein’s Cosmology
The Cosmological Constant
    When Albert Einstein was completing his work on general
relativity in 1916, it was said that he asked some astronomers
whether the stars were falling towards us or perhaps expanding
away from us. “Oh, Dr. Einstein, it is well known that the stars are
‘fixed,’ in the celestial sphere.” Since his new equations suggested
otherwise, Einstein added a small term called the cosmological
constant that would prevent expansion or contraction.
    One very simple way to understand expansion in non-relativistic
terms is to compare the amount of gravitating matter in the
universe, whose mutual attraction would collapse the universe, to
the motion energy seen in the distant galaxies.
    The positive “kinetic” energy of the motion is either larger
or smaller than the negative “potential” binding energy. We can
distinguish three cases.
    K.E. < P.E. The universe is said to be positively curved. The
self-gravitating force will eventually slow down and stop the
expansion. The universe will then collapse in a reverse of the “Big
Bang” origin.
    K.E. > P.E. The universe is said to be negatively curved. The
self-gravitating force will be overcome by the motion energy. The
                                                                       Chapter 41
universe will expand forever. When galaxies are infinitely apart,
they will still be moving.
    K.E. = P.E. The universe is flat. Average curvature is zero. The
geometry of the universe is Euclidean. The expansion will stop,
but only when the distances between remote galaxies approaches
infinity after an infinite time.
    By just adding a cosmological constant to achieve a result,
Einstein masked the underlying physics for time.
The Flatness Problem
   The universe is very likely flat because it was created flat. A
flat universe starts with minimal information, which is fine since
our cosmic creation process can create all the information that
we have today. Leibniz’ question, “Why is there something rather
         340     My God, He Plays Dice!

               than nothing?” might be “the universe is made out of something
               (matter energy) and the opposite of that something (motion
               energy).”
                  When I was a first-year graduate student in astrophysics at
               Harvard University in 1958, I encountered two problems that
               have remained with me all these years. One was the fundamental
               problem of information philosophy - “What creates the information
               structures in the universe?” The other was the flat universe.
                  At that time, the universe was thought to be positively curved.
               Edwin Hubble’s red shifts of distant galaxies showed that they
               did not have enough kinetic energy to overcome the gravitational
               potential energy. Textbooks likened the universe to the surface of
               an expanding balloon decorated with galaxies moving away from
               one another.
                  That balloon popped for me when Walter Baade came to
               Harvard to describe his work at Mount Wilson. Baade took many
               images with long exposures of nearby galaxies and discovered
               there are two distinct populations of stars. And in each population
               there was a different kind of Cepheid variable star. The period
               of the Cepheid’s curve of light variation indicated its absolute
               brightness, so they could be used as “standard candles” to find the
               distances to star clusters in the Milky Way.
                  Baade then realized that the Cepheids being used to calculate
               the distance to Andromeda were 1.6 magnitudes brighter than the
Chapter 41




               ones used in our galaxy. Baade said Andromeda must be twice as
               far away as Hubble had thought.
                  As I listened to Baade, for me the universe went from being
               positively curved to negatively curved. It jumped right over the flat
               universe! I was struck that we seemed to be within observational
               error of being flat. Some day a physicist will find the reason for
               perfect flatness, I thought.
                  I used to draw a line with tick marks for powers of ten in density
               around the critical density ρc to show how close we are to flat.
               Given so many orders of magnitude of possible densities, it seemed
               improbable that we were just close by accident We could increase
               the density of the universe by thirty powers of ten before it would
               have the same density as the earth (too dense!). But on the lighter
               side, there are an infinite number of powers of ten. We can’t
                                           Einstein’s Cosmology 341

exclude a universe with average density zero, which still allows us
to exist, but little else in the distance.




  In the long run we are approaching a universe with average
density zero. All the non-gravitationally bound systems will slip
over our light horizon as the expansion takes them higher than
the velocity of light. At that time, we will be alone in the universe
with the nearby, gravitationally bound members of our “local
group” of galaxies, the Milky Way, Andromeda, the Large and
Small Magellanic Clouds, and a few dozen dwarf galaxies.
  Beyond them will be ghostly images of galaxies, quasars,
supernovae, and other objects with whom communication will
never be possible at the speed of light.
   But note that we may always be able to see back to the cosmic
microwave background, all the same contents of the universe that
we see today, all extremely red-shifted to the point of no visible
energy in the photons!
The Problem of Missing Mass (Dark Matter)
   Given our assumption that the universe is exactly flat, the
missing mass problem is that there is not enough observable
                                                                        Chapter 41
material so that in Newtonian cosmology the gravitational
binding energy can exactly balance the kinetic energy. The
visible (luminous mass) accounts for only about 4-5 percent of
the needed mass. Studying the rotation curves of galaxies and
galaxy clusters reveals an invisible mass (called dark matter) con-
tained inside the galaxies and clusters that amounts to perhaps
6 times the visible matter, which accounts for about 30 percent
of the critical mass density needed to make the universe exactly
flat. Current theory accounts for the balance by “dark energy,” an
interpretation of the cosmological constant Einstein considered
adding to his equations as a pressure to keep it from collapsing
(known as “vacuum energy”). But the missing mass could just be
more dark matter between the galaxies and clusters. About 3 times
the estimated dark matter would do.
         342       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  And I am delighted that observations are within a factor of three
               of the critical density ρc.
                  When Baade showed the universe was open in the 1950’s, we
               needed ten times more matter for a flat universe. Now we need only
               three times more. More than ever, we are obviously flat!
               Dark Energy (Is the Expansion Accelerating?)
                  Finding the missing mass can close the universe and explain
               its flatness. But it would not explain the apparent accelerating
               expansion seen in Type 1a supernovae. This might be an artifact of
               the assumption they are perfect “standard candles.” Recent evidence
               suggests that distant Type 1a supernovae are in a different population
               than those nearby, something like Baade’s two populations.
                  It seems a bit extravagant to assume the need for an exotic form
               of vacuum energy on the basis of observations that could have
               unknown but significant sources of error. Fortunately, the size of
               this problem is only another factor of between 3 and 4, well within
               observational error.
                  String theorists claim conditions at the universe origin must have
               been “fine tuned” to within 120 orders of magnitude to produce our
               current universe. This seems to be nonsense.
                 The Horizon Problem
                  The horizon problem arises from the perfect synchronization of
               all the parts of our visible universe, when there may never have been
Chapter 41




               a time in the early universe that they were close enough together to
               exchange synchronization signals.
                  We propose a solution to the horizon problem based on Einstein’s
               (mistaken) insight that in the wave-function collapse of entangled
               particles, something is “traveling” faster than the speed of light.
                  Einstein said that events in a spacelike separation cannot
               interact, That would violate his special theory of relativity. He
               described it as the “impossibility of simultaneity.” But something
               can simultaneously change great disstances. That something is
               information about possibilities.
                  When the “universal wave function” Ψ collapsed at t = 0, parts
               of the universe that are outside our current light horizon may have
               been “informed” that it was time to start, no matter the distance.
                                          Einstein’s Cosmology 343

  This radical idea is consistent with Richard Feynman’s
path integral (or “sum-over-histories”) formulation of quantum
mechanics. In calculating the probability of a quantum event, the
path integral is computed over all the possible paths of virtual
photons, many traveling faster than the speed of light.
The Information Paradox
   Can we speculate about what Einstein might have thought about
the black-hole information paradox?
   Perhaps not. For Einstein, entropy is defined by Boltzmann’s
principle. S = k log W, where W is the number of phase-space cells.
   Since the size of the black hole is smaller when matter is added,
we can see that Stephen Hawking and Jakob Bekenstein were
correct that the information content of physical objects falling into
a black hole will be lost forever. More particles are now distributed
in a smaller number of cells
   In 1997, John Preskill made a bet with Hawking, claiming that
information must be preserved, according to quantum theory.
     In fact, neither quantum nor classical theory requires the
conservation of information. Being simply the arrangement of
material particles in phase space, information is not a conserved
quantity like energy and momentum, as Einstein would have known.
     The idea of conserved information comes from mathematical
physicists who want a deterministic universe in which all the
information existing today was present at the origin of the universe.    Chapter 41
   In 2004, Hawking published a paper showing how some
information might escape from a black hole, and he conceded his
loss of Preskill’s bet. Hawking is right that particles emerge from
pair production at the black hole horizon, but the idea that it is the
same information that was destroyed when information structures
fell into the black hole is simply absurd.
   Hawking may have told us this when he quipped that he should
have burned the baseball encyclopedia he gave to Preskill and pay
off the lost bet by sending him the ashes!
   Once again, it was Einstein’s phenomenal imagination that first
conceived of extraordinary ideas only recently confirmed, like
gravitational waves, gravitational lensing, and of course black holes,
though like many of his insights, he doubted their existence.
