         408   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                       e at i o n
                                  ic Cr
                    Cosm
Appendix F




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                        informationphilosopher.com/introduction/creation
                                              Cosmic Creation         409


The Cosmic Creation Process
The Fundamental Question of Information Philosophy
   Our fundamental philosophical question is cosmological and
ultimately is profoundly metaphysical.
   What are the processes that create emergent information
structures in the universe?
   Given the second law of thermodynamics, which says that any
system will over time approach a thermodynamic equilibrium of
maximum disorder or entropy, in which all information is lost,
and given the best current model for the origin of the universe,
which says everything began in a state of thermodynamic equilib-
rium some 13.75 billion years ago, how can it be that living beings
are creating and communicating vast amounts of new informa-
tion every day?
  Why are we not still in that original state of equilibrium?
  Broadly speaking, there are only four major phenomena or
processes that can reduce the entropy locally, while of course
increasing it globally to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics.
Three of these do it “blindly,” the fourth does it with a built-in
“purpose,” or telos.”
  • Universal Gravitation
   • Quantum Cooperative Phenomena (e.g., crystallization, the
formation of atoms and molecules)
  • “Dissipative” Chaos (Non-linear Thermodynamics)
  • Life
                                                                        Appendix F




   None of these processes can work unless they have a way to get
rid of the positive entropy (disorder) and leave behind a pocket
of negative entropy (order or information). The positive entropy
is either conducted, convected, or radiated away as waste matter
and energy, as heat, or as pure radiation. At the quantum level, it
is always the result of interactions between matter and radiation
(photons). Whenever photons interact with material particles,
the outcomes are inherently unpredictable. As Albert Einstein
discovered ten years before the founding of quantum mechanics,
these interactions involve irreducible ontological chance.
         410     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Information philosophy (actually information physics) has
               now identified the exact steps needed to create any new informa-
               tion structures in the universe. This includes the first matter - ele-
               mentary particles like quarks, gluons, photons, and electrons. It
               also includes the first atoms and molecules (which did not appear
               until at least 380,000 years after the origin of the universe).




                  Figure 34-1. An artist’s rendering of the cosmic expansion.

                  The very same steps are needed to form the galaxies, stars, and
               planets, which were starting to form about 400 million years after
               the origin. All these cosmic information structures are informa-
               tionally passive. Their interactions follow the relatively simple
               laws of physics and chemistry. They do not process or communi-
               cate information.
                  Although we call it cosmic creation, the very same steps create
               all life on Earth. But biological structures are far from informa-
Appendix F




               tionally passive. They have the extraordinary active and emergent
               capability of replicating, communicating, and processing infor-
               mation. They are cognitively aware of their environment. They
               exhibit purposeful, teleonomic behavior.
                  Finally, those same two steps are involved in our minds when we
               create a new idea! Information philosophy tells a story of cosmic
               and biological evolution that is one creation process all the way
                                              Cosmic Creation           411

from the original cosmic material to the immaterial minds that
have now explained the creation process itself!
   Sadly, cosmic creation is horrendously wasteful. In the existen-
tial balance between the forces of destruction and the forces of
construction, there is no contest. The dark side is overwhelming.
By quantitative physical measures of matter and energy content,
there is far more chaos than cosmos in our universe. But it is the
cosmos that we prize.
   Information philosophy focuses on the qualitatively valuable
information structures in the universe. The destructive forces are
entropic, they increase the entropy and disorder. The constructive
forces are anti-entropic. We call them ergodic. They increase the
order and information.
   By information we mean a quantity that can be understood
mathematically and physically. It corresponds to the common-
sense meaning of information, in the sense of communicating or
informing. It also corresponds to the information stored in books
and computers. But it also measures the information in any physi-
cal object, like a stone or a snowflake, in a production process like
a recipe or formula, and the information in biological systems,
including cell and organ structures and the genetic code.
The Two Steps in Cosmic Creation
   For some years, we have argued that the creation of any new
information structure requires two fundamental steps. The first
involves quantum mechanics, the second thermodynamics. But
the thermodynamics is not the usual entropy-producing kind. It
must produce negative entropy, the “order out of chaos” that is
new information. We call such a process ergodic and find that it
                                                                          Appendix F




works differently in the material, biological, and mental domains
   Furthermore, the quantum mechanics of information creation
raises metaphysical questions that suggest further analysis might
be helpful. So we may have to break down each of these steps as
needed for the best explanation.
         412         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  The first step in the creation of new information needs the meta-
               physical existence of multiple future possibilities as a precondition.
               In a deterministic universe such possibilities do not exist. There is
               but one possible future. We thus need an ontological commitment
               to the existence of multiple possibilities, which like any “ideas” have
               questionable existential status.
                  For example, where do such possibilities go when one of them
               is actualized? When one “becomes” and now has “being,” are the
               others destroyed? Have they become “nothingness,” as existential-
               ists claimed?
                 In a deterministic universe no new information is ever created.
               Information is a conserved quantity, like matter and energy, say
               many mathematical physicists and theologically minded philoso-
               phers, who think constant information fits well their idea of an
               omniscient god, for whom there is “nothing new under the sun.”
                  Quantum physics provides us with a model for the first step. A
               quantum system has possible states. The wave function provides
               calculable probabilities for each state. And the wave function may
               “collapse,” instantaneously and randomly, into one actual state if
               and when there is an interaction with another system. Some inter-
               actions may project the system into a different linear combination
               (a “superposition”) of possible states, but we shall ignore that here.
                 Because the “collapse” is genuinely random, quantum physics is
               the origin of ontological chance in the universe, as first discovered
               by Albert Einstein, many years before the “founders” of quantum
               mechanics and the “uncertainty principle.”1
                  The inventor of the mathematical theory of the communication
               of information, Claude Shannon, explained how there would be
Appendix F




               no communication of new information without the existence of
               possible alternative messages.
                  A deterministic universe is one in which all messages from the
               past contain only the fixed totality of information in the past,
               nothing is ever “new.” So the indeterminism of quantum mechan-
               ics opens possible futures and gives us humans the chance to be
               creative authors of our lives.

                 1     See Appendix D.
                                                     Cosmic Creation    413

  So why do we need a second step in the creation of information?
The short answer is irreversibility.2
   A quantum event may be reversible. It may not leave a permanent
record in the universe.3 Until it does, we have nothing new. For the
many scientists and philosophers of science who deny the collapse
of the quantum-mechanical wave function, the universe is left for-
ever in a superposition of states. Nothing ever “happens.” Claims
of decoherence theorists that explain the appearance of something
happening are incoherent.4
   Making a quantum event irreversible is the job for thermodynam-
ics in our second step. But thermodynamics is a two-edged sword.
Every thermodynamic process is irreversible. Thermodynamicists
invent hypothetical reversible processes to calculate the efficiency
of engines, but in practice, as Ludwig Boltzmann showed, there
is always an increase in the entropy. So irreversibility alone cannot
help us with the creation of information, which we identify with
local reductions in the entropy. The creation of information requires
the creation of local negative entropy, in the form of an information
structure.
   There are just a few natural processes that can create informa-
tion structures. One is gravitation, which can attract matter from
random distributions of dust and gas into structures with spheri-
cal or circular symmetry like planets, stars, and galaxies. Another
is crystallization, when a snowflake with elaborate hexagonal sym-
metry forms from amorphous water vapor. But the most important
ergodic processes are life and mind.
   In order to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics, which
demands that the overall entropy of the universe must increase,
these anti-entropic or ergodic processes must transfer an amount
                                                                          Appendix F




of positive entropy (we can call Boltzmann entropy) away from the
new information structure with local negative entropy (that we can
also call Shannon entropy).5
  2    See chapter 25.
  3    See appendix C for a reversible quantum experiment.
  4    See chapter 21.
  5    See Appendix B for entropy and the second law.
         414         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Shannon’s information is mathematically the negative of the
               Boltzmann formula for entropy. For Shannon it was the logarithm
               of the number of messages, weighted by their probabilities. For
               Boltzmann it was the logarithm of the number of possible distribu-
               tions of gas particles in phase space.6
                 Should we consider the transfer away of positive entropy only a
               part of the second step? The means by which the transfer occurs is
               somewhat different in material, biological, and mental information
               processes.7
               The Flatness Problem in Cosmology
                 The universe is very likely flat because it was created flat. A flat
               universe starts with minimal information, which is fine since our
               cosmic creation process can create all the information that we have
               today. Leibniz’ question, “Why is there something rather than noth-
               ing?” might be “the universe is made out of something and the
               opposite of that something.”
                  When I was a first-year graduate student in astrophysics at
               Harvard University in 1958, I encountered two problems that
               have remained with me all these years. One was the fundamental
               problem of information philosophy - “What creates the information
               structures in the universe?” The other was the flat universe.
                 At that time, the universe was thought to be positively curved.
               Edwin Hubble’s red shifts of distant galaxies showed that they
               did not have enough kinetic energy to overcome the gravitational
               potential energy. Textbooks likened the universe to the surface of
               an expanding balloon decorated with galaxies moving away from
               one another.
Appendix F




                 That balloon popped for me when Walter Baade came to
               Harvard to describe his work at Mount Wilson. Baade took many
               images with long exposures of nearby galaxies and discovered there
               are two distinct populations of stars. And in each population there
               was a different kind of Cepheid variable star. The period of the
                 6     See appendix A for the mathematics.
                 7     See chapter 28.
                                               Cosmic Creation             415

Cepheid’s curve of light variation indicated its absolute brightness,
so they could be used as “standard candles” to find the distances to
star clusters in the Milky Way.
   Baade then realized that the Cepheids being used to calculate the
distance to Andromeda were 1.6 magnitudes brighter than the ones
used in our galaxy. Baade said Andromeda must be twice as far away
as Hubble had thought.
   As I listened to Baade, for me the universe went from being
positively curved to negatively curved. It jumped right over the flat
universe! I was struck that we seemed to be within observational
error of being flat. Some day a physicist will find the reason for
perfect flatness, I thought.
    I used to draw a line with tick marks for powers of ten in density
around the critical density ρc to show how close we are. Given so
many orders of magnitude of possible densities, it seemed improb-
able that we were just close by accident. We could increase the den-
sity of the universe by thirty powers of ten before it would have the
same density as the earth (way too dense!). But on the lighter side,
there are an infinite number of powers of ten. We can’t exclude a
universe with average density zero, which still allows us to exist, but
little else in the distance.




   In the long run we are approaching a universe with average den-
sity zero. Some say all the non-gravitationally bound systems will
slip over our light horizon as the expansion takes more and more
of them faster than the velocity of light. At this time, galaxies with a
                                                                             Appendix F




redshift greater than z = 1.8 are already over our light horizon. We
can never exchange signals with them.
  But note that we may always be able to see back to the cosmic
microwave background, all the same contents of the universe that
we see today will always be visible, just extremely red-shifted!
  What evidence could there be for a perfectly flat universe?
         416         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  First, there is the problem of the “missing mass” needed to slow
               down the cosmic expansion so that it will never stop, except at an
               infinite time, when there will be no kinetic enrgy left over
                  Second, there is evidence for acceleration of the cosmic expansion.
               It depends on observations of a single kind of “standard candle,” the
               type 1a supernovae.
                  It is essential that some other visible bodies at extreme redshifts
               can be used to show acceleration. The type 1a supernovae that
               exploded at the earliest times might have some systematic difference
               from those that exploded later.
                   Beyond any obdervations, there is pure theory. When Alan Guth
               presented his inflation thesis at Harvard in the 1980’s, I asked him
               why not assume the universe has always been exactly flat. He replied,
               “That’s too easy.” The great cosmologist Steven Weinberg agrees that
               it is easy. He wrote
                     “The simplest solution to the flatness problem is just that we are in a
                     spatially flat universe, in which K = 0 and ρ is always precisely equal to
                     ρcrit.” 8
               The Problem of Missing Mass
                  Given our assumption that the universe is exactly flat, the missing
               mass problem is that there is not enough observable material so
               that in Newtonian cosmology the gravitational binding energy can
               exactly balance the kinetic energy. The visible (luminous mass)
               accounts for only about 4-5 percent of the needed mass. Studying
               the rotation curves of galaxies and galaxy clusters reveals an invis-
               ible mass (called dark matter) contained inside the galaxies and
               clusters that amounts to perhaps 6 times the visible matter, which
               accounts for about 30 percent of the critical mass density needed
Appendix F




               to make the universe exactly flat. Current theory accounts for the
               balance by “dark energy,” an interpretation of the cosmological con-
               stant Einstein considered adding to his equations as a pressure to
               keep it from collapsing (known as “vacuum energy”). But the miss-
                 8       Cosmology, p.39
                                             Cosmic Creation             417

ing mass could just be more dark matter between the galaxies and
clusters. About three times their dark matter would do.
   This much material can close the universe and explain its flatness.
But it would not explain the apparent expansion acceleration seen
in Type 1a supernovae. This might be an artifact of the assumption
they are perfect “standard candles.” Recent evidence suggests that
distant Type 1a supernovae are in a different population than those
nearby, something like Baade’s two populations.
  It seems a bit extravagant to assume the need for an exotic form
of vacuum energy on the basis of observations that could have
unknown but significant sources of error. And I am delighted that
observations are within a factor of three of the critical density ρc.
  When Baade showed the universe was open in the 1950’s, we
needed thirty times more matter for a flat universe. Now we need
only three times more. More than ever, we are obviously flat!
The Horizon Problem
   The horizon problem arises from the perfect synchronization of
all the parts of our visible universe, when there may never have been
a time in the early universe that they were close enough together to
send synchronization signals.
   We propose a solution to the horizon problem based on Einstein’s
insight that in the wave-function collapse of entangled particles,
something is “traveling” faster than the speed of light. That some-
thing is information about possibilities. When the universal wave
function Ψ collapsed at t = 0, parts of the universe that are outside
our current light horizon may have been “informed” that it was time
to start, no matter the physical distance.
                                                                           Appendix F




   This radical idea is consistent with Richard Feynman’s path
integral (or “sum-over-histories”) formulation of quantum mechan-
ics. In calculating the probability of a quantum event, the path inte-
gral is computed over all the possible paths of virtual photons, many
travelling faster than the speed of light.
