         216   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                      i n i s m
                          De     term
Chapter 19




                                                                   This chapter on the web
                                     informationphilosopher.com/freedom/determinism.html
                                                 Determinism           217


Determinism
    The “problem of determinism” looms large in philosophy, where
it appears as the powerful alternative to libertarian freedom in the
“problem of free will.”1
   But determinism is equally powerful in physics today. It appears
to be the logical, the rational, even the metaphysical foundation of
classical Newtonian physics. The alternative of chance is thought
to be irrational. Chance cannot be a “reason” or an explanation,
which the Greeks called a “logos.” Chance is “alogos,” illogical. An
uncaused cause has long been considered oxymoronic by analytic
language philosophers who, to be sure, placed too much explana-
tory power in words.
   Despite the fact that quantum physics seems to have shown that
the microscopic world at least is ontologically indeterministic, the
critics of quantum theory, who have developed several alternative
“interpretations” of quantum mechanics, are equally divided into




                                                                         Chapter 19
those who accept the indeterminism and those, following Albert
Einstein, Erwin Schrödinger, and many others, hope to show
that determinism can be restored to quantum theory by discover-
ing “hidden variables,” forces coming in “from outside space and
time,” or that there is only the “appearance” of randomness.
   Determinism is the philosophical idea that every event or state
of affairs, including every human decision and action, is the inevi-
table and necessary consequence of antecedent states of affairs.
There is but one possible future.
  More strictly, determinism should be distinguished from pre-
determinism, the idea that the entire past (as well as the future)
was determined at the origin of the universe.
  Nor should determinism be confused with determination, the
idea that events (including human actions) can be adequately
determined by immediately prior events (such as an agent’s rea-
sons, motives, desires), without being pre-determined back to
before the agent’s birth or even back to the origin of the universe.
  1    See chapter 4
         218     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Since modern quantum physics shows that the universe is inde-
               terministic, with profound effects on microscopic processes at the
               atomic scale, we will find it valuable to distinguish pre-determin-
               ism from the adequate or statistical determinism that we have in
               the real world. Adequate determinism, which may be arbitrarily
               close to and indistinguishable from certainty, is the basis for the
               classical physical laws that apply in the macrocosmos.
                  Determinism is a modern name (coined in the nineteenth-cen-
               tury) for the ancient idea of Democritus that causal determinis-
               tic laws control the motion of atoms, and that everything - includ-
               ing human minds - consists merely of atoms in a void.
                 Democritus’ mentor and fellow materialist Leucippus said
               absolute necessity leaves no room in the cosmos for chance.
                  “Nothing occurs at random, but everything for a reason and by neces-
                  sity.”
                  Determinism, especially the variation of “soft” determinism (cf.
               William James) or compatibilism, is supported as a theory of free
Chapter 19




               will by a majority of philosophers, each with special vested inter-
               ests in one or more of the many determinisms.
                  Compatibilists accept determinism but argue that man is free as
               long as his own will is one of the steps in the causal chain, even if
               his choices are completely predetermined for physical reasons or
               preordained by God.
                  And fatalism is a special form of determinism where every
               event in the future is fated to happen. Fatalism does not normally
               require that any causal laws or higher powers are involved. Que
               sera, sera.
                  The core idea of determinism is closely related to the idea of
               causality. But we can have causality without determinism, espe-
               cially the “soft” causality that follows an “uncaused” event (a causa
               sui) that is not predictable from prior events.
                 Aristotle called such events archai (ἀρχαί) - starting points
               or “fresh starts” in new causal chains which break the bonds of
               determinism.
                                                                Determinism   219

   Despite David Hume’s critical attack on the necessity of causes,
many philosophers embrace causality and determinism strongly.
Some even connect it to the very possibility of logic and reason.
And Hume himself believed strongly, if inconsistently, in neces-
sity. “‘tis impossible to admit any medium betwixt chance and
necessity,”2 he said.
  Bertrand Russell said causation may be a priori,
      “The law of causation, according to which later events can theoreti-
      cally be predicted by means of earlier events, has often been held to
      be a priori, a necessity of thought, a category without which science
      would not be possible.” 3
Indeterminism
  The idea of indeterminism appears to threaten causality and
the basic idea of causal law. But it does not.
   Indeterminism for some is simply an occasional event without
a cause. We can have an adequate causality without strict deter-
minism. Strict determinism means complete predictability (in




                                                                                Chapter 19
principle, if not in practice) of events and only one possible future.
Adequate determinism provides statistical predictability, which in
normal situations for physical objects approaches statistical cer-
tainty.
  An example of an event that is not strictly caused is one that
depends on chance, like the flip of a coin. If the outcome is only
probable, not certain, then the event can be said to have been
caused by the coin flip, but the head or tails result itself was not
predictable. So this causality, which recognizes prior events as
causes, is undetermined and the result of chance alone.
  We call this “soft” causality. Events are caused by prior
(uncaused) events, but not determined by events earlier in the
causal chain, which has been broken by the uncaused cause.
   Determinism is critical for the question of free will. Strict deter-
minism implies just one possible future. Chance means that the
future is unpredictable. Chance allows alternative futures and the

  2       Treatise of Human Nature, Book I, Part I, Section XIV, p.171
  3       Our Knowledge of the External World, p.179
         220         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?


               question becomes how the one actual present is realized from these
               alternative possibilities.
                  The departure required from strict determinism is very slight
               compared to the miraculous ideas associated with the “causa sui”
               (self-caused cause) of the ancients.
                 Even in a world that contains quantum uncertainty, macroscopic
               objects are adequately, statistically determined to an extraordinary
               degree. The macroscopic “laws of nature” are just statistical laws that
               “emerge” when large numbers of atoms or molecules get together.
               For large enough numbers, the probabilistic laws approach practical
               certainty.
                 Determinism is an emergent property.4
                  Newton’s laws of motion are deterministic enough to send men
               to the moon and back. Our two-stage model of free will5 is large
               enough to ignore quantum uncertainty for the purpose of the
               reasoning will. The neural system is robust enough to insure that
Chapter 19




               mental decisions are reliably transmitted to our limbs.
                  We call this determinism, only ineffective for extremely small
               structures, “adequate determinism.” It is adequate enough to pre-
               dict eclipses for the next thousand years or more with extraordinary
               precision.
               Determination
                 Unlike his compatibilist predecessors, R.E.Hobart (the pseud-
               onym of Harvard philosopher Dickinson S. Miller, a student of Wil-
               liam James) explicitly does not endorse strict logical or physical
               determinism. He uses the word “determination,” not determinism.
               And he explicitly endorses the existence of alternative possibilities,
               which can depend on absolute chance. Hobart is writing about six
               years after the discovery of quantum indeterminacy.
                 He says:
                     I am not maintaining that determinism is true...it is not here affirmed
                     that there are no small exceptions, no slight undetermined swervings,
                     no ingredient of absolute chance.6

                 4       See chapter 26.
                 5       See chapter 4.
                 6       Mind, Vol XLIII, No. 169, January, 1934, p.2
                                                           Determinism                221

    “We say,” I can will this or I can will that, whichever I choose “. Two
    courses of action present themselves to my mind. I think of their conse-
    quences, I look on this picture and on that, one of them commends itself
    more than the other, and I will an act that brings it about. I knew that I
    could choose either. That means that I had the power to choose either.7
  Much later, Phillipa Foot argued that because our actions are
determined by our motives, our character and values, our feelings
and desires, in no way leads to the conclusion that they are pre-
determined from the beginning of the universe.
    For instance, an action said to be determined by the desires of the man
    who does it is not necessarily an action for which there is supposed to
    be a sufficient condition. In saying that it is determined by his desires
    we may mean merely that he is doing something that he wants to do, or
    that he is doing it for the sake of something else that he wants. There is
    nothing in this to suggest determinism.8
   The presence of quantum uncertainty leads some philosophers to
call the world undetermined. But indeterminism is somewhat mis-
leading, with strong negative connotations, when most events are
overwhelmingly “adequately determined.” Nevertheless, speaking




                                                                                        Chapter 19
logically, if a single event is undetermined, then indeterminism is
true, and determinism false.
   There is no problem imagining that the three traditional mental
faculties of reason - perception, conception, and comprehension -
are all carried on more or less deterministically in a physical brain
where quantum events do not interfere with normal operations.
   There is also no problem imagining a role for randomness in
the brain in the form of quantum level noise. Noise can introduce
random errors into stored memories. Noise could create random
associations of ideas during memory recall. This randomness may
be driven by microscopic fluctuations that are amplified to the mac-
roscopic level.
   Our macro mind needs the micro mind for the free action items
and thoughts in an agenda of alternative possibilities to be de-liber-
ated by the will. The random micro mind is the “free” in free will and
the source of human creativity. The adequately determined macro
   7      ibid, p.8
   8      “Free Will as Involving Determinism,” The Philosophical Review, vol LXVI,
(1957), p.441
         222         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               mind is the “will” in free will that de-liberates, choosing actions for
               which we can be morally responsible.
                  Determinism must be disambiguated from its close relatives cau-
               sality, certainty, necessity, and predictability.
               The Emergence of Determinism
                  Since the physical world is irreducibly indeterministic at the base
               level of atoms and molecules, there is actually no strict determinism
               at any “level” of the physical world.
                  With random motions at the base level, what emerges at the higher
               level of the macroscopic physical world and the human mind is ade-
               quate determinism. Determinism is an abstract theoretical idea that
               simplifies physical systems enough to allow the use of logical and
               mathematical methods on idealized abstract “objects” and “events.”
               The apparent “determinism” of classical physics is the consequence
               of averaging over extremely large numbers of microscopic particles.
                 Adequate determinism “emerges” when we have large enough
Chapter 19




               objects to be averaging over vast numbers of atoms and molecules.
                 Determinism is an emergent property, just as the concept of
               determinism emerged historically.
               The History of Determinism9
                 The term (sic) determination is first attested in the late fourteenth
               century, “to come to an end,” also “to settle, decide,” from O.Fr. deter-
               miner (12c.), from L. determinare “set limits to,” from de- “off ” + ter-
               minare “to mark the end or boundary,” from terminus “end, limit.”
                 Its sense of “coming to a firm decision” (to do something) is from
               1450. Determination as a “quality of being resolute” dates from 1822.
                  Before the nineteenth century determinists were usually called
               Necessarians. William Belsham contrasted them (favorably) with
               the “incoherent” Libertarians in 1789. This was the first use of Lib-
               ertarian. Libertarians were thought incoherent because liberty was

                 9     Sources, OED, Webster’s Third International
                                                           Determinism            223

thought to be unruly, random, unlawful, and - in a related term of
the day - libertine.
 The noun “determinism” appears first in 1846 in Sir William
Hamilton’s edition of Thomas Reid’s works as a note on p.87.
   “There are two schemes of Necessity - the Necessitation by efficient - the
   Necessitation by final causes. The former is brute or blind Fate; the latter
   rational Determinism.”
  At about the same time, determinism is used by theologians to
describe lack of free will.
  In 1855, William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) wrote,
   “The theory of Determinism, in which the will is determined or swayed
   to a particular course by external inducements and forced habits, so that
   the consciousness of freedom rests chiefly upon an oblivion of the ante-
   cedents of our choice.”
   Ernst Cassirer claimed (mistakenly?) that determinism in the
philosophical sense of a “doctrine that everything that happens is
determined by a necessary chain of causation” dates from the work




                                                                                    Chapter 19
of Emil du Bois-Reymond in 1876.
   Note that many ancient philosophers worried about this causal
chain (ἄλυσις), but those philosophers who allowed the existence
of chance, (Aristotle, Epicurus, Lucretius, and Alexander of
Aphrodisias), denied such a causal chain, while maintaining that
human decisions were caused by neither chance nor necessity but
by a tertium quid - our autonomous human agency.
  The adjective “determinist” appeared first in the Contemporary
Review of October 1874 - “The objections of our modern Deter-
minists.” In the Contemporary Review of March 1885, R. H. Hutton
described “The necessarian or determinist theory of human action.”
   William James’s essay on “The Dilemma of Determinism”
appeared at about the same time, in 1884. In it he coined the terms
“soft determinism” (today’s compatibilism), and “hard determinism”
(strict determinism, indeed, pre-determinism from the beginning
of time).
