        144      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                  m inis        m
                                         De t e r

                                                           t i b i l i s m
                                                 Co    mpa                 ism
                                                                  rmin
                        ter  minism               Sof   t D e t e
Chapter 9




                 De
            Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                   o m p atibi
                                                           S oft C
                     m p a t i b ilism
                                              i s m s
                                         rmin
       n        co                                                                      In
Hard I
                         Dete                   Semic
                                                     tibilism
                                                      om        pa

          n      ism
  Illusio
                                                                p atib ilism
                                                       In c o m
                                                   w
                       sm                 Narro
   Impo        ssibili
                                                                p atib   ilism
                                                     t In c o m
                                                Sof                                      y
                        del                                                      Leewa
                  an Mo
            Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                          a
                                         r c e I ncom nce)
                                     Sou          l S e que
                                       (Actu   a
                                                                            i m i t e d
                                                     e lw             ith L
                                                 o d
                               - S t      a ge M
                          Tw o                      This chapter on the web
                          informationphilosopher.com/solutions/determinisms
                                m inis           m
                       de t e r                                        Determinisms               145
                In
                Determinisms rianism
                                                 a
                                     Libert
                    Determinism is the idea that everything that happens, includ-
               ing all human actions, is completely determined by prior events.
               There is only one possible future, and it is completely predict-
                                                                                        t - C a  usal
               able in principle, most famously by Laplace’s Supreme         AgenIntelligent
               Demon, assuming perfect knowledge
                                                  a u s   l
                                                        athe       of the positions, velocities,
                                             - C
                                Eve I tstrongly suggest that determinism should be
               and forces for allnthe          atoms  in       void.
                    More strictly,
                                                                                                       sal




                                                                                                       Chapter 9
               distinguished from pre-determinism, the idea that the entire past
                                                                                           n - C  a u
               (as well as the future) was determined at the origin of the           No universe.

                                                       SFA David Hume’s critical attack
                    Determinism is sometimes confused                 with causality, the idea

           t i b i lis           m
               that all events have causes. Despite

     omp a     on the necessity of causes, and despite compatibilists’
                                                                                  s  a lity great
nc             respect for Hume as the modern founder of
                                                                  S  o ft C  a u
                                                                         compatibilism,
               philosophers embrace causality and determinism very strongly.
                                                                                            many

               Some even connect
                           m   p a tibilism   it to the very possibility of logic and reason.
                                                                                                  a nism
               I n
               And  c o Hume      himself                                                   a
                                              believed strongly, if inconsistently, inrtneces-r i
      Broad sity. “‘tis impossible to admit any mediumSo                              e and
                                                                            ft Libchance
                                                                          betwixt
               necessity,” he said.
                                          i a n     m law of causation, according to which
                                                 is“The                                                    rtaria
                                e r
                    Bertrand Russellt a r    said
                                                                                                   L i b e
              e  st Levents
               later        ib can theoretically be predicted by meansgofSearlier            oft
          o d
        M events, has often been held to be a priori, a necessity               r i n
                                                                           Da of thought, a
               category without which science
                                                   C  o g i t o
                                                            would   not be possible.” 1

                t i   i
                    But
                    b   l i s m events may themselves
                           some                                 not be completely determined
            p a
 Incom by           prior events.
                          c  e s ) This does not mean they are without causes, jut
                                                                                       n is            m
                   e n
               u their causes are probabilistic. Such an event is then indeter-
            eqthat                                                             e r m i
a t i v e S    minate.
                                                         In                det
                              It might or might not have happened. It is sometimes
                                                     e d
                                                 i t
                                          nd Lim
               called a “causa sui” or self-caused event. But a probabilistically
                                      a
               caused event may in turn be the adequately deterministic cause
               ism
       r m i n for following events. These later events would therefore not be

  Dete         predictable from conditions before the uncaused event. We call
               this “soft” causality. Events are still caused, but they are not always
               predictable or completely pre-determined.
                   1     Russell (1960) p. 179
        146     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Uncaused events are said to break the “causal chain” of events
              back to a primordial cause or “unmoved mover.” Aristotle’s
              “accidents” and Epicurus’ “swerve” are such uncaused causes.
                 There is only one basic form of indeterminism. There is only
              one irreducible freedom, based on a genuine randomness that
              provides for a world with breaks in the causal chain. Quantum
              mechanics is the fundamental source for irreducible objective
              indeterminacy and unpredictability in the physical, biological,
              and human worlds.
Chapter 9




                 By contrast, there are many determinisms, depending on what
              pre-conditions are considered to be determinative of an event or
              action. This chapter identifies more than a dozen distinguishable
              determinisms, though they overlap a great deal.
                 Philosophers and religious thinkers may feel ill-equipped
              to discuss the conflict between a physical freedom based on
              quantum physics and their own particular (logical or physical)
              determinism. Because interpretations of quantum mechanics are
              difficult even for physicists, most recent philosophers dodge the
              issue and declare themselves agnostic on the truth of determinism
              or indeterminism.
                 Even some philosophers who accept the idea of human free-
              dom are uncomfortable with the randomness implicit in quan-
              tum mechanics and the indeterminacy principle. True chance is
              problematic, even for many scientists. This included some, like
              Max Planck, Albert Einstein, and Erwin Schrödinger, who
              discovered the quantum world. And for traditional philosophers
              in a religious tradition, chance has been thought to be an atheistic
              idea for millennia, since it denies God’s foreknowledge. Chance,
              they say, is only epistemic, the result of human ignorance.
                 But quantum indeterminacy is real and ontological. There is
              objective chance in the physical world.
              The Determinisms
                Actualism is the idea that only whatever actually happens
              could ever have happened. It denies the existence of alternative
                                               Determinisms             147

possibilities for actions. This idea began with the logical soph-
istry of Diodorus Cronus’ Master Argument for determinism.
Statements about a future event that are true today necessitate the
future event.
   Sophisticated defenses of this idea include the so-called Frank-
furt cases, which claim that an agent’s actions can be free even
if a hypothetical intervening controller can change the agent’s
decisions, preventing any alternative possibilities that might have
appeared as what John Martin Fischer calls “flickers of free-




                                                                          Chapter 9
dom.”.
   Behavioral Determinism assumes that our actions are reflex
reactions developed in us by environmental or operant condition-
ing. This is the Nurture side of the famous Nature/Nurture debate
- note that both are determinisms. This view was developed to
an extreme by B. F. Skinner in the early 20th century, who had
great success “programming” the behaviors of animals, but never
with perfect control of behavior. Many cognitive scientists are
behaviorists who see the mind as a computer that has been pro-
grammed, by accident or deliberately, by education, for example.
   Biological Determinism finds causes for our actions in our
genetic makeup. This is the Nature side of the Nature/Nurture
debate. Again, both sides are determinisms. There is little doubt
that our genes pre-dispose us to certain kinds of behavior. But
note that our genes contain a miniscule fraction of the informa-
tion required to determine our futures. Most of the information in
the adult brain is acquired through life experiences.
   Causal Determinism assumes that every event has an anteced-
ent cause, in an infinite causal chain going back to Aristotle’s
Prime Mover. Nothing is uncaused or self-caused (causa sui).
Galen Strawson supports this view with his Basic Argument.
Note that there are always multiple causes for any event. Basically,
all the events that are in the past light-cone of an event can have a
causal relationship with the event.
   Cognitive Science Determinism results from a computational
model of mind that sees the mind as a computer. The mind may
        148     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              be evolving its own computer programs, but the overall process is
              completely pre-determined, say cognitive scientists, and philoso-
              phers like Daniel Dennett.
                 Fatalism is the simple idea that everything is fated to happen,
              so that humans have no control over their future. Notice that fate
              might be an arbitrary power and need not follow any causal or
              otherwise deterministic laws. It can thus include the miracles of
              omnipotent gods, and thus be a theological fatalism. Some philos-
              ophers use the term fatalism loosely to cover other determinisms.
Chapter 9




              Richard Taylor’s well-known article, Fatalism, in the Philosoph-
              ical Review, was about logical arguments denying future contin-
              gency. The Idle Argument claimed that since things are fated, it is
              “idle” to take any actions at all, since they can have no effect.
                 Historical Determinism is the dialectical idealism of Hegel or
              the dialectical materialism of Marx that are assumed to govern
              the course of future history. Marxists have often felt they could
              revise the past to suit their purposes, but claimed that the future is
              economically determined.
                 Logical Determinism reasons that a statement about a future
              event happening is either true or it is not true. This is the Principle
              of Bivalence and the Law of the Excluded Middle. If the statement
              is true, logical certainty then necessitates the event. Aristotle’s
              Sea Battle and Diodorus Cronus’ Master Argument are the clas-
              sical examples of this kind of determinism. If the statement about
              the future is false, the event it describes can not possibly happen.
              In logic, as in other formal systems, truth is outside of time, like
              the foreknowledge of God. Fortunately, logic can constrain our
              reasoning, but it cannot provide us with knowledge about the
              physical world nor can it constrain the world.
                 Linguistic Determinism claims that our language determines
              (at least limits) the things we can think and say and thus know. The
              Sapir-Whorf hypothesis claims that speech patterns in a language
              community constrain the conceptual categories of a linguistic
              community and thus determine thought.
                                               Determinisms             149

   Mechanical Determinism explains man as a machine. If
Newton’s laws of classical mechanics govern the workings of the
planets, stars, and galaxies, goes the argument, surely they govern
man the same way. Note that although René Descartes described
human bodies and all animals as deterministic machines, he said
that the human mind was free and undetermined (indeterminata).
   Necessitarianism is a variation of logical and causal determin-
ism that claims everything is simply necessary. This was Leucip-
pus’ view at the beginning of determinism. This was the most




                                                                          Chapter 9
popular name for determinists in the 18th century, when they were
opposed to libertarians.
   Neuroscientific Determinism assumes that the neurons are
the originators of our actions. “My neurons made me do it.” The
Libet experiments have been interpreted to show that decisions
are made by the brain’s neurons significantly before any action of
conscious will.
   Nomological Determinism is a broad term to cover determin-
ism by laws, of nature, of human nature, etc.
   Physical Determinism extends the laws of physics to every
atom in the human mind and assumes that the mind will some-
day be perfectly predictable, once enough measurements are
made. The paradigmatic case is that of Laplace’s Demon. Knowing
the positions, velocities, and forces acting on every particle in the
world, the demon can know the entire past and future. All times
are visible to such a super intelligence.
   Psychological Determinism is the idea that our actions must
be determined by the best possible reason or our greatest desire.
Otherwise, our acts would be irrational. Since all the possible ac-
tions are presented to the mind, determined by prior actions, the
choice is not really made by the agent.
   Pre-determinism claims that everything that ever happens
was pre-determined at the beginning of the universe. Theological
predestination is similar, but if God is assumed to be omnipo-
tent, the events may have been pre-destined more recently. Some
        150     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              theologians insist that God is unchanging and outside of time, in
              which case predestination reduces to pre-determinism.
                 Religious or Theological Determinism is the consequence of
              the presumed omniscience of God. God has foreknowledge of all
              events. All times are equally present to the eye of God (Aquinas’
              totem simul). Note the multiple logical inconsistencies in the idea
              of an omnipotent, omniscient, benevolent God. If God knows
              the future, he obviously lacks the power to change it. And if
              benevolence is assumed, it leads to the problem of evil.2
Chapter 9




                 Spatio-temporal Determinism is a view based on special rela-
              tivity. The “block universe” of Hermann Minkowski and Albert
              Einstein is taken to imply that time is simply a fourth dimension
              that already exists, just like the spatial dimensions. The one possi-
              ble future is already out there, up ahead of where we are now, just
              like the city blocks to our left and right. J. J. C. Smart is a philoso-
              pher who holds this view. He calls himself “somewhat of a fatalist.”
                 Finally, Compatibilism is the idea that Free Will is compat-
              ible with Determinism. Compatibilists believe that as long as our
              Mind is one cause in the causal chain then we can be responsible
              for our actions, which is reasonable. But they think every cause,
              including our decisions, are pre-determined. Compatibilists are
              Determinists. Although some modern compatibilists say they are
              agnostic on the truth of determinism (and indeterminism).
                 Some of these determinisms (behavioral, biological, histori-
              cal-economic, language, and psychological) have demonstrable
              evidence that they do in fact constrain behaviors and thus limit
              human freedom. But others are merely dogmas of determinism,
              believed primarily for the simple reason that they eliminate ran-
              dom chance in the universe.
                 Chance is anathema to most philosophers and many scientists.
              But without indeterminacy, there are simply no possibilities for
              the world to be different from what these many determinisms
              claim that it will be.



                2     See page 5.
                                                 Determinisms             151



Do the Laws of Physics Deny Human Freedom?
   Of all the determinisms listed here, physical determinism
stands out as a special case.
   All the fanciful logical, theological, and nomological determin-
isms described here are basically just ideas.
   Isaac Newton’s classical mechanics was also an idea at first, of
course, just a theory.




                                                                            Chapter 9
   But then it was confirmed experimentally, by observations that
have grown more and more accurate with every passing decade.
   To be sure, the theory has been revised and refined, first for the
case of matter moving at velocities that are a significant fraction of
the speed of light. Albert Einstein’s special theory of relativity
goes beyond classical mechanics, but it asymptotically approaches
the classical theory as velocities go to zero.
   The next grand refinement was Einstein’s general theory, but it
too corresponds to ordinary Newtonian physics in the limit.
   The most important refinement is the quantum mechanics of
Werner Heisenberg and Neils Bohr. Again, it corresponds to
the classical theory, in the limit of large numbers of particles.
   When Arthur Stanley Eddington revised his 1927 Gifford
lectures for publication as The Nature of the Physical World, there
he dramatically announced
      “It is a consequence of the advent of the quantum theory that
      physics is no longer pledged to a scheme of deterministic law.” 1
  There is nothing in the laws of physics, or any wider “laws of
nature,” that in any way puts constraints on human freedom.




  1       Eddington (2005)
