         296   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                               e n ce
                       E  merg
Chapter 27




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/knowledge/emergence
                                                    Emergence           297


Emergence
   Information philosophy explains the reality of emergence,
because what emerges is new information. The universe began
with minimal information. For hundreds of thousands of years,
the only information structures were fundamental particles.
These were only the simplest matter and energy, and they are con-
served quantitities. In a deterministic universe, that initial infor-
mation would be all the information in the universe today and in
the future, because information would be conserved.
   But information is not conserved. Because it is neither matter
not energy, information is immaterial. Matter can be converted to
energy (E = mc2), but their total is a constant. The only thing that
is new is information. Information is the only emergent.
  A complex physical world of galaxies, stars, and planets has
emerged, a diverse biological world has emerged, and a mental
world of ideas has emerged, including the idea of emergence itself.
Emergence is the result of the cosmic creation process.1
   And this process is fundamentally a rearrangement and trans-
formation of the fundamental particles of matter and energy.
  The basic idea of emergence is that there are properties - per-
haps even “laws” - at the upper hierarchical levels of nature that
are not derivable from or reducible to the properties and laws of
the lower levels. Thus chemistry has properties not derivable from        Chapter 27
physics, biology has properties not derivable from chemistry, and
psychology has properties not derivable from biology.
Emergence or Reduction?
   Reductionism, by contrast, argues that everything can be
explained by (reduced to) the basic laws of physics. The world is
said to be “causally closed.” “Physicalism” is the idea that every-
thing that is caused has a physical cause, that everything that hap-
pens is caused by material particles in motion
  Causal control is assumed to work “bottom-up.” The motions
and forces between the material particles are said to determine
1      See appendix F.
         298     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               everything chemical, biological, and psychological. Information
               theory would then require that the information content of every-
               thing being done at the higher biological and mental levels is actu-
               ally contained in the structure and motions of the atoms and mol-
               ecules. We shall show that this reductionism is implausible
                  Causal closure implies that every thought in the mind is some-
               how present in the paths or positions of the atomic particles them-
               selves. Mental causation is then redundant. Mental events are epi-
               phenomenal, non-existent, just an illusion.
                  Genuine emergence of new properties at the higher biological
               and psychological levels, on the other hand, requires that those
               properties can exert “top-down” causal control on the motions of
               particles in lower levels. This is the notion of downward causa-
               tion, the highest version of which is mental causation.2 It means
               motions of the atomic particles must effectively be controlled by
               the mind, which strikes many biologists and psychologists, who
               are uncomfortable making claims about physics, as extravagant.
                 If the laws of nature control everything in the visible universe,
               they say, how can they fail to control the mind?
                  Proving this “top-down” or mental causation is made doubly
               difficult, since we would like to show that “bottom-up” causes on
               the body and mind can somehow be blocked. It seems illogical or
               even impossible to show that causation can flow downward but
Chapter 27




               not upward.
                  But we can demonstrate emergent phenomena at the biological
               and mental (neural) level that have exactly this emergent property
               of what we can call “one-way causality.”
               History of the Idea of Emergence
                 The idea of emergence was implicit in the work of John Stuart
               Mill and explicit in the work of “emergentists” like George
               Henry Lewes, Samuel Alexander, C. Lloyd Morgan, and
                 2    See chapter 15.
                                                               Emergence         299

C. D. Broad. Some wanted to explain the direct emergence of
mind from matter, to solve the mind-body problem, but as Alex-
ander put it, there are at least two distinct steps - mind emerges
from life, just as life emerges from the physical-chemical.
   Mill discusses the Laws of Nature in his System of Logic, Book
III. Although Mill did not use the term “emergent,” he makes the
concept clear enough:
    The chemical combination of two substances produces, as is well
    known, a third substance with properties different from those of either
    of the two substances separately, or of both of them taken together.
    Not a trace of the properties of hydrogen or of oxygen is observable
    in those of their compound, water. The taste of sugar of lead is not
    the sum of the tastes of its component elements, acetic acid and lead
    or its oxide; nor is the colour blue vitriol a mixture of the colours of
    sulphuric acid and copper...If this be true of chemical combinations, it
    is still more true of those far more complex combinations of elements
    which constitute organized bodies; and in which those extraordinary
    new uniformities arise, which are called the laws of life... To whatever
    degree we might imagine our knowledge of the properties of the sev-
    eral ingredients of a living body to be extended and perfected, it is
    certain that no mere summing up of the separate actions of those ele-
    ments will ever amount to the action of the living body itself.3
   Lewes also used Mill’s example of the properties of water not
being reducible to those of oxygen and hydrogen. He coined the
term “emergent” in 1875:
    Although each effect is the resultant of its components, the product of
                                                                                   Chapter 27
    its factors, we cannot always trace the steps of the process, so as to see
    in the product the mode of operation of each factor. In the latter case,
    I propose to call the effect an emergent. It arises out of the combined
    agencies, but in a form which does not display the agents in action.4
   In his 1920 book Space, Time, and Deity, Samuel Alexander
cited Lloyd Morgan as his source of emergentism, and wrote:
    much of what I have to say has been already said by Mr. Lloyd Morgan
    in the concluding chapter of his work on Instinct and Experience. The
    argument is that mind has certain specific characters to which there is
    or even can be no neural counterpart...

3       A System of Logic, Book III, chapter VI
4       Problems of Life and Mind,(1875), vol. 2, p. 412
         300         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    Mind is, according to our interpretation of the facts, an ‘emergent’ from
                    life, and life an emergent from a lower physico-chemical level of exis-
                    tence.5
                  Later, in his 1922 Gifford Lectures and 1923 book Emergent
               Evolution, Lloyd Morgan saw even atoms and molecules as emer-
               gent entities and introduced the related “top-down” concept of hier-
               archical supervenience:
                    ...in the physical world emergence is no less exemplified in the advent of
                    each new kind of atom, and of each new kind of molecule. It is beyond
                    the wit of man to number the instances of emergence. But if nothing
                    new emerge - if there be only regrouping of pre-existing events and
                    nothing more - then there is no emergent evolution.
                    Under emergent evolution there is progressive development of stuff
                    which becomes new stuff in virtue of the higher status to which it has
                    become raised under some supervenient kind of substantial gotogeth-
                    erness.6
                  Vitalists like Henri Bergson and Hans Driesch may not have
               used the term emergence, but they strongly supported the idea of
               teleological (purposeful), likely non-physical, causes, without which
               they thought that life and mind could not have emerged from physi-
               cal matter.
                   C. D. Broad’s view of the mind was emergentist and vitalist.
                  But Broad distinguished between what he called “Substantial
               Vitalism” (a dualist theory of an immaterial substance as a vital force,
               for example, Bergson’s élan vital) and what Broad called “Emergent
Chapter 27




               Vitalism” (some kind of non-reductive materialism, in which the
               vital property emerges from the body, and in the case of mind, from
               the highest bodily level - the brain).
                Broad says he borrowed the adjective “emergent” from Lloyd
               Morgan and Alexander.
                  Broad contrasted the two forms of Substantial and Emergent
               Vitalism with what he called “Biological Mechanism,” which is
               essentially a reduction of biology to physics and chemistry. All the
               emergentists were of course anti-mechanists or anti-reductionists.
               5        Space, Time, and Deity (1920), vol. 2, p. 14
               6        Emergent Evolution (1923), pp. 1-6
                                                     Emergence             301

   Broad also mentioned Driesch, an anti-mechanist who developed
a sophisticated form of vitalism that he called “neovitalism.”
   Driesch saw clear evidence of a kind of teleology in the ability of
lower organisms to rebuild their lost limbs and other vital parts. He
used Aristotle’s term “entelechy” (loosely translated as “having the
final cause in”) to describe the organism’s capacity to rebuild itself.
Driesch said this disproved the theory of preformation from a single
original cell. Driesch studied the original cells of a sea urchin, after
they had divided into two cells, then four, then eight. At each of
these stages, Driesch separated out single cells and found that the
separated cells went on to develop into complete organisms. This is
regarded as the first example of biological cloning.
   Broad rejected Driesch’s idea of entelechy as a non-material, non-
spatial agent that is neither energy nor a material substance of a spe-
cial kind, but we should note that Driesch’s entelechy well describes
the information content of any cell by which it develops into a
complete organism. Driesch himself maintained that his entelechy
theory was something very different from the substance dualism of
older vitalisms. So what was Broad’s criticism of Driesch? Neither
thinker could produce a clear description of their vital element.
   Broad was sophisticated in his discussion of emergence. He saw
that the kind of emergence that leads to water and its unique chemi-
cal properties, when compared to the properties of its molecular
components hydrogen and oxygen, has no element of purpose
                                                                             Chapter 27
or teleology. The emergence of life (and mind) from physics and
chemistry, however, clearly introduces a kind of design or purpose.
Modern biologists call it teleonomy, to distinguish it from a meta-
physical telos that pre-exists the organism. It comes as an essential
part of the organism.
   It seems likely that both Driesch and Broad were trying to grasp
this teleonomy, which can be simply described as the built-in pur-
pose of each living cell to replicate its information. “The goal of
every cell is to become two cells.”
         302         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Three Kinds of Information Emergence
                 Note there are three distinct kinds of emergence, at the material,
               biological, and mental levels:
                        1. the order out of chaos when the randomly distributed
                     matter in the early universe first gets organized into informa-
                     tion structures.
                        This was not possible before the first atoms formed about
                     400,000 years after the Big Bang. Information structures like the
                     stars and galaxies did not exist before about 400 million years.
                     As we saw, gravitation was the principal driver creating infor-
                     mation structures.
                        Nobel prize winner Ilya Prigogine discovered another
                     ergodic process that he described as the “self-organization” of
                     “dissipative structures.” He popularized the slogan “order out of
                     chaos” in an important book.7 Unfortunately, the “self ” in self-
                     organization led to some unrealizable hopes in cognitive psy-
                     chology. There is no self, in the sense of a person or agent, in
                     physical phenomena like convection cells and whirlpools.
                        Both gravitation and Prigogine’s dissipative systems produce
                     a purely physical/material kind of order. The resulting structures
                     contain information, with a “steady state” flow of information-
                     rich matter and energy through them. But they do not process
                     or communicate information. They have no purpose, no “telos.”
Chapter 27




                        Order out of chaos can explain the emergence of downward
                     causation on their atomic and molecular components. But this
                     is a gross kind of downward causal control. Explaining life and
                     mind as “complex adaptive systems” has not been successful.
                     We need to go beyond “chaos and complexity” theories to teleo-
                     nomic theories.
                       2. the order out of order when the material information struc-
                     tures form self-replicating biological information structures.
                     Some become information processing systems.

                 7      Order Out of Chaos. Shambhala, 1984.
                                                      Emergence             303

       In his famous essay, “What Is Life?,” Erwin Schrödinger noted
    that life “feeds on negative entropy” (or information). He called
    this “order out of order.”
       This kind of biological processing of information first emerged
    about 3.5 billion years ago on the earth. It continues today on
    multiple emergent biological levels, e.g., single-cells, multi-cel-
    lular systems, organs, etc., each level creating new information
    structures and information processing systems not reducible to
    (caused by) lower levels and exerting downward causation on
    the lower levels.
       And this downward causal control is extremely fine. Biologi-
    cal systems control the motions and arrangements of individual
    atoms and molecules.
       Biological systems are cognitive systems, using internal “sub-
    jective” knowledge to recognize and interact with their “objec-
    tive” external environment, communicating meaningful mes-
    sages to their internal components and to other individuals
    of their species with a language of arbitrary symbols, taking
    actions to maintain themselves and to expand their populations
    by learning from experience.8
       With the emergence of life, “purpose” also entered the uni-
    verse. It is not the pre-existent “teleology” of many idealistic phi-
    losophies (the idea of “essence” before “existence”), but it is the
                                                                              Chapter 27
    “entelechy” of Aristotle, who saw that living things have within
    them a purpose, an end, a “telos.” To distinguish this evolved
    telos in living systems from teleology, modern biologists use the
    term “teleonomy.”
      3. the pure information out of order when organisms with
    minds generate, store (in the brain), replicate, utilize, and then
    externalize some non-biological information, communicat-
    ing it to other minds and storing it in the environment. Com-
    munication can be by hereditary genetic transmission or by an
    advanced organism capable of learning and then teaching its
    contemporaries directly by signaling, by speaking, or indirectly
    by writing and publishing the knowledge for future generations.

8       See appendix G on Biosemiotics.
         304       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                      This kind of information can be highly abstract mind-stuff,
                   pure Platonic ideas, the stock in trade of philosophers. It is nei-
                   ther matter nor energy (though embodied in the material brain),
                   a kind of pure spirit or ghost in the machine. It is a candidate for
                   the immaterial dualist “substance” of René Descartes, though
                   it is probably better thought of as a “property dualism,” since
                   information is an immaterial property of all matter.
                  The information stored in the mind is not only abstract ideas. It
               contains a recording of the experiences of the individual. In princi-
               ple every experience may be recorded, though not all may be repro-
               ducible/recallable. Information philosophy claims that everything
               created since the origin of the universe over thirteen billion years
               ago has involved just two fundamental physical processes that com-
               bine to form the core of all creative processes at all three levels.9
                  This core creative process underlies the formation of microscopic
               objects like atoms and molecules, as well as macroscopic objects like
               galaxies, stars, and planets. (Note that the formation of self-orga-
               nizing material systems in conditions far from equilibrium that are
               the subjects of chaos and complexity theories are this basic, non-
               teleonomic form of emergence.)
                  With the emergence of teleonomic (purposive) information in
               self-replicating systems, the same core process underlies all biologi-
               cal creation. But now some random changes in information struc-
Chapter 27




               tures are rejected by natural selection, while others reproduce suc-
               cessfully.
                  Finally, with the emergence of self-aware organisms and the cre-
               ation of extra-biological information stored in the environment, the
               same information-generating core process underlies communica-
               tion, consciousness, free will, and creativity.
                 The physical processes in the core creative process are quantum
               cooperative phenomena (involving the mysterious “collapse” of the
               wave function necessary for the appearance of particles - see chapter
               9       See appendix F for details on the cosmic creation process
                                                       Emergence           305

20) and thermodynamics, which requires the transfer of entropy
away from newly emergent information structures to ensure their
stability.10
Emergence in the Body
                                           When a ribosome assembles
                                        330 amino acids in four sym-
                                        metric polypeptide chains (glo-
                                        bins), each globin traps an iron
                                        atom in a heme group at the
                                        center to form the hemoglo-
                                        bin protein. This is downward
                                        causal control of the amino
   Figure 27-32. Four protein chains of
                                        acids, the heme groups, and the
 hemoglobin.                            iron atoms by the ribosome. The
ribosome is an example of Erwin Schrödinger’s emergent “order
out of order,” life “feeding on the negative entropy” of digested food.
   When 200 million of the 25 trillion red blood cells in the human
body die each second, in each of the new cells 100 million hemoglo-
bins cell must be assembled. With the order of a few thousand bytes
of information in each hemoglobin, this is 10 thousand x 100 mil-
lion x 200 million = 2 x 1020 bits of information per second, a million
times more information processing than today’s fastest computer
CPU. Red blood cells are 25% of body weight. Twenty percent of
                                                                             Chapter 27
these are working in the brain to support mental information pro-
cessing.
   When a ribosome produces a protein that does not fold properly,
a chaperone enzyme, shaped like a tiny trash can, opens its lid and
captures the protein. It then closes the lid and squeezes the protein.
Upon release, the protein then frequently folds properly. If it does
not, the chaperone captures it again and disassembles it back to its
amino acids. The chaperone is an emergent agent that is in no way
the result of “bottom-up” processes from its amino acid compo-
nents. It is also an extraordinary example of biological error detec-
tion and correction.
  10    See appendix B on entropy and the second law
         306          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Emergence in the Brain
                  When a single neuron fires, the active potential rapidly changes
               the concentration of sodium (Na+) ions inside the cell and potas-
               sium (K+) ions outside the cell. Within milliseconds, thousands
               of sodium-potassium ion channels in the thin lipid bilayer of the
               cell wall must move billions of those ions from one side to the
               other. They do it with emergent biological machinery that exerts
               downward causation on the ions, powered by ATP energy carriers
               (feeding on negative entropy). Random quantum indeterministic
               motions of the ions put some near the pump opening, where quan-
               tum collaborative forces capture them in a lock-and-key structure.11
                 When many motor neurons fire, innnervating excitatory post-
               synaptic potentials (EPSPs) that travel down through the thalamus
               and the spinal cord and cause muscles to contract, that is as literal as
               downward causation gets in the body.
                 When the emergent mind decides to move the body, that mental
               causation is realized as downward causation.
                  When an emergent philosopher rearranges and communicates
               ideas, verbally in lectures, or as written words in a published paper,
               or as the bits of information in a computer memory, this is “informa-
               tion out of order,” ultimately dependent on the body digesting food,
               producing energy with negative entropy (“order out of order”), but
               in no way controlled “bottom-up” by the molecules of body or food
Chapter 27




               material, or by the energy consumed.
               The Emergence of Immaterial Information Processing
                 Can information provide the basis for a different kind of mental
               substance, one that emerged?
                  Abstract information is neither matter nor energy, yet it needs
               matter for its concrete embodiment and energy for its communica-
               tion. Information is immaterial.
                 It is the modern spirit, the ghost in the machine.
                  Immaterial information is perhaps as close as a physical or bio-
               logical scientist can get to the idea of a soul or spirit that departs
               the body at death. When a living being dies, it is the maintenance of
               biological and mental information that ceases. The matter remains.
                 11     See “Ion Pumps in Neurons Select Individual Atoms” on page 183
                                                            Emergence     307

  Information philosophy proposes a mind-body dualism in which
thoughts (pure information processing) in our minds have genuine
causal power over the body. This might be considered a metaphysical
mind, but it is purely biological and entirely dependent on the brain.
There are multiple realizations of physical/material “hardware” that
can implement the “software” of our ideas.
  For example, when one person teaches another some new tech-
nique, or transmits some purely intellectual knowledge, the other
person is another physical realization, different hardware now run-
ning the same software.
  To make this case, we need to establish the following:
  • that the information in a mind can be regarded as an immaterial
substance.12
  • that the information in a mind, while dependent on the body,
has genuine causal (adequately determined) power over the body.13
   • that the information in a mind has not been pre-determined
by the sum of genetic inputs and life experiences, but has at least in
part been created by the agent, with inputs from some indetermin-
istic processes.14
The Emergence of Determinism
   When small numbers of atoms and molecules interact, their
motions and behaviors are indeterministic, governed by the rules
of quantum mechanics. But when large numbers of particles gather            Chapter 27
into large material objects, they are statistically determined. This is
called the “quantum to classical transition.”
   Werner Heisenberg’s principle of indeterminacy (mistakenly
called “uncertainty,” as if the problem is epistemic/subjective and
not ontological/objective) gives us the minimum error in simulta-
neous measurements of position x and momentum p, for any object,
large or small,
  Δp Δx ≥ h,
  where h is Planck’s constant of action.

  12   See appendix A on information
  13   See chapter 16 on mental causation
  14   See chapter 4 on the two-stage model of free will.
         308       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  To see how “adequate” determinism emerges for large numbers
               of particles, note that the momentum p = mv (the product of mass
               and velocity), so we can write the indeterminacy principle in terms
               of velocities and positions as
                 Δv Δx ≥ h / m.
                  When large numbers of microscopic particles get together in
               massive aggregates, the mass increases and h / m approaches zero,
               the indeterminacy of the individual particles gets averaged over and
               macroscopic “adequately” deterministic laws “emerge.” The posi-
               tions and velocities of large massive objects can therefore be “deter-
               mined” to a high degree of accuracy, in fact beyond our ability to
               measure.
                  Determinism is thus an emergent property for an object made up
               of large numbers of material particles,.
                  The “laws of nature,” such as Newton’s laws of motion, are all sta-
               tistical in nature. They also “emerge” when large numbers of atoms
               or molecules get together. For large enough numbers, the probabilis-
               tic laws of nature approach practical certainty. But the fundamental
               indeterminism of component atoms never completely disappears.
               There Was a Time with No Determinism
                  So determinism “emerges” today from microscopic quantum sys-
               tems as they become a part of larger and more classical systems.
Chapter 27




               But we can say that determinism also emerged in time. In the earli-
               est years of the universe, large massive objects did not yet exist. All
               matter was microscopic and quantal.
                  We can now identify that time in the evolution of the universe
               when determinism first could have emerged. Before the so-called
               “recombination era” at about 380,000 years, when the universe
               cooled to a few thousand degrees Kelvin, a temperature at which
               atoms could form out of sub-atomic particles (protons, helium
               nuclei, and electrons), there were no “macroscopic objects” to
               exhibit deterministic behavior.
                                                                  Emergence            309

   The early universe was filled with positive ions and negatively
charge electrons. The electrons scattered light photons, preventing
them from traveling very far. The universe was effectively opaque
past very short distances. When the temperature fell to about 3000
degrees K, the charged particles combined to form neutral atoms
(hydrogen and helium). With the scattering electrons now bound
into atoms, the photons suddenly could “see” (travel) to enormous
distances. This produced the transparent universe that we take for
granted today (on cloudless nights).
   Those 3000 degrees K photons have been red-shifted as a result
of the universe expansion and now appear to us as the 2.7 degree
K “cosmic microwave background” radiation left over from the big
bang. We are looking at a moment in time when “classical” objects
obeying apparently deterministic causal laws did not yet exist.
  After a few hundred million years, large material objects
could begin to form. Only then could anything “classical”” or
“deterministic” come into existence, could “emerge.”
Emergence Denied
   Some prominent philosophers of science, logical empiricists who
were committed to the ability of physical science to explain every-
thing as “unified science,” were confident that “emergence” would
go the way of “holism” and “vitalism.”
  For example, the former member of the Vienna Circle and lead-
ing reductionist Herbert Feigl wrote in 1958:                                            Chapter 27
     Inseparably connected with holism and the Gestalt philosophy is the
     doctrine of emergence. This is indeed my own, admittedly risky and
     speculative, guess; that is to say, I believe that once quantum dynamics
     is able to explain the facts and regularities of organic chemistry (i.e. of
     non-living, but complex compounds) it will in principle also be capable
     of explaining the facts and regularities of organic life.15


15       “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical’”, in Concepts, Theories, and the Mind-Body
Problem, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol.2, p. 414
