         228   My God, He Plays Dice!




                                 m e nt
                           g l e
                   Entanymmetry
Chapter 29




                   a n d S
        20




                                                          This chapter on the web
                               informationphilosopher.com/problems/entanglement
                               Entanglement and Symmetry                  229


Entanglement and Symmetry
   In his pioneering work on special and general relativity, Einstein’s
greatest work came from his use of fundamental “principles” to
derive his new results. In special relativity, it was the principle
that light has the same speed in all frames of reference. In general
relativity, it was his equivalence principle, that an observer cannot
distinguish between an accelerated frame and the force of gravity.
   Each of these principles emerges from an underlying symmetry
that produces an invariant quantity or a conservation law.
   The speed of light is an invariant. The laws of physics are the
same at different places in space-time. Otherwise we couldn’t
repeat experiments everywhere and discover the laws of nature.
   Einstein discovered symmetries that helped him reformulate
Maxwell’s laws of electromagnetic fields. A few years later
Emmy Noether (often described as the most important female
mathematician) made a profound contribution to theoretical




                                                                                    29
                                                                            Chapter 20
physics with her theorem on the fundamental relationship
between symmetry and conservation principles.
    For any property of a physical system that is symmetric, there is
    a corresponding conservation law.
   For example, if a physical system is symmetric under rotations,
its angular momentum is conserved. If symmetric in time, energy
is conserved. If symmetric in space, momentum is conserved.
   Noether’s theorem allows physicists to gain powerful insights
into any general theory in physics, by just analyzing the various
transformations that would make the form of the laws involved
invariant. No one understood the importance of these invariance
principles better than Einstein. Nevertheless, Einstein introduced
an odd asymmetry where none belongs in his EPR analysis of the
behavior of two “entangled” particles.
         230     My God, He Plays Dice!

               Einstein’s Introduction of a False Asymmetry?
                  Almost every presentation of the EPR paradox and descriptions
               of entanglement begins with something like “Alice observes
               one particle...” and concludes with the question “How does the
               second particle get the information needed so that Bob’s later
               measurements correlate perfectly with Alice’s?”
                  There is a fundamental asymmetry in this framing of the EPR
               experiment. It is a surprise that Einstein, who was so good at seeing
               deep symmetries, did not consider how to remove the asymmetry.
                  Consider this reframing: Alice’s measurement collapses the two-
               particle wave function Ψ12. The two indistinguishable particles
               simultaneously appear at locations in a space-like separation.
               The frame of reference in which the source of the two entangled
               particles and the two experimenters are at rest is a special frame
               in the following sense. It is the frame in which their appearance is
               simultaneous. In this frame, the experiment is symmetric.
                  As Einstein knew very well, there are frames of reference
Chapter 29




               moving with respect to the laboratory frame of the two observers
               in which the time order of the events can be reversed. In some
               moving frames Alice measures first, in others Bob measures first.
        20




                  Einstein also knows well that two events in spacelike separation
               can have no causal influence on one another. They are not in one
               another’s “light cone.” No signals communicate between them.
                  If there is a special frame of reference (not a preferred frame in
               the relativistic sense), surely it is the one in which the origin of the
               two entangled particles is at rest.
                             Entanglement and Symmetry                  231

   Assuming that Alice and Bob are also at rest in this special frame
and equidistant from the origin, we arrive at the simple picture
in which any measurement that causes the two-particle wave
function to collapse makes both particles appear simultaneously
at determinate places with fully correlated properties (just the
values that are needed to conserve energy, momentum, angular
momentum, and spin).
   Instead of the one particle making an appearance in Einstein’s
original case of nonlocality, in the two-particle case, when
either particle is measured - or better, when the wave function is
disturbed? - both particles appear.
   The two-particle wave function splits into two single-particle
wave functions.
   Ψ12 => Ψ1 Ψ2
   At this moment, the two-particle wave function decoheres
(no longer shows interference properties), the particles are
disentangled,




                                                                                  29
                                                                          Chapter 20
   We know instantly those properties of the other particle that
satisfy the conservation laws, including its location equidistant
from, but on the opposite side of, the source, along with its other
properties such as the spin, which must be equal and opposite to
add up to the original spin = zero, for example.
   When Alice detects the particle at t0 (with say spin up), at that
instant the other particle also becomes determinate (with spin
down) at the same distance on the other side of the origin. The
particles separate at t0. Further measures of either particle will
have no effect on the other!
   Note that should Bob have measured before t0, his would be the
“first” measurement that causes the two-particle wave function to
decohere and the particles to disentangle and finally separate.
   We can also ask what happens if Bob is not at the same distance
from the origin as Alice. This introduces a positional asymmetry.
But there is still no time asymmetry from the point of view of the
two-particle wave function collapse at t0.
         232         My God, He Plays Dice!




               What Did Einstein See? The Special Frame?
                  Remember Einstein’s 1933 question to Leon Rosenfeld, “How can
               the final state of the second particle be influenced by a measurement
               performed on the first...” 1 Why did Einstein see something unusual
               in what we now call simply “knowledge-at-a-distance?”
                  The instantaneous nature of the “knowledge” is what Einstein saw
               as a potential violation of his principle of relativity. We argue that
Chapter 29




               it picks out a special frame in which two events are “simultaneous.”
                  Relativity denies simultaneity between separated events.
                  In 1927 at the Solvay conference the events were the detected
        20




               particle on the screen and that mysterious second place on the
               screen. 2 In the 1935 EPR paper they were the “influence” of the first
               particle measurement on the second particle.
                  Between these two points is a space where Einstein thinks some-
               thing is happening that violates his relativity principle. In the
               diagram above it’s the line between Alice’s observation at t0 and the
               point t0 on the line to Bob where the conserved momentum would
               locate the entangled particle on its way to Bob.
                  Events at those two points are “simultaneous” in the frame where
               the center of the experiment is at rest. There are very fast-moving
               frames coming from the right, where Bob’s measurement at t1
               appears to happen before Alice’s measurement at t0.
                  Now these are the two points where electron spins (or photon
               polarizations) are measured in the tests of Bell’s inequality (chapter
               32), where Alice ‘s measurements “influence” Bob’s.


                 1     See page 207.
                 2     See page 175
                             Entanglement and Symmetry                    233

   Einstein knew nothing about our puzzles in the “age of
entanglement,” yet his “spooky actions” are our concerns today!
    His colleagues thought Einstein was too old to contribute any-
thing new to quantum mechanics, but his contributions still zero in
with a laser focus on today’s most profound mysteries. How can his
extraordinary mind have been so prophetic?
No Hidden Variables, but Hidden Constants!
   We shall see in the next several chapters that many physicists
hoped to confirm Einstein’s criticisms of quantum mechanics by
questioning the “foundations of quantum mechanics.” They would
offer either new “interpretations” of quantum mechanics, or new
“formulations” that add or subtract elements to the theory.
   In particular, they followed Einstein’s argument that quantum
mechanics is “incomplete,” and might be completed by the discovery
of additional variables.
   There may be no “hidden variables,” local or nonlocal. But there
are “hidden constants.” Hidden in plain sight, they are the “constants




                                                                                    29
                                                                            Chapter 20
of the motion,” conserved quantities like energy, momentum,
angular momentum, and spin, both electron and photon. Created
indeterministically when the particles are initially entangled, they
then move locally with the now apparently separating particles.
   In our extension of Einstein’s “objective reality,” we assume the
particles have continuous paths from the start of the experiment
to the final measurement(s), although the limits of quantum
measurement never allow us to “know” those paths or any particular
properties like the direction of spin components.
   Conservation of momentum requires that positions where
particles finally appear are equidistant from the origin, in order to
conserve linear momentum. And every other conserved quantity
also appears perfectly correlated at all symmetric positions. It is the
fundamental principle of conservation that governs the correlated
outcome, not some hypothetical, faster than light, communication
of information between the particles at the time of measurement.
   And in any case what would a particle as simple as an electron or
a photon do with “information” from an identical particle? Indeed.
how would the supposed “first” particle “communicate?”
         234        My God, He Plays Dice!

                  Information is neither matter nor energy, though it needs matter
               to be embodied in an “information structure,” and it needs energy
               to communicate information to other such structures.
                  Objective reality tells us that the two particles are (locally) carrying
               with them all the information that is needed for measurements to
               show perfect correlations. This is a major problem only because
               the Copenhagen Interpretation claims that the particles have
               no properties before their measurement, that each particle is in
               a superposition of states, so something is needed to bring their
               properties into agreement at the measurement.
                  Einstein’s “objective reality” asks the simple question whatever
               could have caused the two particles to disagree? That is impossible
               without some physical interaction to change one or both of the
               particle properties. Such an interaction is of course the measurement
               by Alice (or Bob) that disentangles the particles.
               Alice’s “Free Choice” of Spin Direction
                   Following Einstein’s false asymmetry that measurements of
Chapter 29




               spacelike separated particles can be made “first” by one observer,
               it is widely but mistakenly said that Alice’s outcome must be
               “influencing” Bob’s.
        20




                  What Alice does when she interacts with the two-particle wave
               function Ψ12 is to create new information that was not present when
               the particles were initially entangled. It cannot therefore be carried
               along locally with our “hidden constants” of the motion.
                  But the new information is created locally by Alice. The nonlocal
               two-particle wave function makes it available to both particles
               globally instantaneously, wherever they are.
                  The classic case of entangled electrons or photons is that they
               start in a state with total spin (or polarization) equal to zero (the
               so-called singlet state).
                  The singlet state is perfectly symmetric in all directions.
                  When Alice measures a polarization or spin direction, her
               measurement forces the two-particle system to acquire that over-
               all preferred direction. This is what Wolfgang Pauli called a
               “measurement of the second kind. Paul Dirac said the system
               is “projected” into this state. Henry Margenau called it a “state
               preparation.”
                             Entanglement and Symmetry                   235

    Quantum mechanically, the two-particle wave function is in a
superposition of states in all directions and Alice’s measurement
projects it into Alice’s freely chosen spin direction.
    The two spins before her measurement were opposing one another
but had no such preferred direction. Now they have opposite spins
and in the direction chosen by Alice. This new information about
polarization direction can not have been carried along locally with
the hidden constants that conserve all physical properties, because
that information did not exist until her measurement. .
    Just because we cannot continuously measure positions, paths,
and particle properties does not mean that they don’t exist. And
claiming they are not determined just before measurement asks the
question of what forces exist to change them at the last moment?
    The new preferred direction for the spins did not exist. They were
the result of Alice’s “free choice.” But the Copenhagen Interpretation
is simply wrong to extend the non-existence of Alice’s new properties
to other properties that travel “locally” with the particles




                                                                                   29
                                                                           Chapter 20
    Our “hidden constants” traveling locally with the particles
only require that the spins are always perfectly opposite. If Alice’s
measurement shows a spin component of +1/2 in her chosen
z-direction, Bob will necessarily measure -1/2 in the z-direction.
    Any other value would violate the conservation laws and break
the symmetry.
    Note that whether Alice measures +1/2 or -1/2 is random, the
result of what Dirac calls “Nature’s choice.”
    If Bob now “freely chooses” in any other angular direction, his
correlations will be reduced by the cosine squared of the angular
difference between him and Alice. This is the same physics that
reduces the light coming through polarizers at different angles as
we saw in chapter 19.
    We shall see in chapter 32 that John Bell strangely argued that
“hidden variables” of the type imagined by Einstein or Bohm would
produce correlations with a straight-line angular dependence, and
not the familiar sinusoidal relationship .
    Decades of Bell inequality tests claim to have shown that
hidden variables must be nonlocal. “Hidden constants” like linear
momentum and opposing spins are local! They are conserved
properties that move along in the entangled particles at or below
light speed.
         236         My God, He Plays Dice!

                  The two-particle wave function is itself a global function
               encompassing the two particles (and beyond in the case of electrons).
                    When that two-particle wave function instantly acquires a
               preferred direction for its opposing spins it does so globally, giving
               the illusion of an effect or an “action” travelling from Alice to Bob.
                  But this is precisely the same “nonlocality” seen by Einstein in
               1905 and reported by him first in 1927 at the fifth Solvay conference.
                  It is the mysterious and powerful global property of the wave
               function that Einstein called “ghostly” and a “guiding field.” There is
               no “spooky action-at-a-distance” in the sense of one particle acting
               on the other, “influencing” it in some way.
                   It is the same “guiding” power of the wave function which in the
               two slit experiment statistically controls the locations of electrons or
               photons to show interference fringes, including null points where
               particles never appear.
                  This power of the wave function explains the mystery of
               entanglement, why Bob finds perfect correlations with Alice when
Chapter 29




               she measures simultaneously or a moment before him so there is no
               time for knowledge of her freely chosen angle to travel to Bob.
                  There are two important moments to be understood, initial
        20




               entangled formation and later disentangling measurement.
                  1) At formation, standard quantum mechanics usually describes
               the entangled two-particle wave function as in a superposition of
               up-down and down-up states,
                  Ψ12 = (1/√2) (| + - > - | - + >).
                  But Paul Dirac tells us an individual system is in just one of
               these states from the moment of formation.3
                  The singlet state, say | + - >, is visualized as having no determinate
               spin direction as the particles travel apart. This spin state is isotropic,
               spherically symmetric.
                  We should note that the two spins are not in ordinary coordi-
               nate space. Erwin Schrödinger knew his wave function for two or
               more particles is in a multidimensional “configuration space.”
                  The electron spins may be in still another dimension so the spins
               ae not separated at all ordinary space-time!
                 3     See page 151.
                              Entanglement and Symmetry                    237

   2) The two-particle state collapses on Alice’s measurement into a
product of single-particle states, | + > |- >.
   When Alice measures her particle with her “free choice” of a
definite spin direction, e.g., z+, it is the requirement to conserve
total spin, not any communication, that projects Bob’s particle,
before his measurement, into z-. The particles are disentangled.
   Just before Bob’s measurement, his state has been prepared so
that if he measures in Alice’s direction, he will measure z- (say spin
down) to her z+ (say spin up).
   The two particles have been conserving zero total spin from the
time of their singlet state preparation at the start of the experiment
and, if undisturbed, they will be found in the same singlet state
when they are measured. They have perfectly correlated opposing
spins when(ever) they get jointly measured at the same angle.
   The particular direction of spin is created by Alice.
   One of Einstein’s great principles was simplicity. 4 It is also known
as the law of parsimony and Occam’s Razor. The idea is that the




                                                                                     29
                                                                             Chapter 20
simplest theory that fits all the known facts is the best theory.
Einstein may have liked the idea that the most true theories would
be beautiful in some sense, perhaps as the result of their symmetry.
   Consider then the simplicity and parsimony of the idea
that entangled particles, once “cross-linked” and sharing an
antisymmetric two-particle wave function, are carrying with them
at all times all the information needed for them to appear to be
coordinating their actions - without communicating!
   The information is “hidden” in the “constants of the motion.” And
where hidden variables are nonlocal, all hidden constants are local.
   It is now fifty years since the first laboratory experiments were
done to find whether quantum mechanics might be faulty, and
hidden variables might be needed to explain entanglement.
   There has been no evidence that anything is wrong with quantum
mechanics. Isn’t it time that we go back to Einstein’s first principles
and see whether the “objective reality” of continuous particle
motions carrying with them all their conserved properties can give
us a very simple, easy to explain, understanding of entanglement?
  4     See chapter 35.
         238       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  We can have entanglement without “action-at-a-distance.”
                  Information hidden in the constants of the motion is “locally
               real” at all times as the particles travel apart with no definite spin
               directions for either particle, but total spin always zero.
               Can Conservation Laws Do It All?
                  But can conservation laws and symmetry explain the perfect
               correlation of every particle property to prove there is no
               instantaneous “action-at-a-distance” needed for entanglement?
                  All physicists know conservation works for linear momentum.
               Einstein used it in his 1933 letter to Leon Rosenfeld. But what about
               the properties tested in all modern experiments on entanglement,
               electron spin and photon polarization?
                  Can we show how these properties also are actually conserved
               as they are carried along with the particles, so there is no need
               for instantaneous communication between two widely separated
               entangled particles at the moment of their measurement, eliminating
               the conflict between quantum mechanics and special relativity?
Chapter 29




                  The case of the photon is relatively straightforward, as we saw in
               Dirac’s analysis (chapter 19). He said that an individual photon is
               not in a linear combination or superposition of states, as we assume
        20




               when making predictions for a number of experiments.
                  We can simplify the two-particle state to either | + - > or | - + >.
                  And since the two-particle, spin-zero, state has no preferred spin
               or polarization direction, we can say that they are in a superposi-
               tion of possible spin or polarization components, and that the spin
               of one is in some average sense always opposite to that of the other.
                  “Objectively real” entanglement is in no sense a measurement
               of one particle “acting on” and causing a change in another distant
               particle. When Ψ12 decoheres, particles appear simultaneously in
               our special frame of reference. No properties are changing.
                  Einstein’s “objective reality” requires that entangled particle
               properties are conserved from their initial state preparation to their
                              Entanglement and Symmetry                      239

ultimate measurements, giving the appearance of instantaneous
communications, of Einstein’s “spooky action-at-a-distance.”
Pauli’s Kinds of Measurement Again
   When we describe the measurements of entangled particles that
“collapse” the two-particle wave function, and which make the
particles in a spacelike separation appear to interact instantaneously,
infinitely greater than lightspeed, we must consider what kind of
measurements are being made.
   As we saw in chapter 19, Wolfgang Pauli distinguished two
kinds of measurements. The first is when we measure a system
in a known state ψ. (It has been prepared in that state by a prior
measurement.) If we again use a measurement apparatus with
eigenvalues whose states include the known state, the result is that
we again find the system in the known state ψ. No new information
is created, since we knew what the state of the system was before the
measurement. This Pauli called a measurement of the first kind.
   Dirac noted that quantum mechanics is not always probabilistic.




                                                                                       29
                                                                               Chapter 20
Measurements of the first kind are certain, like preparing a state and
then measuring to see that it is still in that state. Today this is called
a non-destructive measurement.
   In Pauli’s second case, the eigenstates of the system plus
apparatus do not include the state ψ of the prepared system. Dirac’s
transformation theory says one should use a basis set of eigenstates
appropriate to the new measurement apparatus, say the set φn.
   In this case, the original wave function ψ can be expanded as a
linear superposition of states φn with coefficients cn,
   ψ = ∑n cnφn,
   where cn2 = | < ψ | φn > |2 is the probability that the measurement
will find the system in state φn.
   Pauli calls this a measurement of the second kind. It corresponds
to John von Neumann’s Process 1, interpreted as a “collapse” or
“reduction” of the wave function. Von Neumann said that new
information is irreversibly recorded in the measuring apparatus.
         240       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  In this measurement, all the unrealized possibilities are eliminated,
               and the one possibility that is actualized produces new information.
               We do not know which of the possible states becomes actual. That
               is a matter of ontological chance. If we did know in advance, there
               would be no new information.
                  Measurements of electron spin are done with Stern-Gerlach
               magnets. A stream of electrons with random spin directions passing
               through a magnet oriented in the z-direction separates into electrons
               deflected upward (z+) and those deflected downward (z-).
                  This is a measurement of the second kind, a state preparation. If
               we pass all those with z+ through a second magnet in the z-direction,
               they all are deflected upward again. This is a non-destructive
               measurement of the first kind. Information is preserved.
                  If those electrons in a known z+ state are passed through a
               magnet oriented in the x-direction, they are observed in a random
               distribution of x+ and x-. The z+ state information is lost.
                  At the initial entangled state preparation, neither electron
Chapter 29




               has information about its spin components. Since there is no
               information, we can call this a measurement of the zeroth kind.
                  This describes the preparation of the entangled pair. We know
        20




               nothing of the spin components of the electrons (or polarization
               of photons). But we do know that the spin of the left-going particle
               will be opposite to that of the right particle when they are measured.
                  Assume that Alice measures “first”, which she does if she is closer
               to the center than Bob. This is a measurement of the second kind,
               because a preferred spin direction of the electron did not exist.
                  Alice makes a “free choice,” as Heisenberg described it. The
               spin component value comes into existence. It did not necessarily
               have that value before her measurement. No matter which angle
               of orientation Alice measures, she will find spin randomly +1/2 or
               -1/2. Dirac called this “Nature’s choice.”
                  Between “Nature’s choice” (quantum chance discovered by
               Einstein in 1916) and “free choice” (Einstein’s “free creations of the
               human mind”), we untie the Gordian Knot of quantum mechanics!
               Neither we nor the universe are pre-determined.
                  If Bob measures the same angle as Alice (perhaps by prior
               agreement) and compares measurements later, he will find his data
                                   Entanglement and Symmetry              241

is perfectly correlated with Alice. Bob’s measurement in the same
direction as Alice is therefore a measurement of the first kind.
   Alice prepares the state. Bob measures the same state.
   If, however, Bob sets his apparatus to measure at a different angle,
he finds a weaker correlation with Alice over several measurements.




   Bob also has a “free choice” as to what to measure. As he varies his
angle away from Alice’s, at first only a few measurements disagree,
randomly but then disagreements increase, following the cosine
dependence of light passing through rotating polarizers. 5
   John Bell made the very unphysical claim that the correlations
would fall off linearly, in a straight line, and connected this




                                                                                    29
                                                                            Chapter 20
“inequality” to Einstein’s idea of additional (“hidden”) variables. 6
   If Bob rotates his apparatus to 90°, spin in the x direction will be
completely random. All correlations with Alice are now lost.
   These measurements of the second kind project Bob’s electron
spin in a new direction . It prepares a new state. It does nothing to
Alice’s particle, since her measurement separated the electrons.
   The reason Alice and Bob measure perfect entanglement when
they measure in the same direction is because both spin directions
were determined by Alice at the moment the two-particle wave
function | + - > collapsed and projected out the two values, +1/2
and -1/2, conserving the total spin as zero.
   The total spin was zero before her measurement, but it had no
definite spin component direction
   This was not “spooky action-at-a-distance” traveling from Alice
toward Bob. The collapse of Ψ12 is symmetric (or anti-symmetric) in
all directions. It is this symmetry, and the conservation law for total
electron spin, that completely explains entanglement.
   The original state preparation of entangled particles created no
new information about specific spin components. With some deep
  5    See Dirac’s polarizers in chapter 19
  6    See chapter 32.
         242       My God, He Plays Dice!

               symmetry (photons) or anti-symmetry (electrons), it does not
               prepare the particles in definite states, as does Alice’s measurement.
                 We could call this a measurement of the zeroth kind.
                 Alice breaks the original symmetry, creating information about
               the new spin directions. If Bob measures at the same angle, it is
               a measurement of the first kind. If he measures at other angles,
               symmetry/anti-symmetry with Alice is broken and Bob’s is a
               measurement of the second kind.
               How Symmetry and Conservation Explain Entanglement
                  When a pair of electrons or photons is entangled, they are not
               prepared with spins that have definite components in specific spatial
               coordinate directions. But they must be such that if one is found to
               have spin +1/2 in any direction, the other will be -1/2. And these
               opposite directions will show up when Alice’s measurement projects
               her electron and Bob’s into definite directions.
                  The two electrons could be in a superposition of | + - > and | - + >,
               as standard quantum mechanics likes to say. They may only acquire
Chapter 29




               specific spin component directions when Alice’s measurement
               projects the two-particle wave function into a definite direction.
                  Or it could be that Dirac is correct that they are in one or the
        20




               other of these states from their entanglement. In this case, Einstein
               is right that they have all properties before they are measured. But
               they cannot yet have definite z spins. Einstein would understand
               this as the consequence of a new measurements.
                  Let’s see how to visualize this in terms of Pauli’s two kinds of
               measurements and a state creation that is not a measurement which
               leaves two entangled electrons in perfectly symmetric directionless
               spin states that together preserve total entropy zero.
                  First let’s recall how measurements of spin in a Stern-Gerlach
               apparatus can distinguish electrons that are in a known state from
               those that are in a symmetric state with no definite direction.
                  The gray circle represents an unentangled electron with no
               specific spin direction. When that electron enters the magnet which
               is oriented in the z direction, it is either directed upward or
               downward. This a measurement of the second kind.
                            Entanglement and Symmetry                    243

  If it prepares a spin-up electron z+ and we pass it through a second
magnet (or even a third) with the same z orientation, it does not
change from z+. These are non-destructive measurements of the first
kind. It never yields z- electrons
  When we know a determined state goes in, the same comes out.
Suppose we had a pair of entangled electrons with no determinate
spin directions but with one carrying the positive spin and the other
the negative. What happens as they pass through the magnets?



   The positive spin electron, which has no determinate direction
component, comes through the magnet projected into z+. Such a
spatial directionless positive spin
electron sent through an x-axis
magnet produces only x+ electrons.
   We must now recall what happens when we pass an electron with




                                                                                   29
                                                                           Chapter 20
known spin z+ through a magnet oriented in the x direction.




   Both x directions are possible, and when a known x+ is produced,
subsequent measurements of the first kind keep it the same x+. Now
before we show how our entangled electron behaviors work to explain
entanglement, we should show the loss of z+ spin when passed
through a magnet oriented in the x direction, and the subsequent
recovery of both z+ and z- components. An x+ electron contains the
potential to produce both z+ and z- electrons.




  Finally, so we show all the amazing properties of electron spin, and
add to understanding the idea of an electron with a spin value, but
with no preferred spin direction, we can use a Stern-Gerlach magnet
         244       My God, He Plays Dice!

               to generate both z+ and z- and, providing we do not make a
               measurement, send them though in the opposite z direction to
               recreate the
               original.
                  So     let’s
               see how our
               directionless spin states travel from their entanglement and then get
               projected into opposite spin directions by Alice and Bob .




                  At the start the two electrons are in the same small volume of
Chapter 29




               phase space with their spins opposite, satisfying the Pauli exclusion
               principle, like the two electrons in the ground state of Helium.
                  A few moments later they travel apart in a |+ - > state, with one
               electron having spin +1/2 and the other -1/2. But neither has a
        20




               definite spatial spin component, in a given direction such as z+.
                  The directionless spin state is symmetric and isotropic, the same
               in all directions. It is rotationally invariant. The spin values of +
               and - are conserved quantities we can call local “hidden constants,”
               traveling with the particles from their entanglement in the center.
                  Because they are entangled, the + spin in one electron is always
               perfectly opposite that of the - electron, though the spatial direction
               of the spins is entirely unknown.
                  These conserved spins provide the necessary information that
               hypothetical “hidden variables” could provide to the electrons at
               their moment of measurement. But no faster-than-light exchange
               of that information is involved, no “signaling” between the particles
               in a distant spacelike separation. Correlation information is carried
               along with the electrons at their speed. Their spins are always
               perfectly correlated, not suddenly correlated at the moment of
               measurement, as the Copenhagen Interpretation claims.
                              Entanglement and Symmetry                     245

   In her measurement, Alice creates new directional information
that did not travel with the “hidden constants” of the motion. It
was unknown beforehand. When Alice measures in the z direction,
she “prepares” the state z+. But Einstein’s “objective reality“ view
is correct that the system has most of its properties before her
measurement.
   In his original EPR, it was linear momentum that was conserved
from the initial interaction. Conservation laws allowed him to know
something about particle 2 simultaneous with his measurement of
particle 1. This is not “action.” This is just “knowledge-at-a-distance.”
   But there is one property the two particles could not have before
Alice’s measurement. It is something Einstein never thought about.
That is the spatial direction of the polarization or electron spin
imposed by Alice’s “free choice” of which angle to measure.
   If Bob also measures at Alice’s angle, Bob’s is a measurement of
the first kind. The state that he measures was prepared by Alice.
These are two perfectly correlated events that are simultaneous (in a




                                                                                      29
                                                                              Chapter 20
“special frame”) despite being in a spacelike separation.
   When Einstein first saw this kind of nonlocal phenomenon in
1905 and described it in 1927, he thought it violated his special
theory of relativity, and his idea of the impossibility of simultaneity.
   Nevertheless, this is one more amazing insight into nature that
Einstein was the first person to see, even if it bothered him.
   These simultaneous spatially separated events are a consequence
of the two-particle wave function Ψ12 collapsing into the product of
two single-particle wave functions Ψ1 and Ψ2
   The Ψ12 wave function has decohered, the particles are
disentangled, they acquire their opposite spin component directions,
+ spin goes to z+, - spin to z-.
   In all entanglement experiments, these simultaneous values
of opposing spins or polarizations that appear now have definite
spatial directions, which is new information. The z+ and z- values
are “nonlocal.” The +1/2 and -1/2 spins came with the particles, as
Einstein hoped to show. They are “local,” like the particle momenta.
   Then again, if the spins live in their own space, they may not be
separated by a metric element in four-dimensional space-time!
