         344   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                               py a n d
                          t ro
                       En nd Law
                        Seco
Appendix B




                                                                  This chapter on the web
                                         informationphilosopher.com/introduction/physics
                                    Entropy and Second Law               345


Entropy and the Second Law
   Every scientist who made a major contribution to the probabi-
listic nature of the world had some doubts as to whether the use
of probability implies that chance is real. Is the appearance of ran-
domness just a consequence of the limits on human knowledge
and merely epistemological? Or is randomness a fundamental
part of the external world and thus ontological? Quantum physics
says chance is ontological and the laws of physics are statistical.
   In 1860, James Clerk Maxwell was the first physicist to use
statistics and probability. He discovered the distribution of veloci-
ties of atoms or molecules in a gas. Although there was no real
evidence for the existence of atoms until Albert Einstein’s work
on Brownian motion in 1905, Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann
showed that the macroscopic laws of thermodynamics could be
explained if gases consist of microscopic atoms in motion. They
used the calculus of probabilities to reduce thermodynamics to sta-
tistical mechanics.
  This is despite the fact that they knew next to nothing about the
details of processes at the atomic level.
   Paradoxically, ignorance of microscopic details is overcome by
the power of averages over large numbers of cases. The average
value of any property gets more and more accurate as the number
of independent events gets large. The number of gas particles in a
cubic centimeter of air is truly astronomical, close to the number         Appendix B
of stars in the observable universe. For this reason, thermody-
namic gas laws like PV = NkT derived from statistical mechanics
are highly accurate, well beyond experimental error. This accuracy
suggests the laws are deterministic. But they are only adequately
or statistically deterministic. Determinism is an illusion.1
Discrete Particles
   To refine a famous comment by Richard Feynman, if there is
just one fact that could survive the destruction of knowledge, so as
to give future scientists the fastest recovery of physics, it would be
  1     See chapter 19.
         346      Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               that the contents of the universe are made up of discrete particles,
               not fields. This is now the standard model of particle physics. It
               grew out of the study of ordinary gases.




                   Figure 30-5. The perfume molecules dissipate until they are uniformly distributed.
               Classical statistical physics mistakenly claims that if the velocities of all the particles
               were reversed at an instant, the molecules would return to the bottle. It assumes that the
               complete path information needed to return to the bottle is preserved. But information
               is not conserved. It can be created and it can be destroyed. We shall show why such
               microscopic reversibility is extremely unlikely.

                  Gas particles are distributed in ordinary coordinate space (x, y,
               z) and in a conjugate momentum (p = mv, mass times velocity)
               space (px, py, pz).
                 These two spaces are combined to form a six-dimensional
               space called a “phase space,” one element of which is Δx Δy Δz
               Δpx Δpy Δpz. At equilibrium, when average density is the same
               everywhere, particles are found distributed in proportion to the
               volume of those spaces. But phase space elements are weighted
               by an exponential factor that reduces the probability of particles
Appendix B




               being found in higher energy spaces. The factor is
                  e - p2/2mkT = e - E / kT, today known as the “Boltzmann factor,”
               though it was first found by Maxwell.
                  E is the particle energy, p is the particle momentum, T is the
               absolute temperature (in degrees Kelvin), e is the base of natu-
               ral logarithms, and k is Boltzmann’s constant (so named by Max
               Planck). As E increases, the probability of finding particles with
               that energy decreases exponentially. But as the temperature T
               rises, the probability of finding particles with any given energy
               E increases.
                                            Entropy and Second Law                        347


   With the hindsight of quantum physics, we can envision the dis-
tribution of particles as the integer number (“occupation number”)
of particles in the smallest possible volumes of this 6-dimensional
“phase space” allowed by quantum mechanics. These have the
dimensions of h3, where h is Planck’s constant. h has the dimensions
of action (momentum times position). It’s called the “quantum of
action.”
   This minimum phase space volume of h3 can be understood as
the result of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle for each dimension,
Δp Δx = h. It is as if space itself is divided into these small “cells.” But
space is continuous, like time. Space and time are abstract tools for
assigning numbers to particle properties like location and motion.
The minimum volume h3 corresponds to locations and momenta
where there is a non-zero probability of finding a discrete particle.
   Although classical statistical mechanics did not include these
quantum volumes, Boltzmann did divide phase space into discrete
“coarse-grained” volumes for calculation purposes. This important
new insight of classical statistical mechanics was accepting the rad-
ical idea of the ancient Greeks Democritus and Leucippus that
matter comes in indivisible discrete discontinuous lumps.




                                                                                            Appendix B




  Figure 30-6. The number of particles with a given velocity at different temperatures.
         348       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Maxwell not only accepted the idea of atoms and molecules, he
               deduced their distribution among different velocities,
                                                  2
                 N(v) = (2πmkT)-3/2 4πv2 e-mv /2kT
                  When heat is added and the temperature rises, the average veloc-
               ity gets higher and there are fewer particles with low velocities,
               since the total number of molecules is a constant. Note that it was
               Maxwell who first found the exponential decay at higher energies
                   2
               e-mv /2kT, now called the “Boltzmann factor.”
                  Maxwell did not know about the future Boltzmann’s constant k
               and its relationship to temperature, but he knew that the exponen-
               tial term is a measure of the average velocity squared, and so of the
               average energy (mv2/2).
                  The Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution has two distinct
               regions which were critically important in Max Planck’s attempt
               to discover the distribution of electromagnetic radiation. For very
               low energies, the number rises as the square of the velocity. It turns
               around at a maximum near the average velocity. It then declines
               slowly like the long exponential tail of the normal distribution of
               errors because of the Boltzmann factor.
                 Boltzmann explained that probabilities can give definite results
               because of the large number of particles in a gas, but that the use of
               probabilities does not imply any uncertainty. He wrote:
                  The mechanical theory of heat assumes that the molecules of a gas are
                  not at rest, but rather are in the liveliest motion. Hence, even though
Appendix B




                  the body does not change its state, its individual molecules are always
                  changing their states of motion, and the various molecules take up many
                  different positions with respect to each other. The fact that we neverthe-
                  less observe completely definite laws of behaviour of warm bodies is to
                  be attributed to the circumstance that the most random events, when
                  they occur in the same proportions, give the same average value. For the
                  molecules of the body are indeed so numerous, and their motion is so
                  rapid, that we can perceive nothing more than average values.
                   Boltzmann refers One might compare the regularity of these aver-
                   to the social         age values with the amazing constancy of the
                                         average numbers provided by statistics, which are
                   statistics of Buckle
                                         also derived from processes each of which is
                   and Quételet          determined by a completely unpredictable inter-
                                         Entropy and Second Law                   349

    action with many other factors. The molecules are likewise just so many
    individuals having the most varied states of motion, and it is only
    because the number of them that have, on the average, a particular state
    of motion is constant, that the properties of the gas remain unchanged.
    The determination of average values is the task of probability theory.
    Hence, the problems of the mechanical theory of heat are also problems
    of probability theory.
    It would, however, be erroneous to believe that the mechanical theory of
    heat is therefore afflicted with some uncertainty because the principles
    of probability theory are used. One must not confuse an incompletely
    known law, whose validity is therefore in doubt,             In the 1870’s,
    with a completely known law of the calculus of Boltzmann clearly
    probabilities; the latter, like the result of any other   saw probability
    calculus, is a necessary consequence of definite
    premises, and is confirmed, insofar as these are cor-       as completely
    rect, by experiment, provided sufficiently many             deterministic.
    observations have been made, which is always the case in the mechani-
    cal theory of heat because of the enormous number of molecules
    involved.2
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
   Beyond his ability to visualize the above “liveliest states of motion”
for atoms, Boltzmann’s greatest work was his attempt to prove the
second law of thermodynamics. The second law says that isolated
systems always approach thermal equilibrium. Entropy or disor-
der always increases. Boltzmann showed that if the velocities of gas
molecules were initially not in the Maxwell distribution above, they
would always approach that distribution, and do it rapidly at stan-
dard temperatures and pressures (as we all know from experience).
  Boltzmann then developed a mathematical expression for entropy
                                                                                    Appendix B
(he called it H), the quantity in classical thermodynamics that is a
maximum for systems in thermal equilibrium.
   At first Boltzmann tried to do this with the dynamical theories
of classical mechanics. The particles in his system would move
around in phase space according to deterministic Newtonian laws.
They collide with one another as hard spheres (elastic collisions). He
included only two-particle collisions, assuming three-particle colli-
sions are rare. As it turns out, three-particle collisions are essential
for proving Boltzmann’s insights, but calculations are difficult.
  2     “Further Studies on the Thermal Equilibrium of Gas Molecules,”
  Vienna Academy of Sciences, 1872
         350         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  But Boltzmann’s mentor, Josef Loschmidt, criticized the results.
               Any dynamical system, he said, would move in reverse if all the par-
               ticles could have their velocities reversed. Apart from the practical
               impossibility of doing this, Loschmidt had shown that systems could
               exist for which the entropy should decrease instead of increasing.
               This is called Loschmidt’s Reversibility Objection, or the problem of
               microscopic reversibility.3
                  Loschmidt’s criticism forced Boltzmann to reformulate his proof
               of the second law with purely statistical considerations based on
               probability theory.
                  He looked at all the possible distributions for particles in phase
               space consistent with a given total energy. Since phase space is
               continuous, there is an infinity of positions for every particle. So
               Boltzmann started by limiting possible energy values to discrete
               amounts ε, 2ε, 3ε, etc. He thought he would eventually let ε go to
               zero, but his discrete “coarse-graining” gets him much closer to
               modern quantum physics. He replaced all his integrals by discrete
               sums (something the “founders of quantum mechanics” in the nine-
               teen-twenties would do).
                 Boltzmann then found the following expression that when
               summed over all the possible discrete energy states has the desired
               property of irreversible statistical increase,
                 Σ f(E) log f(E), where f (E) is the fraction of states with energy E.
                 In 1948, Claude Shannon found a similar expression to describe
Appendix B




               the amount of information, Σi pi log pi , thus connecting his commu-
               nication of information to Boltzmann’s entropy
                 Today scientists identity Boltzmann’s expression with the ther-
               modynamic entropy S, defined as the change of heat Q added to a
               system, divided by the temperature T,
                 dS = dQ/T.
                 3     See chapter 25 on irreversibility.
                                         Entropy and Second Law              351

   In terms of a sum over possible states, S is now written as the
logarithm of the total number of possible states W multiplied by
Boltzmann’s constant,
  S = k log W.
   Boltzmann was discouraged to find that a group of scientists, who
still hoped to deny the existence of atoms, continued to criticize his
“H-Theorem.” They included Henri Poincaré, an expert on the
three-body problem, Max Planck, who himself hoped to prove
the second law is not statistical but absolute, and a young student of
Planck’s named Ernst Zermelo who was an extraordinary math-
ematician, later the founder of axiomatic set theory.
   Poincaré’s work on the three-body problem suggested that,
given enough time, a bounded world, governed only by the laws of
mechanics, will always pass through a state very close to its initial
state. Zermelo accepted Boltzmann’s claim that a system will most
likely be found in a macrostate with the largest number of micro-
states, but he argued that given enough time it would return to a
less probable state. Boltzmann’s H-Theorem of perpetual increase
of entropy would therefore be incorrect sometime in the long run.
   Information physics has shown that, when quantum physics and
the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter are taken
into account, Loschmidt’s reversibility objection and Zermelo’s
recurrence objection fail to prevent entropy from increasing indefi-
nitely in our open universe.4
                                                                               Appendix B
   Unfortunately for Boltzmann, he died just before the significance
of radiation and the quantum were appreciated, and just as Ein-
stein proved the existence of his atoms. And ironically, it was Max
Planck, Zermelo’s mentor and one of those strongly opposing both
Boltzmann’s ideas of atoms and his use of statistics, who was to cor-
rectly guess the distribution law for electromagnetic radiation.
  Adding to the injustice, to develop his radiation law, Planck used
Boltzmann’s own statistical ideas, his assumption about discrete
  4    See chapter 25 on irreversibility and 26 on the recurrence problem.
         352         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               energies, coarse graining, and his ideas about entropy. The radia-
               tion distribution has almost exactly the same shape as the Maxwell-
               Boltzmann distribution for particle velocities. You can see the initial
               rise as the square of the radiation frequency ν, and after the maxi-
               mum the decline according to the Boltzmann factor e - hν / kT, where
               the energy E = hν is Planck’s new constant h times the radiation
               frequency. The reason for the similarity is profound, electromag-
               netic radiation - light is also made of particles, as Einstein brilliantly
               hypothesized in 1905.
                  B (ν) = 8πhν3/ c3 (ehν/kT -1)-1
                  Figure 30-5 shows the number of photons with a given frequεncy
               at different temperatures. When heat is added and the temperature
               rises, the average energy gets higher at all frequencies. The frequency
               at which energy is a maximum moves to higher frequencies. Unlike
               the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution above (Figure 30-4), where
               the total number of molecules is a constant, additional heat shows
               up as more photons at all frequencies. The number of photons is not
               conserved. So the area under the radiation curve grows with tem-
               perature, where the area under the particles curve is a constant.
Appendix B




                   Figure 30-7. Planck’s radiation distribution law is often presented as a function of wave-
               length rather than frequency, but this masks the similarity with the Maxwell-Boltzmann
               distribution of particles.
                                     Entropy and Second Law                  353

   Compounding the irony and injustice for Boltzmann still further,
Planck, who was long the opponent of discrete particles and statisti-
cal mechanics, used Boltzmann’s assumption that energies come in
discrete amounts, ε, 2ε, 3ε, etc. Planck called them quanta of energy
hν, 2hν, 3hν, proportional to frequency ν, where h is a new constant,
now named for Planck. He thereby named and launched the twen-
tieth-century development of quantum mechanics, without really
understanding the full implications of quantizing the energy. Planck
thought quantization was just a mathematical trick to get the right
formula for the blackbody radiation law.
   Albert Einstein said that “the formal similarity between the curve
of the chromatic distribution of thermal radiation and the Max-
wellian distribution law of velocities for gas particles is so striking
that it could not have been hidden for long.” But for over twenty
years few others than Einstein saw so clearly the implication that
light itself is a localizable quantized discrete particle just as any par-
ticle of matter! Planck refused to believe this for many years.
  So did Niels Bohr, despite his famous 1913 work that quantized
the energy levels for electrons in his Bohr model of the atom.
   Bohr postulated two things, 1) that the energy levels in the atom
are discrete and 2) that when an electron jumps between levels it
emits or absorbs energy E = hν, where the radiated energy E is the
difference between the two energy levels in the atom, E = En - Em.
   After independently developing the theory of statistical mechan-
ics in 1902-1904, extending it well beyond Boltzmann, Einstein
                                                                               Appendix B
hypothesized in 1905 that light comes in bundles of localized energy
that he called light quanta (now known as photons). Although it is
hard to believe, Bohr denied the existence of discrete photons well
into the nineteen-twenties, although today’s textbooks teach that
quantum jumps in the Bohr atom emit or absorb photons (a grave
this case an injustice to Einstein. Bohr insisted until the middle
1920’s that the radiation in his discrete quantum jumps is a continu-
ous wave. He was most reluctant to accept Einstein’s work, to depart
from Maxwell’s classical laws of electromagnetism.
         354         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Einstein had told friends that his hypothesis of light quanta was
               more revolutionary than his theory of special relativity published
               the same year. It was Einstein, not Planck or Bohr or Heisenberg,
               who should be recognized as the father of quantum theory. He first
               saw mysterious aspects of quantum physics like wave-particle dual-
               ity, nonlocality, entanglement, and the ontological nature of chance,
               perhaps more deeply than any other physicist has ever seen them.
                 Einstein famously abhorred chance (“God does not play dice”),
               but he did not hesitate to tell other physicists that chance seems to
               be an unavoidable part of quantum theory.
               Entropy Flows in the Universe
                 Creation of information structures means that in parts of the
               universe the local entropy is actually going down. Creation of a
               low entropy system is always accompanied by transfer of positive
               entropy away from the local structures to distant parts of the uni-
               verse, into the night sky for example.
                  My Harvard colleague Eric Chaisson studied energy rather
               than entropy. He saw energy consumption or production per gram
               a better measure of complexity in cosmic evolution. He wrote,
                     When examined on a system-by-system basis, information content can
                     be a slippery concept full of dubious semantics, ambivalent connota-
                     tions, and subjective interpretations. Especially tricky and controversial
                     is meaningful information, the value of information...The conceptual
                     idea of information has been useful, qualitatively and heuristically, as
                     an aid to appreciate the growth of order and structure in the Universe,
Appendix B




                     but this term is too vague and subjective to use in quantifying a specific,
                     empirical metric describing a whole range of real-world systems. 5
                  But information philosophy sees matter and energy as conserved
               quantities that need information concepts to explain how they do
               what they do. As the universe expands, both positive and nega-
               tive entropy are generated.6 The normal thermodynamic entropy
               is known as the Boltzmann Entropy. The negative entropy, often
               called the Shannon Entropy, is a measure of the free energy content,
               energy that is available to do useful work or become information.
                 5       Cosmic Evolution: The Rise of Complexity in Nature, p.132.
                 6       As shown by our common mentor at Harvard, David Layzer.
                                          Entropy and Second Law        355




  Figure 30-8. David Layzer’s growth of information in the universe

   “Negative entropy” is simply the difference between the maxi-
mum possible entropy (where all the particles in a physical system
would be in a maximum state of disorder, there would be no visible
structure or available free energy) and the actual entropy.
   For matter in thermodynamic equilibrium, there is only motion
of the microscopic constituent particles (“the motion we call heat”).
The existence of macroscopic structures, such as the stars and plan-      Appendix B
ets, and their motions, is a departure from thermodynamic equilib-
rium. And that departure we call the “negative entropy.”
   The second law of thermodynamics says that the entropy (or dis-
order) of a closed physical system increases until it reaches a maxi-
mum, the state of thermodynamic equilibrium. It requires that the
entropy of the universe is now and has always been increasing. This
established fact of increasing entropy led many scientists and phi-
losophers to assume that the universe we have is “running down” to
a “heat death.” They think that means the universe began in a very
high state of information, since the second law requires that any
         356       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               organization or order is susceptible to decay. The information that
               remains today, in their view, has always been here.
                  But Harvard cosmologist David Layzer showed that the uni-
               verse is not a closed system (see Figure 30-4). It is in a dynamic
               state of expansion that is moving away from thermodynamic equi-
               librium faster than entropic processes can keep up. The maximum
               possible entropy is increasing much faster than the actual increase
               in entropy. The difference between the maximum possible entropy
               and the actual entropy is potential information.
               Positive and Negative Flows
                  There are two information/entropy flows. In any process, the pos-
               itive entropy increase is always at least equal to, and generally orders
               of magnitude larger than, the negative entropy in any created infor-
               mation structures, to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics.




                 Figure 30-9. Information flows into Boltzmann and Shannon Entropy.
Appendix B




                  Material particles are the first information structures to form in
               the universe from the primordial quarks and gluons. They are bary-
               ons, the protons and neutrons of atomic nuclei, which combine with
               electrons to form atoms and eventually molecules, when the tem-
               perature is low enough. After hundreds of millions of years, these
               particles are attracted by the force of gravitation to form the gigantic
               information structures of the galaxies, stars, and planets.
                 The stars are a special and very important case. The weak but uni-
               versal force of gravitation pulls vast quantities of atomic material to
               collapse, heating it up again. Extraordinary pressures and tempera-
               tures in stellar interiors initiate themonuclear reactions that convert
                                          Entropy and Second Law          357


matter to a supply of energy that is stable for billions of years, a
necessary condition for the emergence of life.




  Figure 30-10. Cosmological information flows.

   Microscopic quantum mechanical particles and huge self-gravi-
tating systems are stable and have extremely long lifetimes, thanks
in large part to quantum stability.
  Stars are a second source of radiation, after the original Big Bang
cosmic source, which today has cooled down to 3 degrees Kelvin
(3K) and shines as the cosmic microwave background radiation.




                                                                            Appendix B




  Figure 30-11. Sun to Earth information flow.

    Our solar radiation has a high color temperature (5000K) and a
low energy-content temperature (273K). It is out of equilibrium and
it is the source of free energy - the information-generating negative
entropy that drives biological evolution on the Earth. Note that the
fraction of the light falling on Earth is less than a billionth of that
which passes by and is lost in space.
         358         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                 Just a tiny fraction of the solar energy falling on the earth gets
               converted into the information structures of plants and animals.
               Most solar energy is radiated away as waste energy to the night sky.
Appendix B




                 Figure 30-12. Information flows into life.

                  Every biological structure is a quantum mechanical structure.
               DNA has maintained its stable information structure over billions
               of years in the constant presence of chaos and noise.
                  The extraordinarily stable information content of a human being,
               from the DNA in every cell to the memories in the Experience
               Recorder and Reproducer,7 survives many changes in the material
               content of the body during a person’s lifetime. The body is an infor-
               mation structure through which matter and energy flow. Only with
               death does the mental information (spirit, soul) dissipate totally -
               unless it is saved somewhere external to the body. 8
                 7     See appendix E for the ERR
                 8     See chapter 2 for identity over time.
                                          Entropy and Second Law                359




  Figure 30-13. Information flows in a human being.

   The total mental information in a living human is orders of
magnitude less than the information content and information pro-
cessing rate of the body. But the information structures created by
humans outside the body, in the form of external knowledge like
this book, and the enormous collection of human artifacts, rival the
total biological information content of one individual human.
   Information increases and we are co-creators of the universe.
Creation of information structures means that today there is more
information in the universe than at any earlier time. This fact of
increasing information fits well with an undetermined universe that
is still creating itself. In this universe, stars are still forming, biologi-
cal systems are creating new species, and intelligent human beings
are co-creators of the world.
   All this creation is the result of the two-step core process that              Appendix B
creates all information.9 It is a combination of two distinct physical
processes, one quantum mechanical, the other thermodynamic.
  Understanding this core creative process is as close as we may
come to understanding the reality behind the popular but primitive
idea of an anthropomorphic creator of the universe, a still-present
divine providence, the cosmic source of everything good and evil.
  Information philosophy hopes to replace beliefs with knowledge.
The “miracle of creation” is happening now, in the universe and in
you and by you.
  9     See appendix F on the cosmic creation process.
