        102   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 8




                                  o l o g y
                      Ep    istem




                                                             This chapter on the web
                                             informationphilosopher.com/knowledge
                                                   Epistemology           103


Epistemology
  Epistemology asks, “how do we know what there is?”
   Immaterial information provides a new ground for
epistemology, the theory of knowledge. We know something
about the “things themselves” when we discover an isomorphism
between our abstract ideas and concrete objects in the material
world. Information philosophy goes beyond the logical puzzles




                                                                            Chapter 8
and language games of analytic philosophy. It identifies knowl-
edge as information in human minds and in the external artifacts
of human culture.
    Abstract information is the foundation – the metaphysical
ground – of both logic and language as means of communication.
It is the part of a dualism parallel to the material substrate that the
Greeks called ὑποκείμενον - the “underlying.” It gives matter its
form and shape. Form informs.
   Knowing how we know is a fundamentally circular problem
when it is described in human language, as a set of logical propo-
sitions. And knowing something about what exists adds another
complex circle, if the knowing being must itself be one of those
things that exists.
   These circular definitions and inferences need not be vicious
circles. They may simply be a coherent set of ideas that we use
to describe ourselves and the external world. If the descriptions
are logically valid and/or verifiable empirically, we think we are
approaching the “truth” about things and acquiring knowledge.
   How then do we describe the knowledge itself - an existing
thing in our existent minds and in the existing external world?
An information epistemology does it by basing everything on the
abstract but quantitative notion of information.
   Information is stored or encoded in physical and biological
structures. Structures in the world build themselves, following
natural laws, including physical and biological laws. Structures in
the mind are partly built by biological processes and partly built
by human intelligence, which is free, creative, and unpredictable.
        104     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Knowledge is the Sum of information created and stored in
              minds and in human artifacts like stories, books, and internet-
              worked computers.
              The History of Epistemology
                Although the English word “epistemology” is relatively new
              (coined in the 19th century), it has been known for centuries as
              the problem of knowledge (Erkenntnisproblem in German), and
              appears in the earliest philosophical works - by the Presocratics,
Chapter 8




              Plato and Aristotle, and especially by the Skeptics, who doubted
              that it could be proved that knowledge is possible.
                Sophists
                 The great sophist Gorgias challenged the many physicists
              (φυσικοι) who lectured and wrote on “what there is” in treatises
              called “Peri Physis” (Περι Φύσις) - roughly, About Nature, or the
              Nature of the Physical World.
                 The content of a typical physicist/philosopher lecture in Gorgias’
              time was usually in three parts:
                Things exist
                You can know what things exist
                You can tell others about what exists
                Gorgias is reported to have dazzled and delighted his audiences
              by proving the opposites, by using nearly identical arguments:
                Nothing exists
                If by chance something did exist, you could not know anything
              about it
                If you did accidentally learn something about it, you could not
              communicate your knowledge to others
                The lesson we can take away from Gorgias is that arguments,
              especially verbal reasoning alone, can be used to prove anything
              by clever rhetoricians. Logical and linguistic arguments can tell us
              nothing “true” about the physical world.
                This is the problem of knowledge. How can we know - how can
              we be certain about - what we know? It is related closely to the
                                                           Epistemology          105

question of what abstract concepts and physical objects (ontology
and cosmology) exist in the universe - what are “the things them-
selves” - for us to know.1 How is what we perceive through our
senses related to the physical things and the abstract concepts that
our reason tells us lies behind the laws of nature (metaphysics).
  Plato/Socrates
  In his Theaetetus, Plato tells us that Socrates considered,
but ultimately rejected, three possibilities for what knowledge




                                                                                   Chapter 8
(ἐπιστήμη) is and how we come to have it.
  • The first is perception (αἴσθησις). Our perceptions are “true”
(ἀληθῆ), at least to us, a kind of private knowledge. But they may
be dreams or illusions. (160D)
   • The second is true (ἀληθῆ) opinion or belief (δόξαν). Socrates
asserts that Protagoras’s relativistic argument that “man is the
measure of all things,” means “what is true is what is true for
me.” But “myriad” others may properly judge your opinion false
(ψευδῆ).(170D)
    • The third is true belief that had some reasons (λόγος) or jus-
tification (συλλογισμῶ), a rational explanation for the belief. True
(or right) opinion accompanied by reason is knowledge. (δόξαν
ἀληθῆ μετὰ λόγου ἐπιστήμην εἶναι) (202C)
   This third possibility that knowledge is “justified true belief ”
has come down to modern times as the three-part “traditional”
theory of knowledge. Although Socrates’ “negative” dialectic never
established any certain knowledge, Plato believed that Socrates’
method of inquiry (ἔλεγχος) is a way to achieve knowledge.
   Nevertheless, the Theaetetus ends with Socrates’ utter rejection
of perception, true belief, or even true belief combined with rea-
sons or explanations as justification. Socrates says:
      “And it is utterly silly, when we are looking for a definition of knowl-
      edge, to say that it is right opinion with knowledge, whether of differ-
      ence or of anything else whatsoever. So neither perception, Theaete-
      tus, nor true opinion, nor reason or explanation combined with true
      opinion could be knowledge (epistéme).”2

  1       See chapter 3 on ontology.
  2       Plato’s Theaetetus, (210A-B)
        106       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Aristotle
                 Aristotle revised his master Plato’s theory of Forms and Ideas.
              Although he too sought the fundamental essences of things and
              ideas (their Being - τὸ ὄν), for Aristotle all things were a combina-
              tion of form (εἴδος) and matter (ὑλῆ), and understanding how real
              physical things change (their Becoming) was as important as know-
              ing their essences (their Being).
                 In his Metaphysics, Aristotle dealt with the problem of knowl-
Chapter 8




              edge (epistemology) and with the question of Being (ontology of
              both physical and abstract things). The opening line of Book I of
              the Metaphysics is “All men desire knowledge by nature.” (πάντες
              ἄνθρωποι τοῦ εἰδέναι ὀρέγονται φύσει.) He uses the word to know
              (εἰδέναι ) based on “to have seen (the form).”
                  Aristotle sharpened the use of language (dialectic) and logic as
              our means of knowing to a level still in use today. He analyzed sub-
              ject-predicate sentences and puzzled over the relationship between
              being or essence and the copula “is.” He elucidated the simplest
              rules of logic - needed for the reasoning (συλλόγος) behind jus-
              tification of knowledge - the Law of Identity (A is A), the Law of
              Non-Contradiction, and the Law of the Excluded Middle. And he
              developed the rules for logical inference, identifying many types of
              syllogism. Socrates had already identified the simplest syllogism -
              S is M, M is P, therefore S is P.
                 But Aristotle went beyond pure reason and the Platonic dialec-
              tic. He added the need for demonstration (ἀποδειξις) to discover
              the cause (ἀιτια) and find an explanation of a phenomenon. This
              was the beginning of empirical knowledge, the observations and
              experiments that form the basis of modern science, as opposed to
              the kind of personal and subjective knowledge available directly to
              our perception, intuition, or reflective introspection.
                 Aristotle identified four basic causes (material, formal, efficient,
              and final) and said that chance might be a fifth cause. Not every-
              thing happens of causal necessity, but some things are just as chance
              will have it, he said.
                                                  Epistemology             107

   He distinguished certain a priori knowledge, for example logic
and mathematics, which was true by necessity, from the merely
probable and contingent a posteriori knowledge of ethics and poli-
tics. He denied that the truth of a proposition about the future
entailed the necessity of a future event (as claimed by the actualist
Diodorus Cronus). The future is open and contingent.
   For Aristotle, there were different methods of inquiry and dif-
ferent kinds of knowledge depending on the subject matter, for
example knowledge of the things themselves in the external world




                                                                             Chapter 8
(ontology and metaphysics) that we would call today the physical
sciences, and knowledge about people (ethics and politics) that
today we would call the social sciences. We might add psychology,
especially the subjective and reflective knowledge of self by intro-
spection. And although he wanted to be more empirical than Plato,
he held onto some necessary truths or first principles that were self-
evident. He also recognized “theses” (θέσισ) and “axioms” (ἄξιος).
   And Aristotle distinguished many kinds of logical argument.
When the premises are true and certain (he does not explain how
this can be the case except for those that are self-evident “first prin-
ciples” - ἀρχὴ or πρῶτων), and when the deductive syllogism is cor-
rect, the conclusions must follow. Aristotle calls this a demonstra-
tion, the truth of it is apodeictic (ἀπόδειξις), a logical proof. The
resulting knowledge is demonstrative knowledge (ἀποδεικτικὲω
ἐπιστήμην).
  Aristotle realized that not all reasons given to justify beliefs could
themselves have reasons without an infinite regress or circular argu-
ment, so he proposed that some reasons could be “self-evident”
axioms, worth believing on their own merits or because they are
popular opinion.
  Returning to Plato here, Aristotle says that all parts of this dem-
onstration - premises, deductions, and conclusions - are necessary.
When the premises are popular opinion, their truth merely prob-
able, the argument is dialectical. When the premises are false, the
argument is sophistical, and can prove anything. Much of modern
epistemology feels disturbingly sophistical.
        108         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Skeptics
                 Shortly after Aristotle, Pyhrro of Ellis reacted to the many
              methods of inquiry (σκέπσις) and their knowledge claims by deny-
              ing all of them. His skeptical followers argued that happiness and
              serenity can be had by avoiding unjustified dogmatic knowledge
              claims and simply follow traditional customs as a guide to life.
                Plato’s Academy itself came to adopt skepticism under
              Arcesilaus in the third century. Arcesilaus doubted that the senses
Chapter 8




              could discover truths about the physical world. Skeptics, especially
              Carneades, who followed Arcesilaus as leader of the Academy,
              denied the claims of their opponent Stoics as mere dogmatism.
                 Philo of Larissa, the last leader of Academic Skepticism in
              Athens, escaped the Mithradatic wars and went in 88 BCE to Rome
              where he mentored Marcus Tullius Cicero. Cicero gave us per-
              haps the best ancient comparison of the Stoic, Epicurean, and Skep-
              tical schools of philosophy in his dialogue De Natura Deorum (On
              the Nature of the Gods), which was David Hume’s model for his
              Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. and a source for his own
              mitigated skepticism.
                 Aenesidemus, the first-century leader of Academic skepticism in
              Alexandria, qualified the obvious self-referential error in the skepti-
              cal claim that nothing could be known. He encouraged a return to
              Pyrrho’s suspension (εποχή) of any judgment. Aenesidemus identi-
              fied ten tropes or modes of knowing by perception through different
              senses, which he showed can be mutually inconsistent. Epistemo-
              logical justification of any absolute objective knowledge is therefore
              impossible.
                According to Sextus Empiricus,3 these ten tropes were reduced
              by Agrippa to five
                     • Disagreement among the philosophers
                     • An infinite regress of justification
                     • Relativity - concepts are meaningful only in some context
                     • Hypotheses cannot be self-evident
                     • Circular reasoning

                3     Outlines of Pyrrhonism, 1.164-77
                                                Epistemology            109

  And finally, Sextus Empiricus says (1.178-79) the reasons to
suspend judgment can be reduced to only the first two. He says that
nothing can be apprehended through itself (immediate knowledge)
or through another thing (mediate knowledge) is shown by the
controversies among the philosophers. And the infinite regress of
reasons is caused by the lack of a criterion for truth (κριτεριόν τῆσ
ἀληθείας). These two problems are still very much with us today,
   An infinite regress arises when we ask what are the justifications




                                                                          Chapter 8
for the reasons themselves.
   For the reasons to count as knowledge, they must themselves be
justified with reasons for the reasons, etc., ad infinitum.
  Stoics
   Chrysippus, the greatest and most prolific of the Stoic leaders,
separated the idea of necessity in certain knowledge from necessity
in human actions, without denying the Stoic belief in physical deter-
minism and fate. He helped to develop propositional logic, a lan-
guage advance on Aristotle’s predicate logic that Gottlob Frege
revived in the nineteenth century as the propositional calculus.
  Chrysippus saw logic as the core of a divine reason that rules
the universe. He saw Laws of Nature are synonymous with the
Laws of God, since Stoics identified God with Nature. In his time,
Chrysippus’ logic was considered superior to Aristotle’s.
The Search for Knowledge Turns Inward
  “What can I know with certainty?” asked René Descartes.
What is it that cannot logically be doubted? Starting with his famous
“Cogito, ergo sum,” Descartes said he could not doubt his own
existence, then - since “God is no deceiver” - he could not be wrong
about his perceptions. This is despite Plato, who knew perceptions
can be illusions, such as the stick appearing bent in the water.
   Descartes shifted the emphasis of knowledge from the external
world to his internal thoughts, and began an effort to find indubita-
ble truths as foundations for all knowledge. Descartes’ introspective
“quest for certainty” changed the focus of problem of knowledge
to what twentieth-century philosophy would come to call “founda-
tionalism and “internalism”.”
        110         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Even if Descartes could have arrived at subjective knowledge
              that he personally could not doubt, such knowledge would be inac-
              cessible to others. And others would be properly skeptical of his
              egocentric knowledge claims.
                 Gottfried Leibniz argued that certainty could be had for neces-
              sary truths that are “true in all possible worlds.” Leibniz’s Principle of
              Sufficient Reason was a claim that knowledge of the physical future
              was implicit in the fact that every event has a sufficient cause. This
Chapter 8




              is despite Aristotle, who knew that future events might or might not
              happen, for example, the famous “sea battle.”
                David Hume, skeptical that anything could be proved true by
              induction, declared causality to be simply a matter of repeated
              conjunctions of apparent cause and effect. With his empirical
              colleagues, John Locke and George Berkeley, he denied any
              knowledge of the “things themselves” behind our perceptions. We
              have only the sense impressions of Locke’s “secondary qualities.”
                 Hume, following Leibniz, admitted as knowledge only two things,
              analytical mathematical logical reasoning, and empirical facts. This
              is essentially the analytic-synthetic knowledge distinction.
                    “If we take into our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics,
                    for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning concern-
                    ing quantity or number? No. Does it contain any experimental reason-
                    ing concerning matter of fact and existence? No. Consign it then to the
                    flames: For it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.”4
                Despite his skepticism about causality, Hume’s “naturalism” con-
              vinced him of the practical truth of strict causal determinism.
                 “What can I know?” asked Immanuel Kant. Faced with the
              skepticism of Hume which put into doubt all phenomenal knowl-
              edge gained by perception alone, Kant postulated a noumenal world
              accessible to the mind by introspection. There the “things them-
              selves” exist along with God, human freedom, and immortality. But
              since they are outside the phenomenal world - the physical world
              governed by strict causal deterministic laws of motion - Kant’s claim
              to knowledge was as weak as Hume’s skeptical claim was strong.
                4       Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, section XII
                                               Epistemology            111

   Kant accepted Hume’s (and Aristotle’s) distinction between
abstract analytic a priori knowledge and experimental or empirical
synthetic a posteriori knowledge. But he claimed that the human
mind imposed certain categories of understanding on the world,
leading to some necessary empirical truths, or what he called syn-
thetic a priori knowledge. Among these are that space must neces-
sarily be Euclidean, that “7 + 5 = 12” is mathematically necessary,
and that the deterministic laws of Newton must be strictly true.




                                                                         Chapter 8
   Although all these “truths” have been found empirically to be
false, modern developmental psychology finds that some ideas are
indeed “built-in” to the mind, as Kant held. Infants are born able
to recognize continuity, contiguity, causality, and form. These con-
ceptual abilities are transmitted genetically and are immediately
available. They do not need a set of prior experiences from which
to abstract. Konrad Lorenz described them as the experiences of
our ancestors. What is a priori for ontogeny in the phenotype was
a posteriori for the phylogeny of the genotype. Thus Locke’s tabula
rasa dictum that everything that is known comes first through the
senses is wrong.
  The nineteenth-century hermeneuticists Schleirmacher and Dil-
they argued for some knowledge accessible in non-scientific ways.
They claimed that cultural knowledge can only be appreciated and
understood by someone immersed in the culture.
   Charles Sanders Peirce defined knowledge - truths about the
real world - as that knowledge that would eventually be agreed upon
“intersubjectively” by a community of inquirers who follow an open
scientific method of hypothesis, deduction, and experimental test-
ing of predictions by means of observations.
   As to Descartes’ search for indubitable certain knowledge, Peirce
agreed that any knowledge should be doubted. But, explaining
Descartes’ two errors, Peirce says first that everything cannot be
doubted at the same time. And second, that nothing is ever certain
because the method of science always leaves open the possibility
for improvements in our knowledge. Peirce’s pragmatic “truth” is
something that is only asymptotically approached over time by the
intersubjective agreement of an open community of inquirers.
        112       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Peirce’s “pragmatic” philosophy identified truth with beliefs that
              informed action and had valuable consequences. This led to John
              Dewey’s idea of truth as “warranted assertability,” with the warrants
              to be found in the empirical consequences.
                Bertrand Russell declared that science is the only source of
              knowledge, “What science cannot discover, mankind cannot know.”
              This came to be called “scientism.”
                  Logical empiricists, following Russell’s student and colleague
Chapter 8




              Ludwig Wittgenstein, could never agree on the method of jus-
              tification. The Vienna Circle philosophers, Rudolf Carnap and
              Moritz Schlick, never could get general agreement on what con-
              stitutes the “verification” of a proposition about the world.
                 A. J. Ayer, who sat in on some Vienna Circle meetings, put their
              ideas forward in his book Language, Truth, and Logic. He said (again
              following Hume and Aristotle) that two kinds of propositions are
              meaningful - analytic sentences (tautologies and definitions of lan-
              guage terms) or statements that can be empirically verified.
                Karl Popper denied that “verification” could ever lead to certain
              knowledge, but argued that even one negative experimental result
              can “falsify” a proposition.
                 In the early 1950’s, Willard van Orman Quine challenged the
              ancient analytic-synthetic distinction, arguing that in the end the
              “truth” of analytic statements, the proofs of mathematical theorems,
              and the use of logic, also depend on some empirical verification.
                 The key idea of Quine’s empiricism is to deny the existence of any
              a priori knowledge of the world (or of words - statements, proposi-
              tions), whether analytic or synthetic. As Peirce had said, nothing is
              logically and necessarily true of the physical world. Logical truths
              like the Principles of Non-Contradiction and Bivalence (Excluded
              Middle) might be true in all possible worlds, but they tell us nothing
              about our physical world, unless they are applicable and empirically
              verified.
                                                    Epistemology              113

  Gettier Problems
   In 1963, Edmund Gettier published two logical counterex-
amples to knowledge defined as justified true belief. His counterex-
amples were true, but not for the reasons cited as the evidence for
justification. So the result is a justified false belief, or perhaps simply
not knowledge.
   The conditions postulated in Gettier-type examples are extraor-
dinarily unlikely to occur, but the mere possibility demonstrates the




                                                                                Chapter 8
difficulty of making logical arguments about contingent real world
situations. The most sophisticated linguistic analysis is problematic
as a source of “truth” or justification.
  There is a technical similarity between Gettier cases and Frank-
furt-type examples of an agent who apparently acts “freely” but a
counterfactual demon ensures that there is only one possibility for
action. In 1969 Harry Frankfurt developed logical counterex-
amples to the traditional idea that alternative possibilities are a pre-
requisite for free agency, because compatibilism had no alternatives.
   Gettier cases artificially construct a “true” situation which is not
true for the apparent reasons. Frankfurt cases artificially construct
a “free” action in which the agent actually is not free to choose the
apparent alternative possibilities. Gettier and Frankfurt cases have
spawned a vast philosophical literature in the past few decades. But
they have produced little advance in understanding either knowl-
edge or freedom. They are little more than clever examples of the
sophistry in today’s analytic language philosophy.
   Skepticism alone should have indicated that logical proofs of
knowledge, or logical analyses of any justification scheme for
knowledge, were bound to fail. Gettier and Frankfurt cases are
applied skepticism or sophistry that cast doubt on the likely valid-
ity of common sense justifications and knowledge, by developing
extremely unlikely if not implausible cases. They depreciate the
value of the central project of epistemology, which is to help us to
know (if only in a virtuous circle) when our arguments for knowl-
edge are as strong as we can make them.
        114       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Epistemology Returns to “Externalist” Justification
                 Until the 1960’s, debates in epistemology were primarily divided
              between Cartesian foundationalist and coherentist theories of justi-
              fication, both of which focused on egocentric subjective “internal-
              ist” theories.
                 Until Descartes’s turn inward, theories of knowledge had assumed
              that justification included the relation of beliefs to objects and events
              in the world. Descarte’s “internalist” turn continued well into the
Chapter 8




              twentieth century, with most epistemologists endorsing his “foun-
              dationalist” theory of knowledge. They included C.I. Lewis (1946),
              Roderick Chisholm, John Pollock (1986), Richard Foley (1987),
              Paul Moser (1989), William P. Alston (1989), and Robert Audi
              (1993).
                 But several philosophers moved toward an “external” view of
              epistemology. As early as the 1920’s, Frank Ramsey had proposed
              the idea of reliability, which depends on some kind of external
              causal process. He said that a belief was knowledge if it was (i) true,
              (ii) certain, and (iii) obtained by a reliable process.
                 In 1967, Alvin Goldman amplified the Ramsey view, endors-
              ing both a “causalist” theory of knowledge and what he called
              “reliabilism.”He claimed that justification for a belief is to be found
              in the natural cause of the belief.
                In 1971, Fred Dretske offered what he called “Conclusive Rea-
              sons” as a form of justification. They included evidence, grounds,
              and reasons.
                 In 1973, David Armstrong called for a return to what he called
              “externalism,” defined as “a certain relation holding between the
              believer and the world.” For example, one can not only believe, but
              know, that the room is hot because the excessive heat one feels is the
              cause of one’s belief. Armstrong further divided externalist theories
              into “causal” (like Goldman) and “reliability” (like Dretske and
              Ramsey) theories.
                There are other externalist theories, including naturalism, evi-
              dentialism, and evolutionary epistemology.
                                                             Epistemology          115

    Epistemology Naturalized
   In the late 1960’s, Willard van Orman Quine argued that
epistemology, the justification of knowledge claims, should be
“naturalized.” All knowledge claims should be reduced to verifi-
cation by the methods of natural science. “For suppose we hold,”
he says, “with the old empiricist Peirce, that the very meaning of a
statement consists in the difference its truth would make to possible
experience.” Quine wrote:




                                                                                     Chapter 8
     “The Vienna Circle espoused a verification theory of meaning but did
     not take it seriously enough. If we recognize with Peirce that the mean-
     ing of a sentence turns purely on what would count as evidence for its
     truth, and if we recognize with Duhem that theoretical sentences have
     their evidence not as single sentences but only as larger blocks of theory,
     then the indeterminacy of translation of theoretical sentences is the nat-
     ural conclusion.
     “Philosophers have rightly despaired of translating everything into
     observational and logico-mathematical terms. They have despaired of
     this even when they have not recognized, as the reason for this irreduc-
     ibility, that the statements largely do not have their private bundles of
     empirical consequences. And some philosophers have seen in this irre-
     ducibility the bankruptcy of epistemology. Carnap and the other logi-
     cal positivists of the Vienna Circle had already pressed the term “meta-
     physics” into pejorative use, as connoting meaninglessness; and the
     term “epistemology” was next. Wittgenstein and his followers, mainly
     at Oxford, found a residual philosophical vocation in therapy: curing
     philosophers of the delusion that there were epistemological problems.
     “Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter
     of psychology and hence of natural science. It studies a natural phenom-
     enon, viz., a physical human subject...
     “The old epistemology aspired to contain, in a sense, natural science; it
     would construct it somehow from sense data. Epistemology in its new
     setting, conversely, is contained in natural science, as a chapter of psy-
     chology. But the old containment remains valid too, in its way... There
     is thus reciprocal containment, though containment in different senses:
     epistemology in natural science and natural science in epistemology.”5
   Although Quine’s reciprocal containment suggested that epis-
temology might still play a foundational role in scientific under-
standing, his work appeared to many to reduce epistemology to
psychology. Quine seemed to deny the normative role of traditional
epistemology to justify all knowledge, including scientific knowl-
edge. An information epistemology can restore that role.
5        Ontological Relativity and Other Essays 1969, pp.80-3
        116         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                An Information Epistemology?
                 Second only to Kant‘s “scandal” that philosophers cannot
              logically prove the existence of the external world, it is scandalous
              that professional philosophers are in such profound disagreement
              about what it means to know something. They may not all be wrong,
              but few of them are likely to be right.
                 This is especially dismaying for those epistemologists who still
              see a normative role for philosophy that could provide a founda-
Chapter 8




              tion, perhaps even a priori, for scientific or empirical, a posteriori
              knowledge.
                 Information epistemology avoids the traditional identification of
              knowledge with “belief.” Belief is a psychological state that may be,
              and often is, disjoint from knowledge. We may empirically verify
              that a person knows something by analyzing her behavior, without
              her consciously articulating or holding a belief in that knowledge.
              A famous example is the difference between linguistic competence
              and mere performance, knowing the grammatical rules for one’s
              language without being able to state those rules. Those rules have
              been learned tacitly, by multiple trials and errors, and stored in a
              person’s mind, in our experience recorder and reproducer (ERR).6
                 Human knowledge is not only information stored in the mind. It
              is also recorded in human artifacts like stories, books, buildings, and
              internetworked computers. Knowledge is information that forms
              the basis for human thoughts and actions. In information philoso-
              phy, knowledge is information that is “actionable,” meaning that if
              we act on the basis of the information, our actions will have fruitful
              consequences. The validity or pragmatic “truth” of knowledge is to
              be found in those consequences.
                 Since information is also stored in animal minds, we can reject
              the exceptionalist fiction that only humans can have knowledge.
              Where humans are indeed exceptional is their ability to communi-
              cate their knowledge - and their reasons for their knowledge - sym-
              bolically by means of language.
                Information is stored or encoded in information structures.
              Although structures in the material world build themselves,
                6     See Appendix E for details.
                                               Epistemology            117

following natural laws, they do not assemble themselves. This is the
material first world of information philosophy.
   In our second world, biological systems are cognitive systems in
the sense that they also process and communicate knowledge (infor-
mation). They bring purpose into the universe. They are “teleo-
nomic.” They cannot be reduced to the laws of physics and chem-
istry. They are not machines, which must be assembled. Biological
systems assemble themselves, using their internal knowledge. This




                                                                         Chapter 8
is the biological second world of information philosophy.
  Structures in the mind are partly built by biological processes
and partly built by human intelligence, which is free, creative, and
unpredictable. The information in mental structures is uniquely
mobile. It is not confined to its structure. As knowledge, it is the
immaterial stuff of thought - our ideal third world.”
   A majority of the Sum of unique human knowledge may now be
stored external to our minds. Even collectively, we don’t know (in
the sense of having it in mind) all that we know. But we (including
almost anyone in the world) can look it up extremely quickly.
   Among the sources of knowledge are the theories and experiments
of natural scientists, who collaborate to establish our knowledge
of the external world, social scientists who study our cultures,
and psychologists, cognitive scientists, and neuroscientists, who
investigate our personal subjective worlds.
   To the extent of the correspondence, the isomorphism, the one-
to-one mapping, between structures (and processes) in the world
and representative information structures in our minds, we can
claim to have knowledge of the world, and of other minds.
   Such knowledge claims are not based on logical arguments about
justification, but on the pragmatic truth that the knowledge has
consequences that can be empirically or “naturally” confirmed.
  Information epistemology is a naturalized epistemology.
