         238   My God, He Plays Dice!




                              t t I I I’s
                       Eve re
                     h
                 Hu ny Worlds
                   g
Chapter 31




                   Ma
                                                                       Many Worlds 239


Hugh Everett III’s Many Worlds
   Hugh Everett III was one of John Wheeler’s most famous
graduate students. Others included Richard Feynman. Wheeler
supervised more Ph.D. theses than any Princeton physics professor.
   Everett took mathematical physics classes with Eugene
Wigner, who argued that human consciousness (and perhaps
some form of cosmic consciousness) was essential to the “collapse“
of the wave function.
   Everett was the inventor of the “universal wave function” and
the “relative state” formulation of quantum mechanics, later
known as the “many-worlds interpretation.”
   The first draft of Everett’s thesis was called “Wave Mechanics
Without Probability.” Like the younger Albert Einstein and
later Erwin Schrödinger, Everett was appalled at the idea of
indeterministic events. For him, it was much more logical that the
world was entirely deterministic.
   Everett began his thesis by describing John von Neumann’s




                                                                                               Chapter 31
“two processes.”
       Process 1: The discontinuous change brought about by the observation of a
  quantity with eigenstates φ1, φ2,..., in which the state ψ will be changed to the state φj
  with probability | ψ, φj|2

       Process 2: The continuous, deterministic change of state of the (isolated) system
  with time according to a wave equation δψ/δt = U ψ , where U is a linear operator. 1
   Everett then presents the internal contradictions of observer-
dependent collapses of wave functions with examples of “Wigner’s
Friend,” an observer who observes another observer. For whom
does the wave function collapse?
   Everett considers several alternative explanations for
Wigner’s paradox, the fourth of which is the standard statistical
interpretation of quantum mechanics, which was criticized
(correctly) by Einstein as not being a complete description.
      Alternative 4: To abandon the position that the state function

  1       The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, p.3
         240     My God, He Plays Dice!

                     is a complete description of a system. The state function is to
                     be regarded not as a description of a single system, but of an
                     ensemble of systems, so that the probabilistic assertions arise
                     naturally from the incompleteness of the description.
                     It is assumed that the correct complete description, which
                     would presumably involve further (hidden) parameters
                     beyond the state function alone, would lead to a deterministic
                     theory, from which the probabilistic aspects arise as a result of
                     our ignorance of these extra parameters in the same manner as
                     in classical statistical mechanics. 2
                  For the most part, Everett seems to represent Einstein’s
               “ensemble” or statistical interpretation, but he also is following
               David Bohm. In order to be “complete,” “hidden variables” would
               be necessary.
                  Everett’s “theory of the universal wave function” is the last
               alternative, in which he rejects process 1, wave function collapse:
                     Alternative 5: To assume the universal validity of the quantum
                     description, by the complete abandonment of Process 1.
                     The general validity of pure wave mechanics, without any
Chapter 31




                     statistical assertions, is assumed for all physical systems,
                     including observers and measuring apparata. Observation
                     processes are to be described completely by the state function
                     of the composite system which includes the observer and his
                     object-system, and which at all times obeys the wave equation
                     (Process 2). 3
                 Everett says this alternative has many advantages.
                     It has logical simplicity and it is complete in the sense that it is
                     applicable to the entire universe. All processes are considered
                     equally (there are no “measurement processes” which play
                     any preferred role), and the principle of psycho-physical
                     parallelism is fully maintained. Since the universal validity of
                     the state function description is asserted, one can regard the
                     state functions themselves as the fundamental entities, and one
                     can even consider the state function of the whole universe. In
                     this sense this theory can be called the theory of the “universal
                     wave function,“ since all of physics is presumed to follow from
                     this function. 4

                 2       The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, p.8
                 3       ibid.
                 4       ibid.
                                                           Many Worlds 241

Information and Entropy
   In a lengthy chapter, Everett develops the concept of information
- despite the fact that his deterministic view of physics allows no
alternative possibilities. For Claude Shannon, the developer
of the theory of communication of information, there can be no
information created ad transmitted without possibilities. Everett
correctly observes that in classical mechanics information is a
conserved property, a constant of the motion. No new information
can be created in such a deterministic universe.
      As a second illustrative example we consider briefly the
      classical mechanics of a group of particles. The system at any
      instant is represented by a point...in the phase space of all
      position and momentum coordinates. The natural motion
      of the system then carries each point into another, defining
      a continuous transformation of the phase space into itself.
      According to Liouville’s theorem the measure of a set of points
      of the phase space is invariant under this transformation.
      This invariance of measure implies that if we begin with a
      probability distribution over the phase space, rather than a




                                                                          Chapter 31
      single point, the total information,... which is the informa-
      tion of the joint distribution for all positions and momenta,
      remains constant in time. 5
   Everett correctly notes that if total information is constant, the
total entropy is also constant.
      if one were to define the total entropy to be the negative of
      the total information, one could replace the usual second law
      of thermodynamics by a law of conservation of total entropy,
      where the increase in the standard (marginal) entropy is
      exactly compensated by a (negative) correlation entropy. The
      usual second law then results simply from our renunciation
      of all correlation knowledge (stosszahlansatz), and not from
      any intrinsic behavior of classical systems. The situation for
      classical mechanics is thus in sharp contrast to that of stochas-
      tic processes, which are intrinsically irreversible.
  5       ibid., p.31
         242         My God, He Plays Dice!

               The Appearance of Irreversibility in a Measurement
                     There is another way of looking at this apparent irreversibility
                     within our theory which recognizes only Process 2. When an
                     observer performs an observation the result is a superposition,
                     each element of which describes an observer who has perceived
                     a particular value. From this time forward there is no interaction
                     between the separate elements of the superposition (which
                     describe the observer as having perceived different results),
                     since each element separately continues to obey the wave
                     equation. Each observer described by a particular element of the
                     superposition behaves in the future completely independently
                     of any events in the remaining elements, and he can no longer
                     obtain any information whatsoever concerning these other
                     elements (they are completely unobservable to him).
                     The irreversibility of the measuring process is therefore, within
                     our framework, simply a subjective manifestation reflecting
                     the fact that in observation processes the state of the observer
                     is transformed into a superposition of observer states, each
                     element of which describes an observer who is irrevocably cut
                     off from the remaining elements. While it is conceivable that
Chapter 31




                     some outside agency could reverse the total wave function, such
                     a change cannot be brought about by any observer which is
                     represented by a single element of a superposition, since he is
                     entirely powerless to have any influence on any other elements.
                     There are, therefore, fundamental restrictions to the knowledge
                     that an observer can obtain about the state of the universe. It is
                     impossible for any observer to discover the total state function of
                     any physical system, since the process of observation itself leaves
                     no independent state for the system or the observer, but only
                     a composite system state in which the object-system states are
                     inextricably bound up with the observer states. 6
                  This is Everett’s radical thesis that the observation “splits” the
               single observer into a “superposition” of multiple observers, each
               one of which has knowledge only of the new object-system state
               or “relative state” (interpreted later by Bryce DeWitt as different
               “universes”) As soon as the observation is performed, the composite
               state is split into a superposition for which each element describes
                 6       ibid., p.98
                                                          Many Worlds 243

a different object-system state and an observer with (different)
knowledge of it. Only the totality of these observer states, with
their diverse knowledge, contains complete information about the
original object-system state - but there is no possible communication
between the observers described by these separate states. Any single
observer can therefore possess knowledge only of the relative state
function (relative to his state) of any systems, which is in any case all
that is of any importance to him.
   In the final chapter of his thesis, Everett reviews five possible
“interpretations, the “popular”, the “Copenhagen”, the “hidden
variables”, the “stochastic process”, and the “wave” interpretations.
      a. The “popular” interpretation. This is the scheme alluded
      to in the introduction, where ψ is regarded as objectively
      characterizing the single system, obeying a deterministic
      wave equation when the system is isolated but changing
      probabilistically and discontinuously under observation. 7
      b. The Copenhagen interpretation. This is the interpretation
      developed by Bohr. The ψ function is not regarded as an
      objective description of a physical system (i.e., it is in no sense




                                                                            Chapter 31
      a conceptual model), but is regarded as merely a mathematical
      artifice which enables one to make statistical predictions,
      albeit the best predictions which it is possible to make. This
      interpretation in fact denies the very possibility of a single
      conceptual model applicable to the quantum realm, and asserts
      that the totality of phenomena can only be understood by the
      use of different, mutually exclusive (i.e., “complementary”)
      models in different situations. All statements about microscopic
      phenomena are regarded as meaningless unless accompanied
      by a complete description (classical) of an experimental
      arrangement. 8
      c. The “hidden variables” interpretation. This is the position
      (Alternative 4 of the Introduction) that ψ is not a complete
      description of a single system. It is assumed that the correct
      complete description, which would involve further (hidden)
      parameters, would lead to a deterministic theory, from which the
      probabilistic aspects arise as a result of our ignorance of these
      extra parameters in the same manner as in classical statistical
      mechanics. 9
  7       ibid., p.110
  8       ibid.
  9       ibid., p.111.
         244          My God, He Plays Dice!

                  Everett says that here the ψ-function is regarded as a description
               of an ensemble of systems rather than a single system. Proponents
               of this interpretation include Einstein and Bohm.
                  d. The stochastic process interpretation. This is the point of
                  view which holds that the fundamental processes of nature are
                  stochastic (i.e., probabilistic) processes. According to this picture
                  physical systems are supposed to exist at all times in definite
                  states, but the states are continually undergoing probabilistic
                  changes. The discontinuous probabilistic “quantum-jumps” are
                  not associated with acts of observation, but are fundamental to
                  the systems themselves. 10
                  This is very close to our information interpretation of quantum
               mechanics, which claims that collapses of the wave function result
               from interactions between quantum systems, independent of any
               observers or measurement processes.
                  e. The wave interpretation. This is the position proposed in the
                  present thesis, in which the wave function itself is held to be the
                  fundamental entity, obeying at all times a deterministic wave
                  equation. 11
Chapter 31




                  Everett says that his thesis follows most closely the view held by
               Erwin Schrödinger, who denied the existence of “quantum jumps”
               and collapses of the wave function. See Schrödinger’s Are There
               Quantum Jumps?, Part I and Part II (and, years after Everett, John
               Bell (1987) and H. Dieter Zeh (1993) who wrote articles with simi-
               lar themes.
               On the “Conscious Observer”
                 Everett proposed that the complicated problem of “conscious
               observers” can be greatly simplified by noting that the most
               important element in an observation is the recorded information
               about the measurement outcome in the memory of the observer.
               He proposed that human observers could be replaced by automatic
               measurement equipment that would achieve the same result. A
               measurement would occur when information is recorded by the
               measuring instrument.
                 10     ibid., p.114
                 11     ibid., p.115.
                                                        Many Worlds 245

   It will suffice for our purposes to consider the observers to
   possess memories (i.e., parts of a relatively permanent nature
   whose states are in correspondence with past experience of
   the observers). In order to make deductions about the past
   experience of an observer it is sufficient to deduce the present
   contents of the memory as it appears within the mathematical
   model.
   As models for observers we can, if we wish, consider
   automatically functioning machines, possessing sen-
   sory apparatus and coupled to recording devices capable of
   registering past sensory data and machine configurations. 12
   Everett’s observer model is a classic example of artificial
intelligence.
   We can further suppose that the machine is so constructed that
   its present actions shall be determined not only by its present
   sensory data, but by the contents of its memory as well. Such
   a machine will then be capable of performing a sequence of
   observations (measurements), and furthermore of deciding upon
   its future experiments on the basis of past results. If we consider
   that current sensory data, as well as machine configuration, is




                                                                         Chapter 31
   immediately recorded in the memory, then the actions of the
   machine at a given instant can be regarded as a function of
   the memory contents only, and all relevant experience of the
   machine is contained in the memory. 13
  Everett’s observer model has what might be called artificial
consciousness.
   For such machines we are justified in using such phrases as
   “the machine has perceived A” or “the machine is aware of A”
   if the occurrence of A is represented in the memory, since the
   future behavior of the machine will be based upon the occur-
   rence of A. In fact, all of the customary language of subjective
   experience is quite applicable to such machines, and forms the
   most natural and useful mode of expression when dealing with
   their behavior, as is well known to individuals who work with
   complex automata. 14

  12   ibid., p.64.
  13   ibid.
  14   ibid.
         246       My God, He Plays Dice!

                 Everett’s model of machine memory completely solves the
               problem of “Wigner’s Friend.” As in the information interpretation
               of quantum mechanics, it is the recording of information in a
               “measurement” that makes a subsequent “observation” by a human
               observer possible.
               Bryce De Witt
                  Everett stepped away from theoretical physics almost entirely
               even before his thesis was finally accepted under John Wheeler
               and published in the July 1957 issue of Reviews of Modern Physics.
               along with an accompanying article by Wheeler.
                  Without the strong interest in the many-worlds interpretation
               of quantum mechanics by Bryce DeWitt, it might have much less
               interest and influence today.
                  In 1970, DeWitt wrote an article on Everett’s “relative-state”
               theory for Physics Today. A few years later he compiled a collection
               of Everett’s work, including the 1957 paper and the much longer
               “The Theory of the Universal Wave Function,”along with interpretive
               articles, by DeWitt, Wheeler, and others.
Chapter 31




               Summary of Everett’s Ideas
                  Everett’s idea for the “universal validity of the quantum description”
               can be read as saying that quantum mechanics applies to all physical
               systems, not merely microscopic systems. This is correct. Then the
               transition to “classical” mechanics emerges in the limit of the Planck
               quantum of action h → 0, or more importantly, h/m → 0 (since h
               never changes), so that classical physics appears in large massive
               objects (like human beings) because the indeterminacy is too small
               to measure.
                  Like Einstein, Everett says that the ψ-function is a description of
               an ensemble of systems rather than a single system. It is true that the
               phenomenon of wave interference is only inferred from the results
               of many single particle experiments. We never “see” interference in
               single particles directly. Probabilistic assertions arise naturally from
               the incompleteness of the description.
                                                        Many Worlds 247

    Everett correctly observes that in classical mechanics information
is a conserved property, a constant of the motion. No new information
can be created in a classical universe. But the observed universe has
clearly been gaining new information structures since the origin.
Indeed, both information and entropy have been increasing and
continue to increase today. This cannot be explained by Everett.
    Everett’s automatic measuring equipment that stores information
about measurements in its “memory” nicely solves von Neumann’s
problem of “psycho-physical parallelism” in “conscious-observer”-
dependent quantum mechanics, like the Bohr-Heisenberg
“Copenhagen Interpretation.”
    The Everett theory preserves the “appearance” of possibilities
as well as all the results of standard quantum mechanics. It is an
“interpretation” after all. So even wave functions “appear” to
collapse. Note that if there are many possibilities, whenever one
becomes actual, the others disappear instantly. In Everett’s theory,
they become other possible worlds
    Unfortunately, as DeWitt and most modern followers of Everett




                                                                              Chapter 31
see it, alternative possibilities are in different, inaccessible universes.
In each deterministic universe, there is only one possible future.
    Many of Everett’s original ideas become central in later
deterministic interpretations of quantum mechanics, such as the
decoherence program of H.Dieter Zeh and Wojciech Zurek.
    Some of Everett’s important new ideas show up also in the work
of John Bell, to which we now turn.
