         262   My God, He Plays Dice!




                                   o - Sl i t
                         a n   Tw
                 Fey n m        m e n t
                        p e r i
                     Ex
Chapter 33




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                   informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/two-slit_experiment/
                                                 Feynman’s Two Slits 263


Feynman Two-Slit Experiment
   Richard Feynman said that the two-slit experiment contains
“all of the mystery” of quantum mechanics.
      I will take just this one experiment, which has been designed
      to contain all of the mystery of quantum mechanics, to put you
      up against the paradoxes and mysteries and peculiarities of
      nature one hundred per cent. Any other situation in quantum
      mechanics, it turns out, can always be explained by saying,
      ‘You remember the case of the experiment with the two holes?
      It’s the same thing’ I am going to tell you about the experiment
      with the two holes. It does contain the general mystery; I am
      avoiding nothing; I am baring nature in her most elegant and
      difficult form. 1
   We will show that the two-slit experiment does contain the key
mystery of quantum mechanics, but it’s not exactly what Feyn-
man described in 1964. It is connected to the new mystery of
“entanglement.” Feynman’s mystery was simply how a particle can
interfere with itself if it goes through only one slit. Our view is that
the particle goes through one slit. We show that it is the probability




                                                                           Chapter 33
amplitude of the wave function that is interfering with itself.
   We are making use of Einstein’s vision of an “objective reality.”
We say the motion of an individual particle of matter or energy
obeys fundamental conservation principles - conservation of all
a particle’s properties. This means the particle path exists and it is
smooth and continuous in space and time, even if it impossible to
measure the path, to determine its position without disturbing it.
   This claim is very controversial, because Werner Heisenberg’s
description of the Copenhagen Interpretation insists that “the
path only comes into existence when we measure it.”
   Einstein said that claiming a particle has no position just before
we measure it is like saying the moon only exists when we are
looking at it! That it is impossible to know the path of a particle
without measuring it does not mean that a path does not exist.


  1       Feynman, 1967, chapter 6
         264     My God, He Plays Dice!

                  We are left with the mystery as to how mere “probabilities” can
               influence (statistically control) the positions of material particles
               - how immaterial information can affect the material world. This
               remains the deep metaphysical mystery in quantum mechanics.
                  There is something similar in quantum entanglement, where
               measurement of one particle appears to transmit something to
               the other “entangled” particle. In the two-slit experiment it is the
               value of the wave function at one place “influencing” the location
               where the particle appears. In entanglement, the collapse of the
               two-particle wave function leaves the spin components ot the two
               particles correlated perfectly.
                  Like Einstein’s 1927 description of nonlocality, both of these
               involve the “impossible” simultaneity of events in a spacelike
               separation.
                  In the two-slit experiment, just as in the Dirac Three Polarizers
               experiment,2 the critical case to consider is just one photon or
               electron at a time in the experiment.
                  With one particle at a time (whether photon or electron), the
               quantum object is mistakenly described as interfering with itself,
Chapter 33




               when interference is never seen in a single event. It only shows
               up in the statistics of large numbers of experiments. Indeed,
               interference fringes are visible even in the one-slit case, although
               this is rarely described in the context of the quantum mysteries.
                  It is the fundamental relation between a particle and the
               associated wave that controls its probable locations that raises the
               “local reality” question first seen in 1905 and described in 1909 by
               Einstein. Thirty years later, the EPR paper and Erwin Schrödinger’s
               insights into the wave function of two entangled particles, first
               convinced a few physicists that there was a deep problem .
                  It was not for another seventeen years that David Bohm
               suggested an experimental test of EPR and thirty years before
               John Stewart Bell in 1964 imagined an “inequality” that could
               confirm or deny quantum mechanics. Ironically, the goal of Bell’s
               “theorem” was to invalidate the non-intuitive aspects of quantum
               mechanics and restore Einstein’s hope for a more deterministic
               picture of an “objective reality” at, or perhaps even underlying
               below, the microscopic level of quantum physics.
                 2    See chapter 19.
                                            Feynman’s Two Slits 265

   At about the same time, in his famous Lectures on Physics at Cal
Tech and the Messenger Lectures at Cornell, Feynman described
the two-slit experiment as demonstrating what has since been
described as the “only mystery” of quantum mechanics.
   How, Feynman asked, can the particle go through both slits?
We will see that if anything goes through both slits it is only
immaterial information - the probability amplitude wave function.
The particle itself always goes through just one slit. A particle
cannot be divided and in two places at the same time. It is the
probability amplitude wave function that interferes with itself.
   A highly localized particle can not be identified as the wave
widely distributed in space. We will show that the wave function
is determined by the boundary conditions of the measuring
apparatus. It has nothing to do with whether or not a particle is in
the apparatus, though it depends on the wavelength of the particle.
   The immaterial wave function exerts a causal influence over the
particles, one that we can justifiably call “mysterious.” It results
in the statistics of many experiments agreeing with the quantum
mechanical predictions with increasing accuracy as we increase
the number of identical experiments.




                                                                          Chapter 33
   It is this “influence,” no ordinary “force,” that is at the heart of
Feynman’s “mystery” in quantum mechanics.
   We will show that the probability of finding particles at different
places in the two-slit experiment is determined by solving the
Schrödinger equation for its eigenvalues and eigenfunctions
(wave functions and probability amplitudes), given the boundary
conditions of the experiment.
   The wave function and its probabilities depend on the boundary
conditions, such as whether one slit is open or two. They do not
depend on whether a particle is actually present, though the
calculations depend on the wavelength of a particle.
   The two-slit experiment shows better than any other experiment
that a quantum wave function is a probability amplitude that
interferes with itself, producing some places where the probability
(the square of the absolute value of the complex probability
amplitude) of finding a quantum particle is actually zero.
         266       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  Perhaps the most non-intuitive aspect of the two-slit experiment
               is this. When we see the pattern of light on the screen with just one
               slit open, then open the second slit - admitting more light into the
               experiment - we observe that some places on the screen where there
               was visible light, have now gone dark! And this happens even when
               we are admitting only one particle of light at a time.
                  Let’s remind ourselves about how the crests and troughs of water
               waves interfere, and then how Feynman presented the two-slit
               experiment to students in his famous Lectures on Physics.
                  Let’s look first at the one-slit case. We prepare a slit that is about
               the same size as the wavelength of the light in order to see the
               interference of waves most clearly. Parallel waves from a distant
               source fall on the slit from
               below. The diagram shows
               how the wave from the left
               edge of the slit interferes with
               the one from the right edge.
               If the slit width is d and the
               photon wavelength is λ, at an
               angle α ≈ λ/2d there will be
Chapter 33




               destructive interference.
                  At an angle α ≈ λ/d, there is constructive interference (which
               shows up as the fanning out of light areas in the interfering waves
               in the illustration). The diagram indicates constructive interference
               between the 7th and 8th waves from the left and right sides of the
               slit.
                  Feynman began with a description of bullets fired at a screen with
               two holes, arguing
               that bullets do not
               interfere,          he
               showed that the
               pattern with two
               holes      open      is
               simply the sum of
               the results from
               one hole or the
               other hole open.
               P12 = P1 + P2
                                             Feynman’s Two Slits 267

  He then described the results for water waves.




   Here the individual results I1 and I2 for one or the other hole
open do not simply add up. The individual wave intensities are the
squares of the amplitudes - I1 = |h1|2, I2 = |h2|2. Instead they show
the cancellation of crests and troughs that produce constructive and
destructive interference. The formula is I12 = |h1 + h2|2. This has the
same pattern of bright and dark areas that are found in the “fringes”




                                                                          Chapter 33
of light at the sharp edges of an object.
   Feynman next shows how a two-slit experiment using electrons
does not behave like bullets, but instead looks just like water waves,
or light waves. He then shows that the mathematics is the same as
for water waves. But he says “It is all quite mysterious. And the more
         268       My God, He Plays Dice!

               you look at it the more mysterious it seems.” “How can such an
               interference come about?”, he asks. “Perhaps...it is not true that the
               lumps go either through hole 1 or hole 2.” He says
                  We conclude the following: The electrons arrive in lumps,
                  like particles, and the probability of arrival of these lumps is
                  distributed like the distribution of intensity of a wave. It is in this
                  sense that an electron behaves “sometimes like a particle and
                  sometimes like a wave”...
                  The only answer that can be given is that we have found from
                  experiment that there is a certain special way that we have to
                  think in order that we do not get into inconsistencies. What we
                  must say (to avoid making wrong predictions) is the following.
                  If one looks at the holes or, more accurately, if one has a piece
                  of apparatus which is capable of determining whether the
                  electrons go through hole 1 or hole 2, then one can say that it
                  goes either through hole 1 or hole 2. But, when one does not try
                  to tell which way the electron goes, when there is nothing in the
                  experiment to disturb the electrons, then one may not say that
                  an electron goes either through hole 1 or hole 2. If one does say
                  that, and starts to make any deductions from the statement, he
                  will make errors in the analysis. This is the logical tightrope on
Chapter 33




                  which we must walk if we wish to describe nature successfully.
                  Einstein was deeply bothered by this Copenhagen thinking that
               claims that we cannot know the particle path, that a path does not
               even exist until we make a measurement, that the particle may be
               in more than one place at the same time, maybe dividing and going
               through both slits, etc.
                  So let’s combine conservation principles with Einstein’s view that
               it is the wave function that determines the probability and the
               statistics of particle positions for a large number of experiments (he
               called it an “ensemble”).
                  We can then argue, corresponding to Einstein’s idea of an
               “objective reality,” that the particle of matter or energy always goes
               through just one slit in a continuous, though unknown path.
                  But whichever slit the particle enters, the probability of finding
               it at a specific location inside the apparatus is determined by the
               square of the absolute value |Ψ|2 of the complex probability ampli-
               tude at that location.
                                            Feynman’s Two Slits 269

   The probability amplitude is the solution to the Schrödinger
equation given the boundary conditions. And the boundary
conditions depend on whether one or two slits are open!
   We can thus overcome Feynman’s difficulties, his inconsistencies,
his “special way to think,” and his “logical tightrope.” Mostly,
Einstein’s reality view denies an electron behaves “sometimes like a
particle and sometimes like a wave.” The particle is real. The wave is
an accurate theory about the particle’s behavior.
   We may never be able to measure the specific location of an
electron in an atomic orbit. But the wave function gives us all the
information we need about atomic orbitals to do the quantum
mechanics of atoms and possible molecules, with their nodal
surfaces, just like the nodes in the two-slit interference pattern.
   Let’s compare the wave functions inside the two-slit apparatus
when one slit or two slits are open.
   With one slit open we see the classic Fraunhofer pattern with
their light zones of constructive interference and dark zones where
the waves are one-half wavelength different, so the crest of one
wave cancels the trough of the other. Many texts mistakenly say that




                                                                         Chapter 33
interference is only possible with two slits open.
         270         My God, He Plays Dice!

                  With two slits open we can still see the overall shape of the single-
               slit Fraunhofer pattern with its broad central maximum, but now




               multiple interference fringes appear.
                  We claim that this interference pattern does not depend
               on which slit the particle enters, but only on the probability
Chapter 33




               amplitude of the wave function that solves the Schrödinger equation
               inside the experimental apparatus, given the boundary conditions,
               viz., which slits are open. 3
                  While this picture eliminates the question of which slit the par-
               ticle enters, it does not eliminate the deeper metaphysical mystery of
               how the immaterial information in the wave function can influence
               the particle paths and positions, one particle at a time, to produce
               the distribution of particles observed in the statistics of large num-
               bers of particles.
                  But Einstein always said quantum mechanics is a statistical
               theory. And he was first to say very clearly that the waves, later the
               wave functions, are guiding the particles. He said the waves are a
               guiding field - a Führungsfeld.
                  It is this mystery, how abstract information can control con-
               crete objects, not Feynman’s worry about how a single particle
               can go through both slits, that is the deepest mystery in quantum
               mechanics.
                 3     David Bohm had a similar view. See chapter 30.
                                             Feynman’s Two Slits 271

Feynman’s Path-Integral Formulation of Quantum Mechanics
   In 1948 Feynman developed his “sum over paths” approach to
quantum mechanics. It was based on a 1933 article by P. A. M. Dirac
to formulate quantum mechanics using a Lagrangian function rather
than the standard Hamiltonian, and to use a variational method to
solve for the least action. It involves calculations over all space.
   The idea of a single path for a quantum system (for example, the
path of an electron or photon in the two-slit experiment) is replaced
with a sum over an infinity of quantum-mechanically possible paths
to compute the probability amplitude. The path-integral method is
equivalent to the other formalisms of quantum mechanics but its
visualization shows how it can sense when both slits are open.
   Feynman’s calculation of the probability amplitude for a particle
entering say the left slit, and arriving at a specific point on the
detector screen, is the result of adding together contributions from
all possible paths in configuration space, however strange the paths.
   Each path contributes a function of the time integral of the
Lagrangian along the path. In Feynman’s approach and in the
transaction interpretations of quantum mechanics by John Cramer




                                                                           Chapter 33
and Ruth Kastner, some paths explore the open slits.
   The resulting probability amplitude is different at the back screen
when one or both slits are open, just as we see in Einstein’s “objective
reality” way of analyzing the problem.
   In order for the state of the slits to “influence” the motion of each
individual particle to produce the statistical interference pattern
that shows up for many particles, the wave function has to “know”
its value at every point inside the two-slit experiment.
