         310   My God, He Plays Dice!




                                  te i n’s
                          Eins heory
                         Fi e l d T
Chapter 38
                                             EInstein’s Field Theory 311



Einstein’s Field Theory
   In the last thirty years of his life Einstein’s main mission was to
create a unified field theory that would combine the gravitational
field of Newton (or Einstein), the electromagnetic field of Maxwell,
and perhaps the probability field of quantum mechanics.
   But he also worried much of his life that continuous fields
are only theories, purely abstract information, whereas discrete
particles have a more substantial reality, arranging themselves in
material information structures.
   But the ideal and pure information of continuous field theories
clearly has causal powers over the “discrete” material world, as we
saw in the two-slit experiment (chapter 33).
   Einstein in his later years grew quite pessimistic about the
possibilities for deterministic continuous field theories, by
comparison with indeterministic and statistical discontinuous
particle theories like those of quantum mechanics.
   Einstein deeply believed that any physical theory must be
based on a continuous field. For Einstein, physical objects must
be described by continuous functions of field variables in four-
dimensional space-time coordinates. In quantum field theory

                                                                         Chapter 38
(QFT), particles are functions of (singularities in) these fields. In
quantum electrodynamics (QED), fields are merely properties of
aggregated particles. Which then are the more fundamental?
   It appears to be particles, especially today when the last
fundamental particle predicted by the standard theory (the Higgs
boson) has been found. Einstein suspected that his dream of a
unified field theory may not be possible.
   In his 1949 autobiography for his volume in Paul Schilpp’s
Library of Living Philosophers, Einstein asked about the theoretical
foundation of physics in the future, “Will it be a field theory [or]
will it be a statistical [particles] theory?”
    “Before I enter upon the question of the completion of the
    general theory of relativity, I must take a stand with reference
    to the most successful physical theory of our period, viz.,
         312     My God, He Plays Dice!

                     the statistical quantum theory which, about twenty-five
                     years ago, took on a consistent logical form (Schrödinger,
                     Heisenberg, Dirac, Born). This is the only theory at present
                     which permits a unitary grasp of experiences concerning the
                     quantum character of micro-mechanical events. This theory,
                     on the one hand, and the theory of relativity on the other,
                     are both considered correct in a certain sense, although their
                     combination has resisted all efforts up to now. This is probably
                     the reason why among contemporary theoretical physicists
                     there exist entirely differing opinions concerning the question
                     as to how the theoretical foundation of the physics of the
                     future will appear. Will it be a field theory; will it be in essence
                     a statistical theory? I shall briefly indicate my own thoughts on
                     this point. 1
               Castle In The Air
                  In 1954 Einstein wrote his friend Michele Besso to express his lost
               hopes for a continuous field theory like that of electromagnetism
               or gravitation,
                     “I consider it quite possible that physics cannot be based on
                     the field concept, i.e:, on continuous structures. In that case,
                     nothing remains of my entire castle in the air, gravitation
                     theory included, [and of] the rest of modern physics.” 2
                 In the same year, he wrote to David Bohm,
Chapter 38




                     I must confess that I was not able to find a way to explain the
                     atomistic character of nature. My opinion is that if the
                     objective description through the field as an       Einstein sees a
                     elementary concept is not possible, then one has conflict between
                     to find a possibility to avoid the continuum
                                                                         relativity and
                     (together with space and time) altogether. But I
                     have not the slightest idea what kind of elemen- quantum
                     tary concepts could be used in such a theory. 3     mechanics
                     (Einstein to David Bohm, 28 October 1954).
                 Again in the same year, he wrote to H.S.Joachim,
                     it seems that the state of any finite spatially limited system
                     may be fully characterized by a finite number of numbers.
                     This speaks against the continuum with its infinitely many

                 1       Schilpp, 1949, p.81
                 2       Pais, 1982, p.467
                 3       Stachel, 1986, p.380
                                              EInstein’s Field Theory 313

      degrees of freedom. The objection is not decisive only because
      one doesn’t know, in the contemporary state of mathematics,
      in what way the demand for freedom from singularity (in the
      continuum theory) limits the manifold of solutions. 4
  The fifth edition of Einstein’s The Meaning of Relativity included
a new appendix on his field theory of gravitation. In the final
paragraphs of this work, his last, published posthumously in 1956,
Einstein wrote,
      “Is it conceivable that a field theory permits one to understand
      the atomistic and quantum structure of reality ? Almost
      everybody will answer this question with “no”...
      “One can give good reasons why reality cannot at all be
      represented by a continuous field. From the quantum
      phenomena it appears to follow with certainty that a finite
      system of finite energy can be completely described by a finite
      set of numbers [quantum numbers]. This does not seem to be
      in accordance with a continuum theory, and must lead to an
      attempt to find a purely algebraic theory for the description
      of reality. But nobody knows how to obtain the basis of such a
      theory.” 5
   No one has described Einstein’s doubts about continuous field
theories better that John Stachel, one of the early editors of the
Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Stachel speculated about


                                                                         Chapter 38
“another Einstein” with doubts about a continuum and field.
   Stachel points to Einstein’s 1923 article “Does Field Theory
Offer Possibilities for the Solution of the Quantum Problem?,”
in which Einstein points out that the great successes of quantum
theory over the last quarter of a century should not be allowed to
conceal the lack of any logical foundation for the theory.
   He quotes Einstein...
      The essential element of the previous theoretical development,
      which is characterized by the headings mechanics, Maxwell-
      Lorentz electrodynamics, theory of relativity, lies in the
      circumstance that they work with differential equations
      that uniquely determine events [das Geschehen] in a four-
  4       ibid.581
  5       Einstein, 1956, pp.165-66
         314         My God, He Plays Dice!

                     dimensional spatio-temporal continuum if they are known for a
                     spatial cross-section...In view of the existing difficulties, one has
                     despaired of the possibility of describing the actual processes by
                     means of differential equations. 6
                  The linear Schrödinger differential equation for waves cannot give
               us the details of individual particles, only the statistics of ensembles
               of particles. Stachel provides several powerful statements from
               1935 to Einstein’s posthumous writings pointing toward discrete
               “algebraic” theories of particles replacing continuum field theories.
                  In modern terms, the arrangement of particles would be described
               by integers, the quantum numbers as “bits” of information in a
               “digital” theory, not the continuum of an “analog” theory.
                     In any case one does not have the right today to maintain that
                     the foundation must consist in a field theory in the sense of
                     Maxwell. The other possibility, however, leads in my opinion
                     to a renunciation of the time-space continuum and to a purely
                     algebraic physics. Logically this is quite possible (the system
                     is described by a number of integers; “time” is only a possible
                     viewpoint [Gesichtspunkt], from which the other “observables”
                     can be considered—an observable logically coordinated to all
                     the others. Such a theory doesn’t have to be based upon the
                     probability concept. For the present, however, instinct rebels
                     against such a theory (Einstein to Paul Langevin, 3 October
Chapter 38




                     1935). 7
                     It has been suggested that, in view of the molecular structure
                     of all events in the small, the introduction of a space-time
                     continuum may be considered as contrary to nature. Per-
                     haps the success of Heisenberg’s method points to a purely
                     algebraical method of description of nature, to the elimination
                     of continuous functions from physics. Then, however, we must
                     also give up, on principle, the utilization of the space-time
                     continuum. It is not inconceivable that human ingenuity will
                     some day find methods that will make it possible to proceed
                     along this path. Meanwhile, however, this project resembles
                     the attempt to breathe in an airless space (“Physics and Reality,”
                 6       Stachel, 2002, p.149
                 7       ibid., p.140
                                             EInstein’s Field Theory 315

      [1936], cited from Einstein Ideas and Opinions 1954, 319). 8
      In present-day physics there is manifested a kind of battle
      between the particle-concept and the field-concept for
      leadership, which will probably not be decided for a long time.
      (Einstein to Herbert Kondo, 11 August 1952). 9
   Einstein might even endorse gravitation theories today, like string
theory and loop quantum gravity, which describe tiny structures
that might be the gravity particle - the “graviton.” Some fit the
graviton into standard particle theory as a spin-2 boson. Spin-1
bosons like the photon have an infinity in quantum field theory
that can be removed by renormalization. The infinity shows up as a
single loop in a Feynman diagram. A spin-2 particle has two loops
in its Feynman diagram and no method is known to eliminate them.
   Particles might have no infinity problems in an algebraic theory?
   Objective reality does not lead to Einstein’s “Unified Field Theory,”
but it does leave us with three very useful fields, the electromagnetic,
the gravitational, and the quantum mechanical probability field, all
generating abstract information that makes very accurate predictions
about the behavior of real particles.
   Einstein’s “castle in the air,” “breathing in empty space,” should
not lead us to despair about quantum field theories, but only to see
them more clearly as Einstein first described a wave, as “ghost fields”


                                                                           Chapter 38
or “guiding fields.”
   We might say that where particles are concrete and “real,” fields
are abstract and imaginary - “free creations of the human mind.”
   Particles are actual. They are involved in actions and interactions.
   Fields are possibilities. Wave functions allow us to calculate the
probabilities for each possibiity, making predictions to degrees of
accuracy unheard of in the other sciences.
   In short, fields are theories, mere ideas, abstract information
about continuous functions across infinite space and time.
   Particles are facts, derived from discrete concrete experiments
done in the here and now.

  8       ibid., p.150
  9       ibid., p.150
