        62   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 4




                                   Wi l l
                              Free




                                                         This chapter on the web
                                            informationphilosopher.com/freedom
                                                                 Free Will   63


Free Will
   In our 2011 book Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy, our mind
model was a combination of a rudimentary experience recorder
and reproducer (ERR)1 and our two-stage model of free will. Recent




                                                                              Chapter 4
information analysis of the mind and the mind-body problem
has greatly strengthened our mind model. We now see the mind
as immaterial information, the “software in the hardware” of the
material brain, which we view as a biological information processor.
   Five years ago, we saw the quantum randomness in the first stage
as adding “uncaused” events to fit a picture of “event causality”
and to attack the “causal closure” of the eliminative materialists.
   Now that our mind model is unapologetically immaterial, it is
in fact an example of the kind of metaphysical entities that the
famous philosopher P. F. Strawson rejected as “panicky metaphys-
ics - uncaused causes, immaterial minds, non-empirical noume-
nal selves, non-event agent causes, and prime movers unmoved.”
We now endorse the idea of agent causality,2 in which the mind
has causal powers over the material world.
   We argue that freedom of the will begins in the pre-deliberative
thoughts of the agent. Although Albert Einstein was a strong
believer in determinism, he saw our thoughts and theories as “free
creations of the human mind.” These creative thoughts bring new
information into the universe. New information emerges3 from the
material and biological worlds to become part of the mental or
ideal world, even as it is embodied in the material world.
   Without alternative possibilities for an open future, there can
be no new information in the universe, in biology, or in human
minds. But there continues to be new information, in stars still
forming, in the evolution of new species, and in creative minds.
  1    See Appendix E.
  2    See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/agent-causality.html
  3    See chapter 27 on emergence and appendix F on cosmic creation..
        64     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             The Two-Stage Model of Free Will
                Our two-stage model is now the most plausible explana-
             tion, not only for human free will, but also for creativity, cited
             in the American Psychological Association’s Review of General
             Psychology as supporting the Campbell-Simonton BVSR model of
Chapter 4




             creative thought.4
                Given the “laws of nature” and the “fixed past” just before a
             decision, many philosophers wonder how a free agent can have
             any possible alternatives. This is partly because they imagine a
             timeline for the decision that shrinks the decision process to a
             single moment.




                Collapsing the decision to a single moment between the closed
             fixed past and the open ambiguous future makes it difficult to see
             the role of free thoughts of the mind - which bring new informa-
             tion into the universe - followed by the willed and adequately
             determined action in a temporal sequence, as shown here.




                But the two-stage model is not limited to a single step of gener-
             ating alternative possibilities followed by a single step of determi-
             nation by the will. It is better understood as a continuous process
             of possibilities generation by what we call the micro mind (parts
             of the brain that leave themselves open to noise) and adequately
             determined choices made from time to time by the macro mind
             (the same brain parts, perhaps, but now averaging over and filter-
             ing out the noisiness that might otherwise make the determina-
             tion random).
               4    Review of General Psychology, APA, 2013, Vol 17, No 4, 374
                                                         Free Will       65

  In particular, note that a special kind of decision might occur
when the macro mind finds that none of the current options are
good enough for the agent’s character and values to approve. The
macro mind then might figuratively say to the micro mind, “Think
again!” Thus we can say that the agent has control over the gen-




                                                                          Chapter 4
eration of alternative possibilities, without controlling the specific
new idea that may come to mind




   Many philosophers have puzzled how an agent could do oth-
erwise in exactly the same prior circumstances. Since humans
are intelligent organisms, and given the myriad of possible cir-
cumstances, it is impossible that an agent is ever in exactly the
same circumstances. The agent’s memory (stored in the experience
recorder and reproducer) of earlier similar circumstances guaran-
tees that.
   The two-stage model may make an artificial temporal separa-
tion between micro-mind creative randomness and macro-mind
deliberative evaluation. These two capabilities of the mind can
clearly be going on at the same time. That can be visualized by the
occasional decision to go back and think again, when the available
alternatives are not good enough to satisfy the demands of the
agent’s character and values, or by noticing that the subconscious
micro mind might be still generating possibilities while the macro
mind is in the middle of evaluations.
   Finally, not all decisions in the two-stage model end with an
adequately determined “de-liberation” or perhaps better we can
call it simply self-determination. Many times the evaluation of the
possibilities produces two or more alternatives that seem more or
less of equal value.
   In this case, the agent may choose randomly among those
alternatives, yet have very good reasons to take responsibility for
whichever one is chosen. This is related to the ancient liberty of
indifference.
        66       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                I like to call such a decision an “undetermined liberty,” because it
             remains undetermined at the moment of the decision. Though not
             determined by the deliberations, we can say that the agent “deliber-
             ately” chooses at random between equal options.
Chapter 4




               Undetermined liberties include Robert Kane’s Self-Forming
             Actions, although Kane limits his SFAs to “torn” decisions between
             moral and self-interested alternatives.
             Neuroscientific Evidence for the Two-Stage Model
               Benjamin Libet’s famous experiments are widely cited by com-
             patibilists and determinists as showing that the decision has been
             made a long time before the conscious will can act. We shall inter-
             pret them as supporting the temporal sequence in the two-stage
             model of free will, creating new information in the first stage.
                The original discovery that an electrical potential (of just a few
             microvolts - μV) is visible in the brain long before the appearance of
             conscious will was made by Kornhuber and Deecke (1964). They
             called it a “Bereitschaftspotential” or readiness potential.




               Figure 4-1. Kornhuber and Deecke “readiness potential”

                The neurobiologist John Eccles had speculated that the subject
             must become conscious of the intention to act before the onset of
             this readiness potential. Benjamin Libet decided to test Eccles’s idea.
                                                            Free Will       67

   Libet’s 1983 experiments measured the time when the subject
became consciously aware of the decision to move the finger. Libet
created a dot on the screen of an oscilloscope circulating like the
hand of a clock. The subject was asked to note the position of the
moving dot when he/she was aware of the conscious decision to
move a finger or wrist..




                                                                             Chapter 4
   As shown on the RP diagram, Libet found that although con-
scious awareness of the decision preceded the subject’s finger motion
by only 200 milliseconds (the up arrow), the rise in the readiness
potential was clearly visible at about 550 milliseconds before the flex
of the wrist (down arrow). The subject showed unconscious activity
to flex about 350 milliseconds before reporting conscious awareness
of the decision to flex. Indeed an earlier very slight rise in the readi-
ness potential can be seen as early as 1.5 seconds before the action.
  Of course the kinds of deliberative and evaluative processes that
are essential for free will involve much longer time periods than
those studied by Libet. Nevertheless, we can correlate the begin-
nings of the readiness potential (350ms before Libet’s “conscious
will” time “W” appears) with the early stage of the two-stage model,
when alternative possibilities are being generated, in part at random.




  Figure 4-2. Readiness potential and the two-stage model

   The early stage may be attributed to the subconscious, which
is capable of considering multiple alternatives (William James’
        68          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             “blooming, buzzing confusion”) that would congest the low-data-
             rate single stream of consciousness.
                Alfred Mele criticized the interpretation of the Libet results on
             two grounds. First, the appearance of the RP a half-second or more
             before the action in no way makes the RP the cause of the action.
Chapter 4




             It may simply mark the beginning of forming an intention to act.
             In our two-stage model, it corresponds to the agent’s thoughts that
             generate possible options, which may create new information.
                Libet himself argued that even if a decison has been made, there
             is enough time after the W moment (a window of opportunity per-
             haps 50 ms) to veto the action, but Mele’s second criticism points
             out that such examples of “free won’t” would not be captured in
             Libet experiments, because the recording device is triggered by the
             action (typically flicking the wrist) itself.
               Thus, although all Libet experiments ended with the wrist flick-
             ing, we are not justified in assuming that the rise of the RP (well
             before the moment of conscious will) is a cause of the wrist flicking.
               Libet knew that there were very likely other times when the RP
             rose, but which did not lead to a flick of the wrist. All such events
             could create immaterial information about new possibilities, but
             might not be acted upon immediately. Libet noted that in normal
             decisions we might deliberate all day.
                   We should also distinguish between deliberations about what choice of
                   action to adopt (including preplanning of when to act on such a choice),
                   and the final intention to actually “act now.” One may, after all, deliberate
                   all day about a choice but never act... However, conscious will definitely
                   can control whether the act takes place. We may view the unconscious
                   initiatives for voluntary actions as “burbling up” unconsciously in the
                   brain. The conscious will then selects which of these initiatives may go
                   forward to an action, or which ones to veto and abort so no act occurs.5
                We conclude that Libet’s neuroscientific experiments may be
             interpreted as supporting the two-stage model. We know little about
             what goes on in the early rise of the readiness potential. But only
             a dogmatic determinist would claim that it already contains and
             directly causes any later decision.
               5       B. Libet, Mind Time, pp.148-149
                                                               Free Will       69


History of the Free Will Problem6
  In our research on the history of the free will problem, we have
identified several thinkers who developed two-stage solutions to
the classical problem of free will, first William James, then Henri
Poincaré, Jacques Hadamard, Arthur Holly Compton, Karl




                                                                                Chapter 4
Popper, Daniel Dennett, Henry Margenau, Robert Kane,
David Sedley and Anthony Long, Roger Penrose, David
Layzer, Julia Annas, Alfred Mele, John Martin Fischer, Ste-
phen Kosslyn, Storrs McCall and E. J. Lowe, John Searle, and
Martin Heisenberg.7
  Some of course were more clear and comprehensive about the
two stagesthan others, but our goal is to give them all credit.8
  Recently we discovered a possible two-stage argument many cen-
turies before William James.
  Titus Lucretius Carus is our main source for the work of
Epicurus, who provided the first argument for chance with his
“swerve” of the atoms. Lucretius eloquently made Epicurus’ case.
Shortly after describing the swerve, he says:
   “If all motion is always one long chain, and new motion arises out of the
   old in order invariable, and if first-beginnings do not make by swerving
   a beginning of motion so as to break the decrees of fate, whence comes
   this free will?”9
   But now we have found evidence that Lucretius made the case
for alternative thoughts coming to mind before a willed decision,
and the possible new ideas sound very much like Epicurus’ random
swervings.
   Now listen, and hear what things stir the mind, and learn in a few words
   whence these things come into the mind. In the first place I tell you
   that many images of things are moving about in many ways and in all
   directions.10

  6    Doyle, 2011, chapter 7 is a 60-page history of the problem
  7    See Doyle, 2011, chapter 12, for these two-stage solutions.
  8    Also see informationphilosopher.com/freedom/two-stage_models.html
  9    De Rerum Natura, Book 2, 251
  10   De Rerum Natura, Book 4, 722
        70          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               This also sounds a great deal like William James’ “blooming,
             buzzing, confusion” of the subconscious and Libet’s “burbling up.”
                even in things plainly visible you can observe that, it is just as if the
                thing were all the while withdrawn and far removed from you. Then
                what wonder is it, if the mind misses everything except what it is itself
Chapter 4




                intent on?11
                Lucretius again sounds like James, who explains choice as the
             focusing of attention. Next comes the will (voluntas).
                Next I will say how it comes about that we can carry onwards our steps
                when we please...I say in the first place images of movement come in
                contact with our mind, and strike the mind, as I said before, After this
                comes will; for no one ever begins anything until the intelligence has
                first foreseen what it wills to do.12
               So Lucretius may have long ago captured the essence of the
             temporal sequence in our two-stage model.
               The classic problem of free will is to reconcile an element of free-
             dom with the apparent determinism in a world of causes and effects,
             a world of events in a great causal chain.
               Determinists deny any such freedom.
                Compatibilists redefine freedom. Although they say that our will
             is determined by prior events in the causal chain (including our rea-
             sons, motives, etc.), our will is in turn causing and determining our
             actions. Compatibilists say that determinism of our actions by our
             will allows us to take moral responsibility for our actions. This is
             correct. The second stage of our model makes us responsible.
                Libertarians think the will is free when a choice can be made that
             is not pre-determined or necessitated by prior events. The will is free
             when alternative choices could have been made with the same pre-
             existing conditions.
               Freedom of the will allows us to say, “I could have chosen (and
             done) otherwise.”
                In a deterministic world, everything that happens follows ineluc-
             tably from natural or divine laws. There is but one possible future.
             We cannot have chosen otherwise,
                In the more common sense view, we are free to shape our future,
             to be creative, to be unpredictable.
               11     De Rerum Natura, Book 4, 815
               12     De Rerum Natura, Book 4, 881
                                                             Free Will    71

   From the ancient Epicureans to modern quantum mechani-
cal indeterminists, some thinkers have suggested that chance or
randomness is an explanation for freedom, an explanation for the
unpredictability of a free and creative act. A truly random event
would break the causal chain and nullify determinism, providing




                                                                           Chapter 4
room for human freedom.
   Freedom of human action does require the randomness of abso-
lute unpredictability, but if our actions are the direct consequence
of a random event, we cannot feel responsible. That would be mere
indeterminism, as unsatisfactory as determinism.
  Moreover, indeterminism appears to threaten reason itself, which
seems to require certainty and causality to establish truth, knowl-
edge, and the laws of nature.
   Most philosophers in all ages have been committed to one or
more of the dogmas of determinism,13 refusing to admit any indeter-
minism or chance. Aristotle said chance was “obscure to human
reason.” Chryssipus described the case of “indeterminism is true”
as a disaster for reason. David Hume found “no medium betwixt
chance and necessity.” Many theologians thought chance atheistic,
doubting God’s omniscience,
  Many scientists agree that science is predicated on strict causality
and predictability, without which science itself, considered as the
search for causal laws, would be impossible.
  For those scientists, laws of nature would not be “laws” if they
were only statistical and probabilistic. Sadly for them, all laws of
nature turn out to be thoroughly statistical and our predictions
merely probable, though with probabilities approaching certainty.
Science is irreducibly statistical.
  But fortunately, for large objects the departure from deterministic
laws is unobservable. Probabilities become indistinguishable from
certainties, and we can show there is an “adequate (or statistical)
determinism”14
  Important elements of the model have been proposed by many
philosophers since Aristotle, the first indeterminist. A number of
modern philosophers and scientists, have proposed models of free

  13   See Doyle, 2011, chapter 9, for a review of many determinisms.
  14   See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/adequate_determinism.html
        72          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             will. But none of them has been able to locate the randomness so
             as to make free will “intelligible,” as libertarian Robert Kane puts it.
                The insoluble problem for previous free-will models has been to
             explain how a random event in the brain can be timed and located
             - perfectly synchronized! - so as to be relevant to a specific deci-
Chapter 4




             sion. The answer is it cannot be, for the simple reason that quantum
             events are totally unpredictable.
                The two-stage model is not a single random event, one per deci-
             sion, but many random events in the brain as a result of ever-present
             noise, both quantum and thermal noise, inherent in any informa-
             tion storage and communication system.
                The mind, like all biological systems, has evolved in the presence
             of constant noise and is able to ignore that noise, unless the noise
             provides a significant competitive advantage, which it clearly does
             as the basis for freedom and for creativity that brings new informa-
             tion into the universe.
                Let’s see how randomness in the two-stage model is never the
             direct cause of our decisions. Decisions are always adequately, i.e.,
             statistically, but near certainly, determined by reasons and motives.
                We assume that there are always many contributing causes for
             any event, and in particular for a mental decision. In both the New-
             ell-Simon “Blackboard” model15 and Bernard Baars’ “Theater of
             Consciousness” and “Global Workspace” models,16 there are many
             competing possibilities for our next thought or action. Where do
             they come from? And, most importantly, does the agent have any
             control over their generation?
               Each of these possibilities is the result of a sequence of events
             that goes back in an assumed causal chain until its beginning in an
             uncaused event. Aristotle called this original event an arche (ἀρχῆ),
             one whose major contributing cause (or causes) was itself uncaused.
                What this means is that tracing any particular sequence of events
             back in time will come to one event - a “starting point” or “fresh
             start” - Aristotle’s origin or arche - the dreaded “causa sui.” Today we
             say it must involve quantum indeterminacy.

               15     Newell and Simon, 1972
               16     Baars, 1997
                                                                Free Will      73

  Whether a particular thing happens, says Aristotle, may depend
on a series of causes that
    “goes back to some starting-point, which does not go back to something
    else. This, therefore, will be the starting-point of the fortuitous, and
    nothing else is the cause of its generation.”17




                                                                                Chapter 4
   We can thus in principle assign times, or ages, to the starting
points of the contributing causes of a decision. Some of these may
in fact go back before the birth of an agent, hereditary causes for
example. To the extent that such random causes adequately deter-
mine an action, we can understand why hard determinists think
that the agent has no control over such actions. Of course if we can
always opt out of an action at the last moment, so we retain control,
even if the origin of the option was inherited.
   Other contributing causes may be traceable back to environmen-
tal and developmental events, perhaps education, perhaps simply
life experiences, that were “character-forming” events. These and
genetic or hereditary causes would now be present in the mind of
the agent as fixed habits, with a very high probability of “adequately
determining” the agent’s actions in many situations.
  But other contributing causes of a specific option may have been
undetermined up to the very near past, even fractions of a second
before an important decision. The causal chains for these contribut-
ing causes may originate in the noisy brain. They include the free
generation of new alternative possibilities for thought or action
during the agent’s deliberations. They fit Aristotle’s criteria for causes
that “depend on us” (ἐφ’ ἡμῖν) and originate “within us” (ἐv ἡμῖν).
   Causes with these most recent starting points are the fundamen-
tal reason why an agent can do otherwise in what are essentially (up
to that starting point) the same circumstances.
   These alternatives are likely generated from our internal knowl-
edge of practical possibilities based on our past experience. They
are stored in our experience recorder and reproducer. Those that
are handed up by the ERR for consideration to Baars’ “executive
function” in his “Theater of Consciousness” may be filtered to some
extent by unconscious processes to be “within reason.” They likely
consist of random variations of similar actions willed many times
in the past.
  17    Metaphysics Book VI 1027b12-14
        74          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Note that the evaluation and selection of one of these possibilities
             by the will is as deterministic and causal a process as anything that a
             determinist or compatibilist could ask for, consistent with our cur-
             rent knowledge of the physical world.
               Remember also that instead of strict causal determinism, the
Chapter 4




             world offers only adequate (or statistical) determinism, and it is the
             random origins of possibilities that provides libertarian freedom of
             thought and adequately determined but not pre-determined action.
               Why have philosophers been unable for millennia to accept the
             common sense view that humans are free? Partly because their logic
             and language preoccupation makes them say that either determin-
             ism or indeterminism is “true,” and the other must be “false.” This is
             the standard (but flawed) argument against free will.
                But there is a deeper concern. If the origin of possibilities is truly
             random, have we lost the control needed to assert moral responsibil-
             ity? Can the two-stage model provide a measure of control over the
             creative generation of alternative possibilities that does not make
             them pre-determined? Let us see.
             The Standard Argument Against Free Will
                Simple variations of this standard argument are found through-
             out the somewhat unsophisticated philosophical literature on free
             will,18 and even in some of the most extensively cited work, for
             example, Galen Strawson’s “Basic Argument on the Impossibility
             of Moral Responsibility.”19
               The standard argument has two parts.
               If determinism is the case, the will is not free.
               If indeterminism and real chance exist, our will would not be in
             our control, we could not be responsible for randomly caused actions.
               The two-stage model provides the two essential requirements
             needed to defeat this standard argument
                The first requirement is some indeterminism (objective chance)
             to break the causal chain of determinism and to generate creative
             thoughts and alternative possibilities for action. But this indeter-
             minism must somehow not destroy our moral responsibility. It must
             not be the direct cause of action.
               18     See Doyle, 2011, chapter 4, for dozens of examples.
               19     Philosophical Studies: Vol. 75, No. 1/2, (Aug., 1994), pp. 5-24
                                                        Free Will        75

   Thus the second requirement is that our deliberations and evalu-
ations are “adequately” (or statistically) determined, so that we can
be responsible for our choices, so that they are “up to us.”
   “Adequate” (i.e., statistical) determinism means that the indeter-
ministic alternative possibilities themselves are not the direct cause




                                                                          Chapter 4
of our actions. The cause is the agent’s decision.
   Objective chance in the generation of alternatives means that at
least some of the possibilities are not causally determined by imme-
diately preceding events, so they are unpredictable by any agency,
including us. They can then be the source of the creativity that adds
new information to the universe.
  Chance gives us the “free” in free will.
  Adequate determinism gives us the “will” in free will.
  Thoughts come to us freely. Actions go from us willfully.
  We must admit indeterminism, but not permit it to produce random
actions as some Determinists mistakenly fear.
  We must also limit the determinism, but not eliminate it as some
Libertarians mistakenly think is necessary.
   The evaluation and careful deliberation of all the available
possibilities, both ingrained habits and creative new ideas, can be
recognized as “self-determination.” This makes us the responsible
“agent cause” of our actions.
    But we must not thing that our “self-determination” was in any
way pre-determined before we began to consider our possibilities.
Self-determination is only “adequately and statistically” determined.
It is not completely immune from random noise.
   Compatibilists should be comfortable that the reasons, motives,
feelings and desires of the agent are causal factors that were evalu-
ated by the agent during the second-stage deliberations and the ulti-
mate choice of an action.
  This is all that is needed for the agent to accept what Robert
Kane calls “ultimate responsibility” for the action.
  But some event acausality is a prerequisite for any kind of agent
causality that is not pre-determined by the moments before delib-
erations begin. This acausality is the quantum indeterminism, the
        76       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             ontological chance, that accompanies the new information creation
             in the first stage of the two-stage model, where the agent freely gen-
             erates alternative possibilities for action.
                The two-stage model of free will proves that our actions are not pre-
             determined, even from moments just before we begin thinking about
Chapter 4




             freely generating new options for action.
                We can summarize our criticism of the standard argument against
             free will in a few simple lines.
                “Free Will” is really two independent stages that combine a
             limited indeterminism with a limited determinism.
               First comes the “free” generation of alternative possibilities, then
             our adequately determined “willed” actions.
               Our thoughts are free. Our actions are willed.
               First “free,” then “will.”
             Possible Worlds and Alternative Possibilities
                In the twentieth century the study of modal logic (the truth con-
             ditions for statements about necessity and possibility) led to a model
             theory involving possible worlds. The philosopher David Lewis
             maintained there are an infinite number of possible worlds, all just
             as real for their inhabitants as our actual world. The physicist Hugh
             Everett III said that the world splits in two whenever a quantum
             experiment is performed.
               Lewis and Everett were materialists and determinists. In their
             worlds everything is determined by the laws of nature and the fixed
             past. Each world has but one future. Free will is an illusion.
                But Saul Kripke, who formulated the theory of possible world
             semantics for modal logic, described the use of possible worlds as
             representations of how our actual world might be. “‘Possible worlds’
             are total ‘ways the world might have been’,” he said, which means
             they can describe the alternative possibilities of our two-stage model
             for free will.
                                                         Free Will         77

   They are “counterfactual situations” in Kripke’s sense, involving
a single individual. Suppose the agent is considering five different
courses of action. During the second stage of evaluation and delib-
eration only one of the five options (each a “possible world”) will
become actualized.




                                                                            Chapter 4
  Note that Kripke’s possible worlds are extremely close to one
another, “nearby” in the sense of their total information content,
the difference between them is very small amount of information
compared to the typical examples given in possible worlds cases.
   For typical cases of a free decision, the possible worlds require
only small differences in the mind of a single person. Kripke argued
against the thesis that mind and body (or brain) are identical. In this
example, it would only be the thoughts in the mind of the agent that
pick out the possible world that will be actualized.
Free Will and Creativity
  Creativity requires that new information come into the world. It
must be information that was not implicit in earlier states of the
world. Information is only fixed in a deterministic universe.20
  It is new information creation that explains agent causality.
  When we create new information, we do it freely. Our thoughts
are “free creations of the human mind,” as Einstein said.
  Humans are conspicuous creators and consumers of new infor-
mation structures, altering the face of planet Earth. And we create
the constructed ideal world of thought, of intellect, of spirit, includ-
ing the invention of the laws of nature, followed by the discoveries
that confirm them experimentally.
  We are authors of our lives and co-creators of our natural world.

  20    See appendix A.
