                                                About the Cover
   Information philosophy can now suggest plausible solutions for a
number of well-known problems in philosophy and physics.
   The philosophical problems include metaphysics - what is there?,
the problem of knowledge - how do we know what exists?, a theory
of mind and the mind/body problem - can an immaterial mind move
the material body?, the “hard problem” of consciousness, freedom of
the will, theories of ethics - is there an objective universal Good?,
what is Evil?, and problems from theology - does God exist?, is God
responsible for the evil in the world, what is immortality?




   Another set of problems with plausible solutions comes from
physics and the philosophy of science. They include an informa-
tion interpretation of quantum mechanics to clarify the muddled
Copenhagen interpretation, the collapse of the wave function,
entanglement, decoherence and the quantum-to-classical transi-
tion, the universe expansion as the fundamental arrow of arrow of
time, which requires microscopic irreversibility, the emergence of
the biological and mental from the physical and chemical, and the
creative process behind the origin of cosmic information structures
that made biology possible.
What Philosophers Are Saying about Free Will

                       “How Free Are You?”, asks the well-known
                    determinist philosopher Ted Honderich,
                    in his best-selling book. Though he is its
                    foremost champion, Honderich frankly char-
                    acterizes determinism as a “black thing” and
                    an “incubus” which gives him dismay.


                      “Did My Neurons
                   Make Me Do It?”, asks
                   Nancey Murphy, sum-
marizing the concern of philosophers who
think neuroscience will reveal us to be just
biological machines that are running pro-
grams determined by our heredity and envi-
ronment, by our genes and our upbringing,


                       “Is Conscious Will an Illusion?” Harvard
                    psychologist Daniel Wegner thinks so.
                    We think we do things freely for good rea-
                    sons, but Wegner finds we often confabulate
                    reasons after the fact, when we are challenged
                    to provide the motivations for our actions.


  “Living Without Free Will” is required,
according to hard incompatibilist philoso-
pher Derk Pereboom. And philosopher
Galen Strawson provides a logical and
“basic” argument to prove that we cannot
possibly be responsible for our actions,
because they are the consequences of a
causal chain that goes back to times long
before we were born.
       Why The Free Will Scandal Should Matter to You

   Academic philosophers, psychologists, and neuroscientists
teach their students to believe that their actions may be deter-
mined and beyond their control, that free will is an illusion.
   Like the workers in Charlie Chaplin’s Modern Times, humans
are seen as cogs in a vast biological
machine. If scientists could show
that this is so, and give us reasonable
evidence for it, we would have little
choice but to accept the science. Or,
we could do as Immanuel Kant did
in his great Critique of Pure Reason.
We might doubt Reason to make room for Belief in Free Will.
   But physical and biological science can produce no such
evidence. Iron-clad proof that determinism is true is beyond
the reach of empirical science, since evidence is always prone to
observational errors, and physics today is indeterministic.
   Nevertheless, some philosophers accept the faulty reason-
ing that freedom exists only on some metaphysical plane. If you
accept freedom as a mystery beyond explanation, a gift of God
beyond understanding by our finite minds, perhaps you need not
worry and may not need this book.
   But this ivory-tower thinking should still matter to you. Why?
Because we have good evidence that telling young people they
are determined beings, and that they are not responsible for their
actions, actually makes them behave less morally, more willing to
cheat their colleagues in innocent games, for example.
   Whether you are one of those young students, or one of the
older generation sending your children to school, or perhaps one
of the faculty teaching our young, you should be concerned about
what we are doing to the life hopes and moral fibre of our youth.
   If you see something scandalous in this situation, this book
provides you with the resources you need to do something to
change what we are teaching in our schools.
La Trahison des Philosophes...
In a world full of problems, they sat doing puzzles.

Qui docet doctores?

Tantum philosophia potuit suadere malorum.

Werte ohne Freiheit sind nutzlos,
Freiheit ohne Werte ist absurd.

Ich mußte also den Determinismus und den Indeterminismus
aufheben, um für die Freiheit Platz zu bekommen.

Our thoughts are free. Our actions are willed.
FREE WILL

 The Scandal in Philosophy




Online updates are available here:
informationphilosopher.com/books/scandal
Send comments to bobdoyle@informationphilosopher.com




                           Bob Doyle
          The Information Philosopher
                   “beyond logic and language”
                                     m inis         m
                            De t e r

                                            a t i b i lism
                                    C   omp              minis
                rminis
                       m                       term
           Dete                       S oft De
   Hard
                                                            pati    bilism
                                                   ft C o m
                                               So
                     ism
          compatibil
Hard I
       n                                                                     Inc
                                                 atibi        lism
                                           o m p
                                    S emic
       nism
Illusio                                                       ism
                                              m p a tibil
                                      w Inc o
                              Narro
          ilism
Im possib                                                  ilism
                                               c o m p atib
                                   Sof    t In
                                                                             a yI
          an    M odel                                               L e e w
                                                                               at
   Valeri                                     p a tibilism            (Altern
                                            m
                           o u r c e Inco uence)
                         S               l Seq
                            (A   c t u a
                                                               ited             D
                                                         L i m
                                M o d            el with
                         Stag e
                Two-
                                            This book on the web
                            informationphilosopher.com/freedom
                          m inis  m
                 de t e r
           In
                                      i a nis   m
                              r t a r

             FREE WILL
                         Libe
                                                           -Ca      usal
                                                     Agent
                             - C ausal
                    Ev e n t
                                                                  C aus    al
                                                          N o n -
                                      SFA
       a t i b i lism
co  mp                                       o f t C a usal  ity
                                            S
                  ThetibScandal
                        ilism   in Philosophy
           Inco   mpa                                          r t arianism
   r o a d                                               i b e
 B                                              So  ft L
                        arian ism                                               ion
                 Libert                                        t e r m inat
            st                                           lf-De
   Mode                                              Se
                                Cogito
       p a t i b ilism
Incom uences)                                                               m
tive S
       eq                                                t e r m inis
                                        e d In        de
                                    i t
                          a  nd Lim
     r m i n ism
Dete                                      Bob Doyle
                         The Information Philosopher
                                  “beyond logic and language”
First edition, 2016
© 2016, Bob Doyle, The Information Philosopher


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in
any form by electronic or mechanical means (including photo-
copying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without
the prior permission of The Information Philosopher.

Publisher’s Cataloging-in-Publication data
(Prepared by The Donohue Group)

Doyle, Bob. 1936–

  Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved? /
Bob Doyle. – Cambridge, Mass. : I-Phi Press, 2016.

  p. ; cm. Includes bibliographic references and index.
  ISBN: 978-0-9835802-8-7
  ISBN(eBook): 978-0-9835802-9-4
  1. Philosophy. 2. Physics. 3. Information
science--Philosophy. I. Title.

BD21.Dxx 2016
123.5—dc22

I-Phi Press
Cambridge, MA, USA
Dedication
  To the hundreds of philosophers and scientists with web pages
on the Information Philosopher website.
   After collecting and reading their works for the past six decades,
I have tried to capture their essential contributions to philosophy
and physics, as much as practical with excerpts in their own words.
  Special thanks to many who have sent suggestions and
corrections to ensure that their work is presented as accurately
as possible for the students and young professionals who use
the I-Phi website as an entry point into some great intellectual
problems that they may help to solve in the coming decades.
   As a scientist and inventor, the author has contributed some
modest tools to help individuals and communities communicate,
to share information. So he would like also to dedicate this work
to some of the creators of the world’s fundamental information-
sharing technologies.
  Alexander Graham Bell, Alan Turing, Claude Shannon, John
von Neumann, Norbert Wiener, Steve Jobs, Tim Berners-Lee,
Mark Zuckerberg, Jimmy Wales, Larry Page, Sergei Brin.
  Information philosophy builds on the intersection of computers
and communications. These two technologies will facilitate the
sharing of knowledge around the world in the very near future,
when almost everyone will have a smartphone and affordable
access to the Internet and the World-Wide Web.
   Information is like love. Giving it to others does not reduce it.
It is not a scarce economic good. Sharing it increases the Sum of
information in human minds.
  Information wants to be free.


  Bob Doyle
  Cambridge, MA
  August, 2016
x        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


    Contents
    Preface                                                             xvi
    1. Introduction                                                         3
       How to Use this Book, 1; On Omniscience, Omnipotence, Benev-
    olence, 5; About Information Philosophy and Physics, 8; Two Steps in
    Cosmic Information Creation, 12; Information and Predictability, 13
    2. The Free Will Scandal                                            14
      A Knowledge Scandal, 15; A Moral Scandal?, 17
    3. Freedom                                                          18
      Hobart’s Determination, 23
    4. The Standard Argument Against Free Will                          26
       Part One - The Determinism Objection, 28; Part Two - The
    Randomness Objection, 29; Examples of the Standard Argument,
    30; What’s Wrong with the Standard Argument?, 46; The Standard
    Argument in Antiquity, 50; Summary, 53
    5. Requirements for Libertarian Free Will                           54
      Part One - The Randomness Requirement, 55; Part Two - The
    Determinism Requirement, 56; Part Three - The Responsibility
    Requirement, 56; Freedom, Will, and Moral Responsibility, 57
    6. A Taxonomy of Free Will Positions                                58
      Van Inwagen’s Incompatibilism Changes the Taxonomy, 60
    7. The History of the Free Will Problem                             68
       The Presocratics, 70; Aristotle, 71; The Stoics, 74; Hellenistic
    Thinking, 75; Early Christians, 75; Classicists, 76-83; Scholastics,
    83; The Renaissance, 84; The Rationalists, 84; The Empiricists, 85;
    Probabilists, 89; Kant, 90; Five Post-Kantian Shocks, 92; Evolution ,
    92; Thermodynamics, 92; Logic, 93; Quantum Mechanics, 93; Math-
    ematics, 93; Determinists, 94; Libertarians, 94; Compatibilists, 94;
    Germans in the 19th century, 95; Rise of Statistical Thinking, 96;
    Quantum Indeterminacy, 102; Quantum Mysteries, 109; Free Will
    Specialists, 112; Experimental Philosophy, 128; Forking Paths, 130
    8. Actual, Possible, Probable                                      132
      Actualism, Possibilism, Probabilism, 143
    9. Determinisms                                                    144
      The Determinisms, 146
                                           Table of Contents             xi

10. Libertarianism                                                 152
11. Compatibilism                                                  156
  Giving Compatibilists What They Say They Want, 158
12. Two-Stage Models of Free Will                                  160
  James, 161; Poincaré, 165; Hadamard, 165; Compton, 166; Adler,
167; Popper, 168; Margenau, 170; Dennett 171; Kane, 172; Long and
Sedley, 176; Penrose, 177; Annas, 177; Mele, 178; Fischer, 179; Libet
and Kosslyn, 181; Searle, 183; Heisenberg, 184
13. The Cogito Model                                               186
  Micro Mind 190; Macro Mind, 192; Six Critical Aspects Of Chance,
195; Temporal Sequence, 196; A Mind, 197; Second Thoughts, 199;
Undetermined Liberties, 200; Free Thoughts, Willed Actions, 200;
The Cogito Compared to Other Models, 201
14. Objections to Two-Stage Models                                 204
   The Strongest Motive Objection, 205; Daniel Dennett’s Objections,
206; Robert Kane’s Objections, 207; Richard Double’s Objections to
Kane’s “dual rational control.”, 210; Alfred Mele’s Doubts about his
own “Modest Libertarianism.”, 211; Randolph Clarke’s Objections
to Dennett, Mele, Ekstrom, and Kane., 211; The Luck Objections of
Thomas Nagel, Bernard Williams, and Alfred Mele, 216; Thomas Na-
gel, 217; Bernard Williams, 218; Alfred Mele, 219, How the Cogito
Model Meets the Objections, 220
15. The Physics of Free Will                                       222
  Quantum Physics, 225; Special Relativity and the Block Universe,
225; Nonlocality and Entanglement, 228; The Free Will Theorem, 230;
The Free Will Axiom, 231; The Contribution of Quantum Mechanics,
232
16. The Biology of Free Will                                       234
  Creativity in the Immune System, 236; Bacterial Chemotaxis, 237;
An Error Detection and Correction System, 238; Neurotransmitter
Release as a Noise Source, 238; Four Levels of Selection, 239
17. The Neuroscience of Free Will                                  240
  Libet’s Experiment, 241; Libet and the Two-Stage Model, 243
18. Consciousness                                                  244
  The Experience Recorder Reproducer (ERR), 245; Four Levels of
Consciousness, 247
xii        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

      19. Moral Responsibility                                            248
         Peter Strawson Changed the Subject, 250; Are only Moral Deci-
      sions Free?, 251; Naturalism and Moral Responsibility, 252; Even
      If Determinism Were True 253; The Acquired Freedom of Self-
      Perfection, 253
      20. Separability of Free Will and Moral Responsibility              254
        “Free” from “Will”, 256; “Moral” from “Responsibility.” 258; “Free
      Will” from “Moral Responsibility,” 259; Separate Punishment, 260
      21. Naturalism                                                      262
      22. Creativity and Free Will                                        274
        Blind Variation and Selective Retention (BVSR), 276
      23. Ted Honderich’s Determinism                                     278
        The Failure of Compatibilism and Incompatibilism, 280; Conse-
      quences of Determinism, 284; On Consciousness and Radical Exter-
      nalism, 288; Consciousness as Existence, 290
      24. Robert Kane’s Libertarianism                                    294
         Kane’s Libertarian Free Will Model, 297; Free Will and Values, 298;
      The Significance of Free Will, 303; A Contemporary Introduction to
      Free Will, 305; Four Views on Free Will, 310; The Cogito Model, 315;
      Kane’s SFAs, 316; Kane’s Businesswoman, 321; Kane in Barcelona,
      320; Kane at Harvard, 322; The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, 323
      25. Daniel Dennett’s Compatibilism                                  324
        Evolution as an Algorithmic Process, 329; Quantum Indeterminism
      Might Matter?, 330; Laplace’s Demon, 331; Intelligent Designers, 331;
      Frankfurt Controllers, 332; Dennett’s Eavesdropper, 332; Creating
      New Memes, 333; Valerian Model, 333; Who’s Afraid?, 334
      26. Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                             336
         Agnostic Autonomous Agents, 338; Modest Libertarianism, 338;
      Problem about Luck, 340; Modest Libertarianism (redux), 341; Mele’s
      Other Models for Free Will, 347; The Fischer/Mele Hypothesis, 350;
      Libet Experiments, 350; Big Questions in Free Will, 351
      27. What If?                                                        352
        What if Libertarians Had Accepted What Dan Dennett Gave To
      Them In 1978?, 353; It takes two - Cogito and Intelligo, 355; What If
      Kane and Dennett Had Done Otherwise?, 356
                                                Table of Contents                   xiii

28. Comprehensive Compatibilism                                            360
29. Ending The Scandal                                                     366
30. The Cosmic Creation Process                                            374
   Cosmic Creation and Free Will, 381; Information and Love, 383
31. Some Other Problems in Philosophy and Physics                          384
   Some Philosophical Problems, 384, Some Physics Problems, 386
Glossary of Terms                                                          390
Actualism, Actual Sequence, Adequate Determinism, Agent Causal, Agnostic,
Akrasia, Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Sequences, Asymmetry,
Authenticity, Autonomy, Avoidability, Basic Argument, Broad Incompatibilism,
Causality, Causa Sui, Chance, CNC, Compatibilism, Consequence Argument,
Consequentialism, Control, Degrees of Freedom, Deliberation, Determination,
Determined De-Liberation, Determinism, Determinism Objection, Direct
Argument, Do Otherwise, Downward Causation, Dual Control, Epistemic
Freedom, Event Causal, Fixed Past, Foreknowledge, Frankfurt Examples,
Freedom of Action, Free Will, Future Contingency, Guidance Control, Hard
Determinism, Hard Incompatibilism, Hierarchy Of Desires, Illusionism,
Incompatibilism, Indeterminism, Indirect Argument, Information Objection,
Intellect, Kane-Widerker Objection, Laws of Nature, Leeway Incompatibilism,
Liberty of Indifference, Liberty of Spontaneity, Logical Fallacy, Luck Objection,
Manipulation Argument, Master Argument, Mind Argument, Modal Fallacy,
Modest Libertarianism, Moral Luck, Moral Responsibility, Moral Restrictivism,
Moral Sentiments, Moral Skepticism, Narrow Incompatibilism, Naturalism,
Naturalistic Fallacy, Ontological, Origination, Ought From Is, Ought Implies
Can, Pre-Determinism, Principle of Alternate Possibilities, Principle of
Bivalence, Possible Worlds, Probability, Quantum Mechanics, Randomness
Objection, Reactive Attitudes, Reasons-Responsive, Regulative Control,
Restrictivism, Retributivism, Revisionism, Rule Beta, Same Circumstances,
Self-Determination, Self-Forming Action, Self-Perfection, Self-Realization,
Semicompatibilism, Soft Causality, Soft Compatibilism, Soft Determinism,
Soft Incompatibilism, Soft Libertarianism, Source Incompatibilism, Standard
Argument, Strongest Motive, Tracing, Traditional Argument, Transfer
Principle, Ultimacy, Undetermined Liberties, Up To Us, Volition, Voluntarism,
Weakness of Will, Yes-No Objection
Bibliography                                                               430
   Free Will Anthologies, 445
Index                                                                      448
Philosophers and Scientists on the I-Phi Website                           456
xiv      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


      List of Figures
       Figure 1-1. For a Laplace demon, information a constant of nature. 9
       Figure 1-2. Information decreases in a closed system.                 10
       Figure 1-3. Information increases as entropy increases.               11
       Figure 1-4. Entropy flows                                             11
       Figure 3-1. Kane’s Incompatibilist Mountain (time-reversed)           22
       Figure 4-1. Kane’s Incompatibilist Mountain.                          44
       Figure 6-1. Traditional categories of the free will debates.          59
       Figure 6-2. Van Inwagen’s compatibilism-incompatibilism.              62
       Figure 6-3. Taxonomy of Free Will Positions                           63
       Figure 7-1. Forking paths in the free will debates.                  130
       Figure 8-1. De Moivre’s normal distribution.                         138
       Figure 8-2. The two-slit experiment                                  141
       Figure 8-3. The wave function has collapsed.                         142
       Figure 8-4. The probability of winning collapses instantly.          142
       Figure 8-5. Justifying the traditional taxonomy.                     143
       Figure 11-1. A compatibilist-incompatibilist taxonomy.               159
       Figure 13-1. Decisions have many contributing causes                 189
       Figure 13-2. Decision as a single moment in time.                    197
       Figure 13-3. Decision as a two-stage temporal process.               198
       Figure 13-4. Decisions are not determined by the alternatives.       198
       Figure 13-5. Doing otherwise in the Cogito model.                    200
       Figure 13-6. Undetermined Liberties and Self-Determination           200
       Figure 15-1. Space-time diagram for fast-approaching observers. 227
       Figure 15-2. Information about probabilities is instantaneous.       229
       Figure 15-3. Electrons prepared with total spin = 0 at the center. 229
       Figure 17-1. Early brain activity is only considering possibilities? 242
       Figure 20-1. Separating Free Will from Moral Responsibility.         255
       Figure 24-1. Kane’s Self-Forming Actions.                            318
       Figure 25-1. Dennett’s Valerian Model.                               333
       Figure 26-1. Mele’s Modest Libertarianism.                           346
       Figure 28-1. A simplified taxonomy of free will categories           364
       Figure 28-2. Decisions considered as a point in time                 364
       Figure 28-3. Doing otherwise in the “same circumstances”             365
                                          Table of Contents            xv

 Figure 28-4. Undetermined liberties and self-determination      365
 Figure 29-1. The Two-Stage Cogito Model of Free Will.           370
 Figure 29-2. A comprehensive compatibilism taxonomy.            373
 Figure 30-1. Info flows into Boltzmann and Shannon Entropy.     376
 Figure 30-2. Cosmological information flows.                    376
 Figure 30-3. Sun to Earth information flow.                     377
 Figure 30-4. Information flows into life                        377
 Figure 30-5. Information flows in a human being.                378
 Figure 30-6. Info processing to maintain our red blood cells.   379
 Figure 30-7. Four levels of information processing.             380
 Figure 30-8. Evolution of behavioral freedom to free will.      382



List of Sidebars
 How to Use This Book                                              1
 What is Information?                                              3
 Omniscience, Omnipotence, Benevolence                             5
 Information and Entropy                                           8
 The Standard Argument Against Free Will                          16
 Hobart’s Determination                                           23
 Two-Stage Models in a Nutshell                                   67
 Five Post-Kantian Shocks to Determinism                          92
 Herman Melville on Chance, Free Will, and Necessity             131
 On Probabilities and Statistics                                 137
 Do the Laws of Physics Deny Human Freedom?                      151
 Six Critical Aspects of Chance                                  195
 Who Got What Right and Wrong?                                   196
 Two-Stage Models Compared to the Cogito Model                   221
      xvi      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                              n i s m
Preface




                                          m i
                                  D  eter

                                                     t i b i l i s m
                                          Co     mpa                 ism
                                                           r min
                     terminism              Sof   tD e t e
            a r d De
          H
                                                                  pati    bilism
                                                         ft C o m
                                                     So
                        ilism
                 mpatib
                                    f a ce
                                Pre                                                Inc
             nco
 Hard I                                             m
                                           atibilis
                                                o     mp
                                          Semic
              nism
   Illusio
                                                         p atib  ilism
                                                In c o m
                                            w
                     sm            Narro
    Impo     ssibili
                                                         p atib   ilism
                                              t In c o m
                                         Sof                                       a yI
                   nM  odel                                                L e e w
                 a                                                                   at
          Valeri                                   p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                 u r c e  Incom nce)
                              So
                                         u a l S eque
                                (Ac    t
                                                                     i m i t e d
                                                           w i t h L
                                         o          d  e l
                                   g e M
                       Two    -Sta
                             m i n is          m
                      dete r                                                  Preface           xvii
              In
                My goal for this book is to provide you with a textbook/guide to
                                              i a nis           m
            the hundreds of pages on my Information Philosopher website
                                      r t a r




                                                                                                    Preface
                                 Libe
            (www.informationphilosopher.com). Information philosophy (I
            like to call it I-Phi) provides insights into some classical unsolved
            philosophical problems,1 but of these the most important to soci-al
            ety may well be the question of free will.                          n t - C aus
                                                                           g e
                The free will problem has been uppermostAin my mind since
            1957, when I first reada
                                         t - C    usal Stanley Eddington’s 1927 book
                                                Arthur
            The Nature             n
                           Evofethe Physical World. Quantum mechanics had in that
            year just invalidated the deterministic physics of previous centu- al
            ries, and Eddington thought that Werner Heisenberg’s                  o  n - C  aus
                                                                                       Uncer-
            tainty Principle might offer support for human freedom.
                                                                               N
                Eddington’s hopes were S                FA by his philosopher contempo-
          t i b i l i s m                            dashed

      mpa
            raries. Quantum randomness is no more of a help to free will than
                                                                                     y said.​
                                                                             salitthey
co          Epicurus’ ancient notion of a “swerve” of the
            If our willed decisions are made at random,
                                                                      C  a u
                                                                           atoms,
                                                               Soft we cannot be morally
            responsible for our
                              t i b i l i s mactions.
            n  c o
                In   the   a I studied quantum physics. My Ph.D. thesis was
                      mp1960’s                                                        a r i a n
                                                                                             on ism
          I                                                                        rt that
  Broad collisions of hydrogen, the simplest of atoms.                o  t L
                                                                       Ifcameibtoebelieve
            the philosophers might be wrong, that S                 quantum physics might
                                              i s m
            do no harm to human
                       i b e r t a r   i a  n    responsibility. Random   thoughts need not
                                                                                           r m  i n ation
             st L
            make       our  actions       random,    as most philosophers  argued,
                                                                                     ete
                                                                                     and  even
   ModeEddington had reluctantly accepted.                               Self-D
                I began a serious study of allitthe
                                                C  o  g  o philosophers and scientists that
           t
            had written
             i b i l i s m on the problem of free will. My library now has over
       pa 150 books
Incom uthrough
                             specifically on free will, and I have access to many more
              en     c  e s )
                                                                                     inis        m
tive S e q                Harvard’s
                                                                          de t e   m
                                           Widener Library. David Chalmers’ PhilPapers.
                                                                                 r
                                                                        In
            org website provides access to over 2000 articles on free will.

                                           i m ited
                 In recent years I moved all my research onto the web, where it
                                         L
                                   a  nd
            is open source and freely available. Information Philosopher
                    s m
              i n i
            has about 140 web pages on philosophers and 65 on scientists,
            m
De      ter with critical analyses of their views. My I-Phi website now shows
            up on the first Google page for many search terms, and is used in
            a number of philosophy courses.
                  1     See Chapter 31 for some of my I-Phi problems.
      xviii     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 When I create new web pages, if the philosophers are alive, I
              write and ask for their criticisms, to ensure that my account of
Preface




              their views is as accurate as I can make it. In many cases, I add new
              material to their Wikipedia page, or create a page.
                 My email exchanges with dozens of philosophers have great-
              ly enhanced my appreciation for the wide variety of their views,
              which you see I have arranged in a taxonomy of two dozen or so
              basic positions. Sadly, I can report little progress in changing the
              fundamental opinions of any philosopher over these years.
                 Most well-known philosophers have made up their minds long
              ago, and have been teaching their views for decades. But by corre-
              sponding with them for years, by writing and rewriting their posi-
              tions, I have come to understand how they fit with one another in
              their various intellectual niches. And by meeting many in person
              in the last year or so, I now think my web site presents as compre-
              hensive an overview of the free will problem as is available any-
              where today.
                 My hope is that philosophy students who read this book, or the
              I-Phi website, will be more likely to arrive at their own views on
              free will, different from that of their professors.
                 I hope to publish a second volume titled Free Will: The Philoso-
              phers and Scientists, with extended analyses of over 200 thinkers.
              But to give you a picture of my methods, this volume will focus
              on my interactions with just four philosophers - Robert Kane,
              the world’s leading libertarian on free will, Ted Honderich,
              the leading determinist, who denies free will, Daniel Dennett,
              the leading compatibilist, who thinks that determinism gives us
              as much free will as we should want, and Alfred Mele, one of
              whose free will models is much like my own.
                 Although I started building the information management tools
              for my I-Phi website in 1999, and began writing pages in earnest
              in 2004, my first philosophical publication appeared only in June
              of 2009, in Nature magazine.2 I was responding to a May 2009
              essay in Nature, “Is Free Will an Illusion,” by the German neuro-
                2    Doyle (2009)
                                                                   Preface            xix

geneticist Martin Heisenberg. Heisenberg described two-stage
freedom in lower animals that he thought might be the basis for




                                                                                        Preface
free will in humans. I agreed, and noted that the two-stage idea
had been put forward by a dozen thinkers since William James in
1884.
   My second publication appeared in William James Studies in
June 2010.3 It traced James’ extraordinary insight into free will,
as independently discovered by other philosophers and scien-
tists down to Heisenberg. This paper led to an invitation to lead
a 90-minute seminar at the William James Symposium (on the
100th anniversary of James’ death) in August, 2010 at Chocorua,
NH, and at Harvard.
   Having seen my Jamesian Free Will paper, Daniel Dennett
kindly invited me to participate in his graduate seminar on free
will in the Fall term at Tufts University.
   Then in October, 2010, an “Experts Meeting” on the question
“Is Science Compatible with Our Desire for Freedom” was con-
vened by the Social Trends Institute in Barcelona, Spain. Orga-
nized by Antoine Suarez of the Center for Quantum Philosophy
in Zurich, Switzerland, the “experts” included several quantum
physicists working with the exotic phenomena of nonlocality and
entanglement to develop quantum cryptography, quantum com-
puting, and possibly explain consciousness and free will.
   The philosophers invited to Barcelona included myself, Robert
Kane, the editor of the Oxford Handbook on Free Will, Alfred
Mele, who leads a four-year, $4.4-million research effort at
Florida State University on the Big Questions in Free Will, funded
by the Templeton Foundation. Martin Heisenberg attended by
video conference from his lab in Würzburg, Germany.
   My Harvard talk and all the Barcelona talks were videotaped
and posted to YouTube in January, 2011.4 I then turned my atten-
tion to producing this printed book and e-book versions of the
Freedom section of the I-Phi website.
   3      Doyle (2010)
   4      http://www.socialtrendsinstitute.org/Activities/Bioethics/Is-Science-Com-
patible-with-Our-Desire-for-Freedom/Free-Will-Debate-on-YouTube.axd
      xx     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              After the introductory Chapter 1, Chapter 2 makes the case
           why the current situation is a scandal in philosophy, not only
Preface




           because of the lack of progress, but because of grave implications
           for moral responsibility and creativity in young people.
              Chapter 3 explores the reasons why the free will problem has
           been so intractable for millennia. In chapter 4, I identify the main
           reason for intractability as a standard argument against free will
           that has been used for centuries, but which is flawed.
              The standard argument has two parts, each of which indepen-
           dently denies free will. It follows that each needs to be addressed
           on its merits, and this gives rise to two independent requirements
           that any satisfactory model of libertarian free will must meet.
           These are set out in Chapter 5.
              Chapter 6 gives names and brief descriptions for the most com-
           mon positions on free will taken over the centuries. This prepares
           us for a lengthy history of the free-will problem in Chapter 7,
           where we can put up milestones and signposts giving credit to the
           original thinkers behind the different positions we identified in
           Chapter 6.
              Chapter 8 introduces actualism, possibilism, and probabilism,
           with a discussion of quantum probabilities.
              Chapters 9 and 10 review the many different kinds of determin-
           ism that have been invented, and what it means for the different
           kinds of compatibilist “free will” that they entail.
              In Chapter 11, I consider some theories of libertarian free will
           that postulate noumenal realms, non-causal events, and meta-
           physical or supernatural mystical gifts of freedom that remain
           mysteries, even for their proponents.
              When the two requirements for libertarian free will of Chapter
           5 are satisfied by a theory, it results in a two-stage model, each
           stage satisfying one of the requirements. The dozen or so think-
           ers who have proposed such a two-stage model are described in
           Chapter 12, and the most plausible and practical current version
           that I call the Cogito model is developed in Chapter 13.
              Chapter 14 is a blow-by-blow discussion of the many objections
           levelled by philosophers against the two-stage model
                                                         Preface         xxi

   Chapters 15 to 17 investigate the physics, the biology, and the
neuroscience of free will. All three are being actively used to




                                                                           Preface
develop strong arguments in favor of determinism. They deserve
careful examination. Chapter 18 explores the significance of the
Cogito model for the traditional problem of consciousness.
   From the very first debates, free will has been connected tightly
to moral responsibility. Many modern thinkers equate, or at least
conflate the two, making free will nothing but the control condi-
tion for moral responsibility. Chapter 19 describes the problem of
moral responsibility and Chapter 20 makes the case for separating
free will from moral responsibility. Indeed, I also propose separat-
ing “moral” from “responsibility,” like the clear separation of “free”
from “will” in my two-stage model.
   Chapter 21 is devoted to Naturalism, a well-intentioned but
misled movement that emphasizes the animal nature of human
beings. Naturalists properly reject anything supernatural that
separates humans from animals. But they also reject the idea of
free will, perhaps because it is often said to be a gift of God, and
therefore nonexistent for naturalists, who are atheists.
   Free will involves bringing new information into the universe.
I argue in Chapter 22 that creativity would not be possible in a
deterministic universe, where the future is “already out there.”
Free will is a precondition for creativity.
   Chapters 23, 24, 25, and 26 discuss my exchanges with Ted
Honderich on determinism, Robert Kane on libertarianism,
Daniel Dennett on compatibilism, and Alfred Mele on his
modest libertarianism. In all these chapters, the fundamental
question is the role of quantum indeterminacy in these philoso-
phers’ models for free will.
   In Chapter 27, I imagine how different the history of free will
would have been if Dennett and Kane had reached a compromise
position. Instead of helping to make the history of philosophy
today, I would be just writing the history of philosophy.
   In Chapter 28, I make the case for reconciling free will with the
indeterminism of quantum physics. Here I follow in the footsteps
of David Hume, who reconciled freedom with the determinism of
      xxii     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             classical physics. Hume’s compatibilism is fine if by determinism
             we mean the “adequate determinism” of classical physics, the
Preface




             one that emerges as the asymptotic limit of quantum mechanics
             in objects with large numbers of material particles.
                I therefore invite all compatibilist philosophers to consider a
             new “comprehensive compatibilism” that reconciles free will
             with both limited determinism and limited indeterminism.
                Most philosophers today think of themselves as compatibil-
             ists, and for understandable if somewhat misguided reasons.
             As R. E. Hobart wrote in his 1934 Mind article, “Free Will As
             Involving Determination, and Inconceivable Without It,” our
             character, values, motives, and feelings must determine our willed
             decisions, or we could not be morally responsible for our actions.5
             But Hume was not happy with his determinism, and Hobart, if
             we read him carefully, did not deny the existence of irreducible
             chance, although he could not see, as we can today, how it is that
             indeterminacy helps to solve the problem of free will.
                Chapter 29 summarizes the key points that you can use to help
             end the scandal of teaching that free will is an illusion.
                Chapter 30 examines the cosmic information creation process
             that underlies information processing in the body and mind.
                Chapter 31 has brief comments on some more unsolved
             problems in philosophy and in physics that may yield to an
             information philosophy analysis.
                Join me on the I-Phi website to explore the work in progress
             on these problems. I look forward to your critical comments
             on problems that interest you. Your input will help to make the
             Information Philosopher as accurate a resource for twenty-
             first-century philosophy as we together can make it.

                                          bobdoyle@informationphilosopher.com
                                                              Cambridge, MA
                                                                    June, 2011

               5    See the Hobart’s Determination sidebar on page 23.
                                                                          1



How To Use This Book With The I-Phi Website




                                                                          Chapter 1
   The content of the book comes primarily from the Freedom
section of the Information Philosopher website. Please refer to
the website for more details than there is room for here.
   You will find multiple entry points into the website from this book,
with URLs for the chapters and in many of the footnotes. I hope that
you agree that the combination of printed book and online website
is a powerful way to do philosophy in the twenty-first century.
   The Freedom section has a drop-down menu for the major sub-
sections - Problem, History, Physics, Biology, etc.
   In the left-hand navigation of the Freedom section there are links
to the core concepts needed to understand the free will debates.
These are followed by links to the hundreds of philosophers and
scientists who have contributed to the history of free will.




   Words in boldface in the text refer to core concepts. Many of
these have entries in the Glossary and are good Google search terms.
   You will find a list of these core concepts on page 441.
   Names in Small Caps are the philosophers and scientists with
web pages on the I-Phi website. They are listed on page 440.
   It is not easy to navigate any website, and I-Phi is no exception. A
fast way to find things of interest is to use the Search box on every
page. Once on a page, a “Cite this page” function generates a citation
with the URL and the date the page was retrieved in APA format.
        2        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                               m inis        m
                                             r
Chapter 1




                                      De t e

                                                       a t i b i lism
                                              C    omp       r min  m    is
                                i n ism                e t e
                   De   t e r m                 Soft D
            Hard
                                                                     pati     bilism
                                                            ft C o m
                                                        So
                     patibil
                             ism
                                       c t i o n
                                  rodu
       d I ncom                                                                        Inc
                          Int
 H a r
                                                 ilism         atib
                                                 m i c o mp
                                              Se
             n   ism
     Illusio                                                           ism
                                                        m p a tibil
                                                wI  nco
                    lism                  Narro
        p o s sibi
     Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                         o m p
                                              So  ft Inc
                                                                                       yI
                        M  odel                                                Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                        a
                                                      m
                                     o u r c e Inco uence)
                                   S               l Seq
                                      (A   c t u a
                                                                         i m i t e d
                                                    e lw           ith L
                                                o d
                               - S t      age M
                          Tw o
                      m i n i s m
                deter
                                                                Introduction                3
            In
            Introduction                     n ism
                                     a r i a
                                    t information philosophy may help
                           L  iberthat




                                                                                            Chapter 1
               Of all the problems
            to solve, none is more important than the question of free will.
           There is little in philosophy more dehumanizing than thealogic
                                                                     t - C     usal
           chopping and sophisticated linguistic analysis    Agthatn
                                                                 e denies the
           possibility of human freedom.
                                   C a u    al They claim deterministic laws
                                         sfurther.
              Many philosophers
                       veneven t -   go
           of natureEdeny           the possibility of alternative possibilities.
           Only the actual is possible, there is only one possible future, a    sayusal
           some philosophical voices over the twenty-two centuries      n
                                                                  No from  - C
           Diodorus Cronus to Daniel Dennett.
                      m                    SFAthat reduced the bodies of all
        t i b i l i s
              Even the Cartesian dualism

co  mpa    animals to living machines left room for a non-­
           immaterial, and indeterministic mind fabove
                                                     o  tC   a u s
                                                               and
                                                                   a   ty
                                                                   mliechanistic,
                                                                    beyond     the
                                                   S
           deterministic limits set by the laws of nature.
                      a
              Information
                    p        lism hopes to show that information is itself sm
                        tibiphilosophy
     a d I n
           that  m
             coimmaterial “substance” above and beyond mattereand     r t a r iani
                                                                           energy
 Bro       that Descartes and Kant were looking for.Soft Li
                                                                  b

                            arian  ism                                                 at ion
                L i b e r t                                                  e r m i n
            st What is Information?                                       et
   Mode                                                     Self-D
                                        C o g  o nor Energy,
                       Information is neitheritMatter

         a t i b i l ism
                       But it needs Matter for its Embodiment,
       p
Incom uenceInformation
                       And it needs Energy for its Communication.
         q
                       s)            is the modern Spirit.
                                                                   r m i n ism
                                                             dete
     S e
tive                                            In
                       It is the Ghost in the Machine
                                        i t e d
                    It is the Mind in the Body.

                              a  nd Lim
                    It is the Soul, and when we Die,

     r m i n ism    It is our Information that Perishes.

Dete          Please go to the Information Philosopher website for more
            on information. (www.informationphilosopher.com/introduction/information)
        4     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              To understand the role of information in human freedom,
            you need to know that information cannot be created without
Chapter 1




            an indeterministic quantum process known as the “collapse of
            the wave function.” I explain more about information creation in
            the universe in Chapters 1 and 31, and more about information
            physics, wave-function collapses, and free will in Chapter 15.

               Quantum physics in the twentieth century opened a crack in
            the wall of physical determinism, through which a “chink of day-
            light” could be seen by Arthur Stanley Eddington in 1927.
            But academic philosophy reacted to quantum indeterminacy the
            same way as the Academics and Stoics had reacted to the idea of
            an Epicurean “swerve” of the atoms.
               Ancient and modern academics were appalled at the idea that
            chance could play a role in generating alternative possibilities for
            adequately determined decisions that are “up to us,” as Aristotle
            called them.
               Chance is atheistic, said the Stoics. It denies the omni­potence of
            Nature and Nature’s God - Reason. How could humans be exempt
            from universal laws that govern the macrocosmos and microcos-
            mos, from the stars and planets down to the atoms themselves?
               The illusion of chance is a consequence of human ignorance,
            the product of finite minds, say many ancient and modern think-
            ers. Chance is epistemic and not ontologically real, they say.
               An infinite and omniscient mind can comprehend everything,
            and foresee the future with a God’s-eye view, as clearly as it sees
            the present and the past. But our human and finite mind’s-I views
            are limited. You will find this anti-humanistic thought in much
            theologically inspired philosophy.
               Note that John Duns Scotus preferred a God capable of random
            miracles to Thomas Aquinas’ vision of a God constrained by his
            own Reason, like the Nature/God of the deterministic Stoics. See
            the sidebar on omniscience and omnipotence.
                                                          Introduction   5


    On Omniscience, Omnipotence, Benevolence




                                                                         Chapter 1
       In passing, it is worth noting that the idea of God as an
    omniscient and omnipotent being has an internal logical
    contradiction that is rarely discussed by the theologians.1
    If such a being had perfect knowledge of the future, like
    Laplace’s demon, who knows the positions, velocities, and
    forces for all the particles, it would be perfectly impotent.
    Because if God had the power to change even one thing
    about the future, his presumed perfect knowledge would
    have been imperfect. Omniscience entails impotence.
    Omnipotence some ignorance. Prayer is useless.
       As to benevolence, Archibald MacLeish said in J.B, “If
    God is Good, He is not God. If God is God, He is Not Good.”
      1    Anselm was an exception. See Sorabji (1980). p. 126.



   With so much talk of probability and statistics after Pierre-
Simon Laplace in the nineteenth century, it was becoming more
respectable to discuss the possibility of absolute chance. Charles
Darwin’s theory of evolution included chance variations that
could be inherited by an organism’s offspring to allow the natural
selection of new species. Genuine novelty in the universe needs
chance to generate those new possibilities. Otherwise, the exist-
ing species would be the pre-determined consequence of laws of
nature and events in the distant past. Determinism accommodates
the view of an omniscient intelligent designer.
   In Cambridge at Harvard, Charles Sanders Peirce and his
colleague William James followed the Darwinian arguments
closely. Peirce was undoubtedly more familiar than James with
the statistical arguments of the physicists. Peirce’s main attack
was on the idea of logical and necessary truths about the physi-
cal world. Peirce was the strongest philosophical voice for abso-
lute and objective chance since Epicurus. For Peirce, chance was
ontological and real, not epistemic and merely human ignorance.
        6     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Peirce argued that chance liberated the will from determinism,
            but he gave no definite model, and in the end he compromised
Chapter 1




            and wanted to manage and control the chance with a form of
            rationality that he called “synechism” or continuity. He dreamed
            of “evolutionary love” and a God who kept the chance in Darwin’s
            “greedy” evolution in check.
               Although Peirce is famous for promoting the reality of chance
            with his Tychism, his overall opinion of the role of chance was
            negative. We shall see that it is William James who in the end
            found a measured and constructive role for chance in his attempt
            to defend freedom of the will. Where Peirce saw chance as a nega-
            tive force, James, like Darwin, saw it as a positive and creative one.
               About the same time Darwin was introducing chance into
            biological evolution, James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig
            Boltzmann were applying the ideas of probability and statistics
            to a model of gases as untold numbers of particles, the atoms of
            the ancients Democritus and Epicurus.
               Social scientists like the mathematician Joseph Fourier in
            France, the astronomer Adolph Quételet in Belgium, and the
            historian Henry Thomas Buckle in England applied the cal-
            culus of probabilities to the statistics of social phenomena like
            marriages and suicides. They found regularities scattered about
            mean values (often following the bell curve of a normal distribu-
            tions). The mean values seemed constant from year to year. They
            concluded that these regularities were proof of rigorous, though
            unknown, laws controlling chance.
               Scientists like Maxwell and Boltzmann, inspired by the collec-
            tive properties of many random social events, showed that the
            same distribution applied to physical properties, like the velocities
            of individual particles in a gas. (The word “gas” was coined from
            the “chaos” of the particles.) Unlike the social scientists, Maxwell
            and Boltzmann did not assume that the gross regularities meant
            the constituent particles were determined by unknown laws.
               Instead, they had shown that trillions of trillions of trillions of
            atoms moving randomly average out to produce the regular laws
                                                  Introduction         7


of large bodies. Deterministic classical mechanics became inde-
terminate statistical mechanics. Once the microscopic world was




                                                                       Chapter 1
found in the 20th century to include quantum indeterminacy, the
regular laws of nature for macroscopic systems were seen to be
irreducibly statistical laws. Nature is fundamentally stochastic.
But how do we reconcile such indeterminate chaos with the regu-
larities of nature and the rational operations of the human mind?
   Contemporaries of Epicurus would have been appalled by
these developments. The Stoic Chrysippus wrote:
   “Everything that happens is followed by something else which
   depends on it by causal necessity. Likewise, everything that
   happens is preceded by something with which it is causally con-
   nected. For nothing exists or has come into being in the cosmos
   without a cause. The universe will be disrupted and disintegrate
   into pieces and cease to be a unity functioning as a single sys-
   tem, if any uncaused movement is introduced into it.”
   This perfect causal necessity of Chrysippus is still the ideal of
many philosophers today. Although they no longer think they
can prove Laplacian determinism, sobered by the indeterminacy
of quantum physics, they reserve judgment and call themselves
agnostics on determinism.
   The disruption and disintegration of the universe predicted by
Chrysippus if atoms were to swerve randomly was in some ways
realized by the discovery of the second law of thermodynamics in
the mid-19th century. The confirmation of the ancient idea that
matter, and chaotic gases in particular, is made of atoms forever
swerving, looks in many ways like a universe disintegrating.
   Boltzmann’s statistical mechanics explained how probabilistic
processes would lead to the rise of entropy. Orderly systems would
run down into disorder. Information would be lost.
   The deep challenge for information philosophy is to explain
the emergence and maintenance of so many rich macroscopic
information structures when the microscopic world is as utterly
chaotic as Chrysippus could have possibly imagined.
        8      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

            About Information Philosophy and Physics
               By information we mean a quantity that can be understood
Chapter 1




            mathematically and physically. It corresponds to the common-
            sense meaning of information, in the sense of communicating or
            informing. It is like the information stored in books and comput-
            ers. But it also measures the information in any physical object,
            like a recipe, blueprint, or production process, as well as the infor-
            mation in biological systems, including the genetic code, the cell
            structures, and the developmental learning of the phenotype.


                    Information is mathematically the opposite of entropy.
                It is sometimes called negative entropy. The same formula is
                used for the quantity of entropy or information.

                    S = kΣ pn log pn.
                  where k is Boltzmann’s constant, pn is the probability of
                the state n, and the summation is over all states.


               It is of the deepest philosophical significance that information
            is based on the mathematics of probability. If all outcomes were
            certain, there would be no “surprises” in the universe. Informa-
            tion would be conserved and a universal constant, as some math-
            ematicians mistakenly believe. Information philosophy requires
            the ontological uncertainty and probabilistic outcomes of modern
            quantum physics to produce new information.
               But at the same time, without the extraordinary stability of
            quantized information structures over cosmological time scales,
            life and the universe we know would not be possible. Quantum
            mechanics reveals the architecture of the universe to be discrete
            rather than continuous, to be digital rather than analog.
               Creation of information structures means that in parts of the
            universe the local entropy is actually going down. Creation of a
            low-entropy system is always accompanied by radiation of energy
                                                                                       Introduction         9

and entropy away from the local structure to distant parts of the
universe, into the night sky for example.




                                                                                                            Chapter 1
   From Newton’s time to the start of the 19th century, the Lapla-
cian view coincided with the notion of the divine foreknowledge
of an omniscient God. On this view, complete, perfect and con-
stant information exists at all times that describes the designed
evolution of the universe and of the creatures inhabiting the world.
   In this God’s-eye view, information is a constant of nature.
Some mathematicians today argue that information must be a
conserved quantity, like matter and energy.
   We represent this picture of constant information in Figure 1-1.


                                                                                              information
                Laplace’s Demon (1814)
                A Laplace Demon has all the information - forces, positions, velocities -
                for all the particles in the universe.

                All times, past and future, are present to the Laplace Demon,
                as to the eyes of God. In a deterministic universe, information is constant.
  information




                Mathematical physicists, like Laplace, believe that the conservation of information
                is as much a conservation law as that of matter and energy.

                There is no chance. The randomness we see is simply epistemic, a consequence
                of human ignorance about physical details that his demon and God can know.



                (Pierre Simon Laplace, A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities, 1814)
                                                                                       time
  Figure 1-1. For a Laplace demon, information is a constant of nature.

   If information were a universal constant, there would be “noth-
ing new under the sun.” Every past and future event can in prin-
ciple be known by the super-intelligent demon of Pierre Simon
Laplace, with its access to such a fixed totality of information.
   But midway through the 19th century, Lord Kelvin (William
Thomson) realized that the newly discovered second law of ther-
modynamics required that information could not be constant, but
would be destroyed as the entropy (disorder) increased. Hermann
Helmholtz described this as the “heat death” of the universe.
        10     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy
Chapter 1




                                                                                                                                      entropy
               entropy/information




                                       Lord Kelvin’s Heat Death (1852)
                                       Following the discovery of the laws of thermodynamics,
                                       William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) claimed that the universe would
                                       “run down,” all the energy ultimately dissipated into thermal motions,
                                       which Herman Helmholtz called a “heat death.”
                                        Mathematicians would say the information lost to entropy is still                             information
                                        available microscopically, recoverable if time was reversed.

                                                                                                                            time
                                     (William Thomson, "On a Universal Tendency in Nature to the Dissipation of Mechanical Energy")

                                     Figure 1-2. The second law requires information to decrease in a closed system.

                Mathematicians who are convinced that information is al-
             ways conserved argue that macroscopic order is disappearing
             into microscopic order, but the information could in principle be
             recovered, if time could only be reversed.
                This raises the possibility of some connection between the
             increasing entropy and what Arthur Stanley Eddington called
             “Time’s Arrow.” 1
                Kelvin’s claim that information must be destroyed when entropy
             increases would be correct if the universe were a closed system.
             But in our open and expanding universe, my Harvard colleague
             David Layzer showed that the maximum possible entropy is
             increasing faster than the actual entropy. The difference between
             maximum possible entropy and the current entropy is called
             negative entropy, opening the possibility for complex and stable
             information structures to develop.2
                In Figure 1-3, we see that it is not only entropy that increases
             in the direction of the arrow of time, but also the information
             content of the universe.
               1                         www.informationphilosopher.com/problems/arrow_of_time/
               2                         Roger Penrose described this as ‘standard.” Penrose (1989) p. 328-9
                                                                                                      Introduction                11



                           David Layzer (1975)




                                                                                                                                   Chapter 1
                           The universe begins in equilibrium.
                           As the universe rapidly expands, the
                           maximum possible entropy increases
  entropy/information




                           faster than the energy and matter can
                           equilibrate (reach thermal equilibrium),                                   negative
                           making it possible for stable information                                  entropy
                           structures to form and grow.
                                                                                                                    information
                                                                        potential
                                                                        entropy

                                                                                            actual
                                                                                            entropy

                           (David Layzer, The Arrow of Time, Scientific American, 1975)                time
                        Figure 1-3. Information increases as entropy increases in our universe.

Despite the second law of thermodynamics, stable and lawlike
information structures evolved out of the chaos. First, quan-
tum processes formed microscopic particulate matter – quarks,
baryons, nuclei, and electrons. Eventually these became atoms,.
Later, under the influence of gravitation – macroscopic galaxies,
stars, and planets form. Every new information structure reduces
the entropy locally, so the second law requires an equal (or gener-
ally much greater) amount of entropy to be carried away. Without
the expansion of the universe, this would be impossible.

                                                                                   The positive entropy carried
                                                                                away (the big dark arrow on
                                                                                the left) is always greater than
                                                                                and generally orders of mag-
                                                                                nitude larger than the negative
                                                                                entropy in the created informa-
                                                                                tion structure (the smaller light
                                                                                arrow on the right). See Chapter
                                                                                30 for more details.

                                                                                      Figure 1-4. Entropy/Information Flows
        12     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


             The Two-Step Cosmic Creation Process
Chapter 1




                Every material object created since the origin of the universe
             has involved two physical steps, first quantum events that form
             structures, then thermodynamical energy/entropy flows away
             from the structures so they can be stable.
                The first step is the collapse of a probability-amplitude wave
             function.3 Wave-function collapses are usually associated with
             measurements. Measurements produce new information. So the
             new structure is in some sense “measuring itself.”
                In the second step, binding energy of the new structure must be
             radiated, conducted, or convected away, carrying some positive
             entropy, or the new structure will be destroyed. In a closed box,
             thermal equilibrium will destroy any new information structure.
                These two steps are found in all creative processes, from
             elementary particles to ideas in our minds.
                With the emergence of teleonomic (purposive) information in
             self-replicating systems, the same two-step core process underlies
             all biological creation. But in biology some information structures
             are rejected by purposive natural selection, while others repro-
             duce and maintain their low entropy states.
                Finally, with the emergence of self-aware organisms and the
             creation of extra-biological information, the same process under-
             lies communication, consciousness, free will, and creativity.
                By creation we mean the coming into existence of recognizable
             information structures from a prior chaotic state in which there
             was no recognizable order or information.
                Creation of information structures means that today there is
             more information or order in the universe than there was at any
             earlier time. Of course there is also more entropy or disorder, as
             Layzer’s picture (Figure 1-3) and entropy flows (Figure 1-4) shows.
                This fact of increasing information describes very well an unde-
             termined universe with an open future that is still creating itself.
             In this universe, stars are still forming, biological systems are
               3 informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/wave-function_collapse.
                                                             Introduction                13


creating new species, and intelligent human beings are co-creators
of the world we live in.




                                                                                          Chapter 1
   All this creation is the result of the one core creative process.
Understanding this process is as close as we are likely to come to
understanding the creator of the universe, a still-present divine
providence, the cosmic source of everything good and evil.
   The creative ideas of individual human beings are a minis-
cule part of the cosmic information, but they can have enormous
impact. And William James has a message we need young people
to hear. As momentous as our ideas are, the neuroscientists will
never see them in our brain scans.
    “Although such quickening of one idea might be morally and
    historically momentous, if considered dynamically, it would be
    an operation amongst those physiological infinitesimals which
    calculation must forever neglect.” 4

Information and Predictability
   The future is now unpredictable for two basic reasons.
   First, quantum mechanics has shown that some events are not
predictable. The world is causal, but not pre-determined.
   But second, and this is new and philosophically significant, the
early universe does not contain the information of later times,
just as early primates do not contain the information structures
for intelligence and verbal communication that humans do, and
infants do not contain the knowledge and remembered experi-
ence they will have as adults.
   This second reason for unpredictability means that complete
information or knowledge about our choices does not exist in the
human brain/mind until the will has actually made a decision.5
   In this simple fact lies human freedom.


    4     James (2007) vol.2, ch.XXVI, p. 576
    5     Thus the Frankfurt-style cases of an intervening demon (discussed in Chapter
7) are complete nonsense, as first noted by Robert Kane (1985) fn, p. 51
       14        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r
Chapter 2




                                                         a t i b i lism
                                                C    omp      r min   m   is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                   De    t e r m                 Soft D
            Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                                C o m

                     patibil
                             ism
                                                       a
                                                         So
                                                         n d
                                                             ft
                                                             a l
        ard In
               com
                            i                  l l S c                                  Inc
 H
                     Fre e W                                    atibilis
                                                                         m

            Tsihoneism
                                                      om      p
                                                Semic
    Illu                                                                ism
                                                          m p a tibil
                                                 wI   nco
                     lism                  Narro
        p o s sibi
     Im                                                         a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                                So ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                       p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                            informationphilosopher.com/freedom/scandal.html
                      m i n i s m
                deter
                                                                  The Scandal            15
            In
            The Free Will Scandal
                             nism     ar      ia
                               Libert
              John Searle says it is a scandal that philosophers have not




                                                                                          Chapter 2
             made more progress on the problem of free will.
                                                                               atousal
                                                                           -
                “The persistence of the free will problem in philosophy seems
                                                                      n  t   C
                                                                Ageof writing
                me something of a scandal. After all these centuries

                                          sal
                about free will, it does not seem to me that we have made very
                much progress.t”-1Cau
                     E ven
                                                                       usal
               Two centuries ago, Immanuel Kant called it a scandal that
                                                               n
             academic philosophers were so out of touch with the - C a
                                                                   com-
                                                           No
            mon sense of the masses when they doubted the existence of
                                          SFA had criticized the Theory of
            the external world.2 David Hume
                       m
         t i b i l i s
            Ideas of his fellow British empiricists John Locke and George

co   mpa    Berkeley. If they are right that knowledge is limited
                                                              a u s a litotypercep-
                                                         t C about external
            tions of sense data, we cannot “know”  Sofanything
            objects, even our own bodies. Kant’s main change in the second
            edition ofp a
                        the   ilism of Pure Reason was an attempted refutationism
                          tibCritique
          I       m
                o idealism. He thought he had a proof of the existence
            ofcthis
            n                                                           r  t a r    n
                                                                                 iathe
  Bro a d                                                            e
                                                              t Lib that we
                                                                               of
            external world. Kant thought it a scandal   Sinofphilosophy
            must accept the existence
                            a r i a n ismof things outside of ourselves merely as ation
                       er
            a belief, witht no  proof.
                 Lib innocent idealism may be considered withlf-respect            min
      o d e  st “However                                            e    D  etetor
   M                                                             S
                the essential purposes of metaphysics (without being so in real-
                                       C
                ity), it remains a scandal      o
                                         ogtoitphilosophy,  and to human reason
                   s m
                 li general, that we should have to accept the existence of things
            tibiin
    o m p a
Inc           e n c   s)knowledge,
                outside
                    eour              even for that of our inner sense) merely on inis
                          us (from which after all we derive the whole material
                                                                                       m
tive S e q u    for
                trust, and have no satisfactory proof with which toe
                                                                             r
                                                                        te any m
                                        i t e d Ind                   counter

                                 L  immust be investigated
                opponent who chooses to doubt it.” 3
                         n   d
              i s mtheascandal which metaphysical controversies are
         Kant said “speculative
          i n
                                reason”

    eterm
          “to prevent
D               sure, sooner or later, to cause even to the masses.” 4

               1 Searle (2007) p. 37
               2 Kant (1962) p. 11
               3 Kant (1962) p. 12
               4 Kant (1962) p. 11
       16     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              Martin Heidegger commented on Kant’s scandal:
               The “scandal of philosophy” is not that this proof has yet to be
               given, but that such proofs are expected and attempted again and
Chapter 2




               again. 5
              Bertrand Russell said this was an unsatisfactory state,
               “Philosophy, from the earliest times, has made greater claims,
               and achieved fewer results, than any other branch of learning.” 6
              This knowledge scandal is closely related to the free will
            scandal, in that so many philosophers and scientists have thought
            that they could prove that free will, because of several imagined
            determinisms, does not exist. Free will is an illusion, they say.
              Moritz Schlick calls this scandal a “pseudo-problem,”
               “this pseudo-problem has long since been settled by the efforts
               of certain sensible persons; and, above all...— with exceptional
               clarity by Hume. Hence it is really one of the greatest scandals
               of philosophy that again and again so much paper and print-
               er’s ink is devoted to this matter... I shall, of course, say only
               what others have already said better; consoling myself with the
               thought that in this way alone can anything be done to put an
               end at last to that scandal.” 7
              This most common proof that free will cannot exist is based
            on the two-part standard argument against free will, which we
            examine in Chapter 4.


                 The Standard Argument Against Free Will
                   1) If our actions are determined, we are not free.
                   2) If our actions are directly caused by chance, they are
                 simply random, and we cannot be responsible for them.


              Despite more than twenty-three centuries of philosophizing, I
            believe that the main reason that no progress has been made is
              5 Heidegger (1962) p. 249.
              6 Russell (196) p. 11.
              7 Schlick (2008) Chapter VII, “The Pseudo-Problem of Freedom of the Will”
                                                The Scandal            17

that most modern thinkers have not moved significantly beyond
the second part, the problem of reconciling indeterminism and
free will. They assume that choosing from random alternative




                                                                        Chapter 2
possibilities makes the choice itself random. This is the mistaken
idea that “free” actions are caused directly by a random event.
A Moral Scandal?
   But there is a deeper and darker reason that failure to provide a
plausible explanation for free will has become a scandal.
   Ever since Hume, libertarian philosophers have expressed con-
cerns that determinism implies a lack of moral responsibility and
might, like a form of fatalism, even encourage irresponsibility.
   In the past few decades, the “logical” standard argument against
free will has been used by some philosophers - the hard deter-
minists, illusionists, and impossibilists - to deny the existence of
moral responsibility.
   Others have reacted to these developments with an ancient
concern - that people who are told they have no free will may
behave less responsibly. Some recent psychological studies have
actually confirmed such a laxity in moral behavior..8
   Despite this concern, several philosophers and psychologists
have openly called for our legal and judicial systems to recognize
that advances in neuroscience ultimately will show that all human
action is causally pre-determined, and that no one should be held
morally responsible for their crimes.
   One would hope that philosophers who are skeptical about
the truth of modern physics, and claim to be agnostic about the
truth of determinism or indeterminism, would be more circum-
spect and cautious about recommending drastic and unjustifiable
changes in social policies based on little or no empirical evidence.
   Beyond Searle’s scandal of little progress made, it is this moral
scandal that I hope this book may help to resolve, in part by sim-
ply making some modest progress after all this time.

  8 Vohs and Schooler (2008)
        18       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                               m inis         m
                                      De t e r
Chapter 3




                                                        a t i b i lism
                                                C   omp       r min  m    is
                                i n ism                 e t e
                   De   t e r m                  Soft D
            Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                             ism
                     patibil
 Hard I
        n       com
                                     e d o m                                            Inc
                                 Fre       om p a t
                                               Semic
                                                    i bilism

             n   ism
     Illusio                                                           ism
                                                         m p a tibil
                                                  wI nco
                    lism                  Narro
        p o s sibi
     Im                                                         a tibilism
                                                          o m p
                                               So  ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                        M  odel                                                 Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                      p a tibilism             (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                      m
                                     o u r c e Inco uence)
                                   S               l Seq
                                      (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                               - S t      a ge M
                          Tw o
                                                       This chapter on the web
                                          informationphilosopher.com/freedom
                         m i n i s m
                   deter
                                                                                 Freedom   19
            In
            Freedom                             n ism
                                       a  r i a
                            L
               Freedom is the  bert of being free from constraints, espe-
                              iproperty
            cially from external constraints on our actions, but also from inter-




                                                                                            Chapter 3
                                                                      t - C a usal
            nal constraints such as physical disabilities or addictions. Political
                                                             Agand
            freedoms, such as the right to speak, to assemble,      n
                                                                 e the limits to
            government constraints on associations and organizations such as
                               -
            media and religions, C a
                                  areu sal of external freedom.
                                      examples
                        vent called this kind of freedom “negative” in his
               IsaiahEBerlin
            essay Two Concepts of Liberty.                                    ausal
                                                                           o man     n-C
                   I am normally said to be free to the degree to which Nno
                                                   A which a man can act unob-
                   or body of men interferes with my activity. Political liberty in
                                              SFwithin
         t i b i l i s m
                   this sense is simply the area

     mpa
                   structed by others. If I am prevented by others from doingywhat
                                                                          lit
co                                                             Cau1 sa
                   I could otherwise do, I am to that degree tunfree.
                                                            Sof
               Philosophers call this absence of external and internal con-
            straints p
                  m    a tibilism
                     “freedom     of action.” But there is another, more philo-ism
                                                                               n
  Bro  ad I n c o
            sophical  form  of liberty that Berlin called “positive b ertar”ia
                                                                    freedom.
                                                                         ft Li
               I wish to be the instrument of my own, not  Soof other men’s, acts
                                     n   m not an object; to be moved by rea-
               of will. I wish to be iassubject,
                                                                                           n
                     e   r t a r i a             which are my own... I wish, above minatio
        d e     Litob be conscious of myself as a thinking, willing, active
               sons, by
            st all,
                          conscious    purposes,
                                                                      l f - D eter
    M o        bearing responsibility for my choices and ableS
                                                                   e         being,
                                                                 to explain them
               by references to my own         i t o
                                             g and purposes.
                                        Coideas
                                                               2


      p a t i b ilism
               This  kind of positive liberty raises the ancient question of “free-
Incom udom          e s) will.” One can be free to act, that is, be free of con- ism
      e q    e nc the
                   of
tive S straints, but one’s will might be pre-determineddbyeevents    term       in
                                                                            in the
            past and the laws of nature.
                                             i t e d In
                                      nd Lim
               Quite apart from whether we are free to act, are we free to will
                                  a
     r m i n ism
            our actions?

Dete           This is the question that philosophers have not been able to
            resolve in twenty-two centuries of philosophical analysis.

               1    Berlin (1990) p. 122. This is sometimes called “freedom from.”
               2    Berlin (1990) p. 131. Sometimes called “freedom to.”
        20     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                This book is based on parts of the Freedom section of the web-
             site Information Philosopher, a critical study of the “problem
             of free will.” (www.informationphilosopher.com/freedom)
                Those parts of the Freedom section that could not fit in this
Chapter 3




             book will appear in two forthcoming volumes. Free Will: The Core
             Concepts will include the web pages devoted to over 60 critically
             important concepts needed to understand the free will debates.
             Free Will: The Philosophers and Scientists will excerpt the I-Phi
             web pages on 135 philosophers and 65 scientists.
                There I have researched the arguments of hundreds of philoso-
             phers and scientists on the question of free will, from the original
             philosophical debates among the ancient Greeks down to the cur-
             rent day. They are presented on my I-Phi web pages, with some
             source materials in the original languages, for use by students and
             scholars everywhere, without asking me for permission to quote.
                Some readers might want to skip ahead to Chapter 7, the History
             of the Free Will Problem. There you can try to develop your own
             ideas on how and why this problem has been thought insoluble,
             even unintelligible, for over two millennia.
                If you don’t mind being biased a bit, and would like a little
             guidance as you try to make more sense of the problem than
             hundreds of great thinkers have been able to do, I present briefly
             in this and the next chapter two of my ideas that you may want to
             study first and have in mind as you read the History chapter.
             The First Idea - against libertarian free will
                The first is a very strong logical argument against libertarian
             free will that I have found again and again in philosophy since
             ancient times. I call it the standard argument against free will.
                If you fully master the standard argument, and perhaps even
             learn to detect its flaws, you will be more likely to recognize it in
             its various forms, and under a wide variety of names.
                I believe that the standard argument was the main stumbling
             block to a coherent solution of the free will problem long ago.
                                                                Freedom                  21

   In the next chapter, I provide examples of the standard argument
taken from the work of over thirty philosophers, from Cicero
to Robert Kane, over twenty-two centuries. I am sure there are
others. Perhaps you will come across them in your readings. If so,




                                                                                          Chapter 3
I would very much like to hear from you about them.
The Second Idea - for libertarian free will
   The second thing you might want to keep in mind is what looks
to me to be, after twenty-two centuries of sophisticated discussion,
the most plausible and practical solution to the free-will problem.
   Please excuse my hubris to think that I have solved a 2200-year
old problem, one that has escaped so many great minds. Despite
John Searle’s cry of no progress, I have found steps toward the
solution in nearly twenty fine minds. They just failed to convince
their contemporaries, and I find that few of them have read their
predecessors as carefully as I have. 3
   If you don’t want to be aware of my opinions before you begin,
just skip ahead to Chapter 4 for more on the standard argument.
   Almost all philosophers and scientists have a preferred solu-
tion to any problem. It very likely biases their work. You almost
certainly bring your own views to all your reading and research. If
you want to read the free will history unbiased by my views, skip
to Chapter 7. If you want a brief introduction to my libertarian
free-will model before proceeding, read on.




  3   If you don’t remember the past, you don’t deserve to be remembered by the future
        22      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Two Requirements for Free Will
                Any plausible model for free will must separately attack the two
             branches of the standard argument against libertarian free will.
Chapter 3




                The foremost libertarian, Robert Kane, says that anyone wanting
             to show that free will is incompatible with determinism must
             successfully climb over what he calls “Incompatibilist Mountain.”
             I take the liberty of time-reversing Kane’s ascending and
             descending stages here, for reasons that will become clear later.




                   Figure 3-1. Robert Kane’s Incompatibilist Mountain (reversed)

                I like Kane’s division of the one “incompatibilism” problem into
             two.4 Although we will see that Kane thinks libertarian free will
             is focused in a single moment at the end of the decision process,
             his diagram shows that the upward and downward climbs of his
             metaphorical mountain deserve separate treatment.
             First Requirement
                The first, ascent, requirement is for a limited indeterminism.
             It must provide randomness enough to break the causal chain of
             determinism. Even more critical, it must be the indeterminism
             needed to generate creative thoughts and alternative possibilities
             for action. So why and how must it be limited? Because the inde-
             terminism must not destroy our moral responsibility, by making
             our actions random.
                So to make sense of indeterminist free will as we ascend the
             reversed incompatibilist mountain, we must demand that the
             indeterministic alternative possibilities are not normally the
             direct cause of our actions.
                4 But I don’t like the term “incompatibilism,” as explained on p. 60 in Chapter 6.
             Why define human freedom by saying that it conflicts with something that does not
             exist, except as a philosophical ideal?
                                                              Freedom             23


Second Requirement
   The second, descent, requirement is to have enough determin-
ism to say that our actions are “determined” by our character,
our values, our motives, and feelings. Again, how and why is this




                                                                                   Chapter 3
determinism limited? It must not be so much that our actions are
pre-determined from well before we began deliberation, or even
from before we were born.5
   So for our descent of Incompatibilist Mountain, we can say that
free will is not incompatible with a limited determinism or deter-
mination, but it is definitely incompatible with pre-determinism.
   Our deliberations, both evaluations and selections, are
“adequately” determined. We can be responsible for choices that
are “up to us,” choices not determined from before deliberations.


     Hobart’s Determination
        R. E. Hobart (the pseudonym of Dickinson Miller, the
     student and colleague of William James) is often misquoted as
     requiring determinism. He only advocated determination.
        Hobart did not deny chance in his famous Mind article
     of 1934, entitled “Free Will as Involving Determination, and
     Inconceivable Without It.” (It’s my second requirement.)
        Philippa Foot added to the misquote confusion in the ti-
     tle and in the footnotes for her 1957 Philosophical Review ar-
     ticle, “Free Will as Involving Determinism.” Most philosophers
     continue to misquote this important title.
        Determinist and compatibilist philosophers, eager to sup-
     port their unsupportable claims of a deterministic world, have
     been misquoting Hobart ever since, showing me that they do
     not always read the titles of their sources, never mind the origi-
     nal articles. If they did, they would be surprised to find that
     neither Hobart nor Foot was a determinist.

   5 As claimed by the incompatibilist Peter van Inwagen’s Consequence Argument
and by the impossibilist Galen Strawson’s Basic Argument.
        24     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Hobart on Indeterminism
                Hobart was nervous about indeterminism. He explicitly does
             not endorse strict logical or physical determinism, and he explic-
Chapter 3




             itly does endorse the existence of alternative possibilities, which
             he says may depend on absolute chance. Remember that Hobart is
             writing about six years after the discovery of quantum indetermi-
             nacy, and he also refers back to the ancient philosopher Epicurus’
             “swerve” of the atoms.
                    “I am not maintaining that determinism is true...it is not here
                   affirmed that there are no small exceptions, no slight undeter-
                   mined swervings, no ingredient of absolute chance.” 6
                    “We say,’ I can will this or I can will that, whichever I choose ‘.
                   Two courses of action present themselves to my mind. I think
                   of their consequences, I look on this picture and on that, one
                   of them commends itself more than the other, and I will an
                   act that brings it about. I knew that I could choose either. That
                   means that I had the power to choose either.” 7
                Here Hobart seems to agree with his mentor and colleague
             William James that there are ambiguous futures. And note that
             Hobart, like James and using his phrase, argues that courses of
             action “present themselves.” Our thoughts appear to “come to us”
             - and the will’s power to choose brings the act about - our actions
             “come from us.”
                Despite his moderate position on chance, Hobart finds fault
             with the indeterminist’s position. He gives the typical overstate-
             ment by a determinist critic, that any chance will be the direct
             cause of our actions, which would clearly be a loss of freedom and
             responsibility
                    “Indeterminism maintains that we need not be impelled to ac-
                   tion by our wishes, that our active will need not be determined
                   by them. Motives “incline without necessitating”. We choose
                   amongst the ideas of action before us, but need not choose sole-
                   ly according to the attraction of desire, in however wide a sense

               6    Hobart (1934) p. 2
               7    Hobart (1934) p. 8
                                                             Freedom         25

      that word is used. Our inmost self may rise up in its autonomy
      and moral dignity, independently of motives, and register its
      sovereign decree.
       “Now, in so far as this “interposition of the self ” is undeter-




                                                                              Chapter 3
      mined, the act is not its act, it does not issue from any concrete
      continuing self; it is born at the moment, of nothing, hence it
      expresses no quality; it bursts into being from no source”. 8
  Hobart is clearly uncomfortable with raw indeterminism. He
says chance would produce “freakish” results if it were directly to
cause our actions. He is right.
      “In proportion as an act of volition starts of itself without cause
      it is exactly, so far as the freedom of the individual is concerned,
      as if it had been thrown into his mind from without — “sug-
      gested” to him — by a freakish demon. It is exactly like it in
      this respect, that in neither case does the volition arise from
      what the man is, cares for or feels allegiance to; it does not come
      out of him. In proportion as it is undetermined, it is just as if
      his legs should suddenly spring up and carry him off where he
      did not prefer to go. Far from constituting freedom, that would
      mean, in the exact measure in which it took place, the loss of
      freedom”. 9
   It is very likely that Hobart has William James in mind as “the
indeterminist.” If so, despite knowing James very well, he is mis-
taken about James’ position. James would not have denied that
our will is an act of determination, consistent with, and in some
sense “caused by” our character and values, our habits, and our
current feelings and desires. James simply wanted chance to pro-
vide a break in the causal chain of strict determinism and alterna-
tive possibilities for our actions.




  8    Hobart (1934) p. 6
  9    Hobart (1934) p. 7
        26       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                               m inis          m
                                      De t e r
Chapter 4




                                                       a t i b i lism
                                              C    omp       r min  m   is
                                i n ism                e t e
                   De   t e r m                 Soft D
            Hard
                                                                     pati    bilism
                                                                 o m

                     patibil
                             ism
                                            m        e nt Soft C

        ard In
               com
                               A   rg  u lism Inc
 H
                    n d a r d      co W      i
                                             tibl  l
                                                   i
     h  e     S t a         F r emie m p a
  T
 Illusio Agai
        n i s m       n s t  S e

                                       p a t i b ilism
                                    om          w   Inc
                    lism                  Narro
        p o s sibi
     Im                                                       a tibil  ism
                                                        o m p
                                              So ft Inc
                                                                                      yI
                        M  odel                                               Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                      p a tibilism           (Altern
                                                                                       a
                                                      m
                                     o u r c e Inco uence)
                                   S               l Seq
                                      (A   c t u a
                                                                         i m i t e d
                                                    e lw           ith L
                                                o d
                               - S t      age M
                          Tw o
                                                  This chapter on the web
              informationphilosopher.com/freedom/standard_argument.html
                       m i n i s m
                 deter
                                                   The Standard Argument            27
            In
            The Standard Argument n ism
                          a r i a
                     ibertWill
            AgainstLFree
                                                                  -Ca      usal




                                                                                       Chapter 4
               The standard argument has two parts.
                                                            Agent
                                     u
               1) If determinism is the
                                 C a     al the will is not free.
                                       scase,
                         vethe
               We callEthis    -
                            nt Determinism Objection.
                                                                     n - C a usal
               2) If indeterminism and real chance exist, our willN o not be
                                                                  would
             in our control. We could not be responsible for our actions if they
                       m                SFA
         t i b i l i s
             are random.

     mpa
                We call this the Randomness Objection.                y
co                                                       au     salit
                                                  Soft C
            Together, these objections can be combined as a
                                                                     FREE
               m p a tibilism Objection, namely that no
         single Responsibility                                       WILL
                                                                          a n ism
       I n c o                                                    t a r i
  Broad account of the agent control needed for moral       Liber
         Free Will model  has yet provided  us an intelligible
                                                   Softresponsibility.
                         r t    nism
                               rialogically and practically flawed, partly from
                             aare                                                i n atio  n
                    i  e
               Bothbparts
                                                                           e r m
           st L of language that led some 20th-century ephilosophers
                                                                  lf-Det to
   Modeabuse                                                  S
          call free will a “pseudo-problem,” and partly from claims to
          knowledge that are based    C      ito evidence (Kant’s Scandal). We
                                         oongfaulty
        a t i b
          shall    sm the evidence for each part and try to expose errors
                iliconsider
      p
Incom uinethe     c es)
                    reasoning.
                                                                        n is        m
        q       n
                                                                  r m i
                                                             dete
      e
tive S philosophers
               If  you  would like to examine the arguments of over thirty
                                               In
                                         t e d
                             from ancient times to the present before reading my
                                       i
                                nd Lim
          critical comments, skip to the examples starting on page 30. Later

             ism              a
          you can return to compare your conclusions to mine on the next
     r m i n
Dete
          two pages.
        28        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Part One - The Determinism Objection
               Determinism is true. All events are caused by the fixed past and
             the laws of nature. All our actions are therefore pre-determined.
             There is no free will or moral responsibility.
Chapter 4




               Let’s consider the evidence and the possible errors...
                     • Determinism is not “true.” If one physical thing is “true,”
                 it is indeterminism.
                     • Physical determinism is not “true” because physics is
                 empirical, not logical. And the empirical evidence has never
                 justified the assumption of strict determinism.
                     • Quantum mechanical indeterminism is extremely well
                 established. While also not logically “true,” the evidence for
                 quantum mechanics is better established than any other phys-
                 ical theory, including classical mechanics and determinism.
                     • Just because some events, like the motions of the planets,
                 are adequately determined does not justify the widespread be-
                 lief in an absolute universal determinism.
                     • Some events are unpredictable from prior events. They are
                 causa sui, starting new causal chains.
                     • The “chain” of events behind a particular cause may go
                 back to inherited characteristics before we were born, others
                 may go back to environmental and educational factors, but
                 some may go back to uncaused events in our minds during
                 our deliberations. Decisions have many contributing causes.
                     • We say correctly that our actions are “determined” by
                 our (adequately determined) will. This determination does
                 not imply universal strict determinism (as R. E. Hobart and
                 Philippa Foot have shown).
                     • Our will chooses among free alternative possibilities, at
                 least some of which are creative and unpredictable.
                     • The will itself is indeed not “free” (in the sense of uncaused),
                 but we are free.
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                         29


Part Two - The Randomness Objection
   Chance exists. If our actions are caused by chance, we lack con-
trol. We can not call that free will, because we could not be held
morally responsible for random actions.




                                                                            Chapter 4
   Errors and evidence...
       • Randomness in some microscopic quantum events is
    indeed chance.
       • But microscopic chance does little to affect adequate
    macroscopic determinism.
       • Just because some events are undetermined and involve
    chance does not justify the widespread fear that all events are
    undetermined and random.
       • Chance only generates alternative possibilities for thought
    and action. It is not the direct cause of actions.
        • We are free, in control, and morally responsible for our
    choices and actions, when they are adequately determined, in
    the normal cases of a two-stage decision process.
       • But there are some cases where the two-stage model
    does not result in a self-determined decision. The alternative
    possibilities do not narrow down to a single possibility.
       • In this case, if the remaining possibilities are simple
    everyday practical decisions with no moral or prudential
    significance, the agent can essentially “flip a coin” and still take
    responsibility for the choice.
       • However, when the decision has important moral or pru-
    dential implications, and the agent must put effort into resolv-
    ing the decision process, it is not appropriate to describe such
    choices as “flipping a coin.” Robert Kane notes that the effort
    that goes into making these “torn” decisions is what deserves
    the credit for the decision. The underlying indeterminism may
    tip the scales away from some possible actions, making them
    fail, but the main cause of the action that succeeds should be
    seen as a result of the agent’s effort.
        30         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Examples of the Standard Argument
               Collected here are a few dozen examples of the standard
             argument from antiquity to the present day. You are invited to
             examine them for the appearance of the two objections.
Chapter 4




               Cicero’s Version
                   “Epicurus saw that if the atoms travelled downwards by their
                   own weight; we should have no freedom of the will [nihil fore
                   in nostra potestate], since the motion of the atoms would be
                   determined by necessity. He therefore invented a device to es-
                   cape from determinism (the point had apparently escaped the
                   notice of Democritus): he said that the atom while travelling
                   vertically downward by the force of gravity makes a very slight
                   swerve to one side. (70) This defence discredits him more than
                   if he had had to abandon his original position.” 1
                Notice that Cicero’s argument already appears in the form of
             a logical proposition, one or the other of determinism or random-
             ness must be true. He claims that Epicurus must be denying such
             logical disjunctions. He and Aristotle did, for future events.
                   (70) XXV. “He does the same in his battle with the logicians.
                   Their accepted doctrine is that in every disjunctive proposition
                   of the form’ so-and-so either is or is not,’ one of the two alterna-
                   tives must be true. Epicurus took alarm; if such a proposition as
                   ‘Epicurus either will or will not be alive to-morrow’ were grant-
                   ed, one or other alternative would be necessary. Accordingly
                   he denied the necessity of a disjunctive proposition altogether.
                   Now what could be stupider than that?” 2


               John Fiske’s Version
                   “Volitions are either caused or they are not. If they are not
                   caused, an inexorable logic brings us to the absurdities just
                   mentioned. If they are caused, the free-will doctrine is annihi-
                   lated.” 3
               1       Cicero (1951) Book I, sect. XXV, ¶¶ 69-70, Loeb Classical Library, v. 40, p. 67
               2       ibid.
               3       Outline of Cosmic Philosophy, part. H. Chap.xvii, cited in James (2007) p. 577
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                        31

Max Planck’s Version
    “Let us ask for a moment whether the human will is free or
    whether it is determined in a strictly causal way. These two
    alternatives seem definitely to exclude one another. And as the
    former has obviously to be answered in the affirmative, so the




                                                                           Chapter 4
    assumption of a law of strict causality operating in the universe
    seems to be reduced to an absurdity in at least this one instance.
    In other words, if we assume the law of strict dynamic causal-
    ity as existing throughout the universe, how can we logically
    exclude the human will from its operation?... “Recent develop-
    ments in physical science [viz., quantum indeterminacy] have
    come into play here, and the freedom of the human will has
    been put forward as offering logical grounds for the acceptance
    of only a statistical causality operative in the physical universe.
    As I have already stated on other occasions, I do not at all agree
    with this attitude. If we should accept it, then the logical result
    would be to reduce the human will to an organ which would be
    subject to the sway of mere blind chance.” 4


Arthur Stanley Eddington’s Version
    “There is no half-way house between random and correlated
    behavior. Either the behavior is wholly a matter of chance, in
    which case the precise behavior within the Heisenberg limits
    of uncertainty depends on chance and not volition. Or it is not
    wholly a matter of chance, in which case the Heisenberg limits...
    are irrelevant.” 5


L. Susan Stebbing’s Version
    “If previous physical events completely determine all the move-
    ments of my body, then the movements of my pen are also
    completely determined by previous physical events....But if
    the movements of my pen are completely determined by pre-
    vious physical events, how can it be held that my mental pro-
    cesses have anything to do with the movements made by my

4       Planck (1981) p. 101-105
5       Eddington (1939) p. 182.
        32         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   pen....I do not think that it can reasonably be maintained that
                   physical indeterminism is capable of affording any help in this
                   problem.” 6


               Norbert Wiener’s Version
Chapter 4




               Wiener sees no advantage in quantum mechanical indetermin-
             ism.
                   “Tyche [chance] is as relentless a mistress as Ananke
                   [necessity].” 7


               A. J. Ayer’s Version
               Ayer is extremely clear that the “truth” of determinism cannot
             be proved. He says that the determinist’s
                   “belief that all human actions are subservient to causal laws
                   still remains to be justified. If, indeed, it is necessary that every
                   event should have a cause, then the rule must apply to human
                   behaviour as much as to anything else. But why should it be
                   supposed that every event must have a cause? The contrary is
                   not unthinkable. Nor is the law of universal causation a neces-
                   sary presupposition of scientific thought. But nevertheless he
                   states the standard argument succinctly: But now we must ask
                   how it is that I come to make my choice. Either it is an accident
                   that I choose to act as I do or it is not. If it is an accident, then
                   it is merely a matter of chance that I did not choose otherwise;
                   and if it is merely a matter of chance that I did not choose oth-
                   erwise, it is surely irrational to hold me morally responsible for
                   choosing as I did. But if it is not an accident that I choose to do
                   one thing rather than another, then presumably there is some
                   causal explanation of my choice: and in that case we are led back
                   to determinism.” 8
               J. J. C. Smart’s Version
               Smart states two definitions - one for determinism and one for
             randomness and declares them to be exhaustive of all possibilities.
               6       Stebbing (1958) pp. 216-7
               7       Wiener (1965) p. 49.
               8       Ayer (1954) p. 275.
         The Standard Argument Against Free Will                        33

 “Dl. I shall state the view that there is ‘unbroken causal continu-
 ity’ in the universe as follows. It is in principle possible to make
 a sufficiently precise determination of the state of a sufficiently
 wide region of the universe at time to, and sufficient laws of
 nature are in principle ascertainable to enable a superhuman




                                                                         Chapter 4
 calculator to be able to predict any event occurring within that
 region at an already given time t.
 “D2. I shall define the view that ‘pure chance’ reigns to some
 extent within the universe as follows. There are some events
 that even a superhuman calculator could not predict, however
 precise his knowledge of however wide a region of the universe
 at some previous time.
 “For the believer in free will holds that no theory of a determin-
 istic sort or of a pure chance sort will apply to everything in the
 universe: he must therefore envisage a theory of a type which is
 neither deterministic nor indeterministic in the senses of these
 words which I have specified by the two definitions D1 and D2;
 and I shall argue that no such theory is possible.” 9


P. F. Strawson’s Version
 “...the notions of moral guilt, of blame, of moral responsibility
 are inherently confused and that we can see this to be so if we
 consider the consequences either of the truth of determinism
 or of its falsity. The holders of this opinion agree with the pessi-
 mists that these notions lack application if determinism is true,
 and add simply that they also lack it if determinism is false.” 10


Roderick Chisholm’s Version
 “The metaphysical problem of human freedom might be sum-
 marized in the following way: “Human beings are responsible
 agents; but this fact appears to conflict with a deterministic
 view of human action (the view that every event that is involved
 in an act is caused by some other event); and it also appears
 to conflict with an indeterministic view of human action (the
9    Smart (1961) p. 294.
10   Strawson (1962) p. 1.
        34          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                view that the act, or some event that is essential to the act, is not
                caused at all).” To solve the problem, I believe, we must make
                somewhat far-reaching assumptions about the self of the agent
                — about the man who performs the act.” 11
Chapter 4




              Richard Taylor’s Version
              Here Taylor clearly states what his student Peter van Inwagen
             made famous as the Consequence Argument.
                “If determinism is true, as the theory of soft determinism holds
                it to be, all those inner states which cause my body to behave
                in what ever ways it behaves must arise from circumstances
                that existed before I was born; for the chain of causes and ef-
                fects is infinite, and none could have been the least different,
                given those that preceded.        Both determinism and simple
                indeterminism are loaded with difficulties, and no one who has
                thought much on them can affirm either of them without some
                embarrassment. Simple indeterminism has nothing whatever
                to be said for it, except that it appears to remove the grossest
                difficulties of determinism, only, however, to imply perfect
                absurdities of its own.”
                   Taylor sees the asymmetry in favor of determinism over
             indeterminism as a popular belief.
                “Determinism, on the other hand, is at least initially plausible.
                Men seem to have a natural inclination to believe in it; it is,
                indeed, almost required for the very exercise of practical intelli-
                gence. And beyond this, our experience appears always to con-
                firm it, so long as we are dealing with everyday facts of common
                experience, as distinguished from the esoteric researches of
                theoretical physics. But determinism, as applied to human be-
                havior, has implications which few men can casually accept,
                and they appear to be implications which no modification of
                the theory can efface.” 12
               David Wiggins’ Version
                “If it were false that every event and every action were causally
                determined then the causally undetermined events and actions
                would surely, to that extent, be simply random. So the argument

               11     Chisholm (1964), in Lehrer (1966) p. 11.
               12     Taylor (1963) p. 46.
          The Standard Argument Against Free Will                        35

   goes. That a man could have done x would mean no more than
   it might have turned out that way - at random.”
    Wiggins also prefers determinism to indeterminism, to ensure
that actions are caused by character.




                                                                          Chapter 4
   “It will be asked if it makes any better sense to hold the man
   responsible for actions which happen at random that for ones
   which arise from his character. Surely then, if it doesn’t, we
   ought to prefer that our actions be caused?” 13


  Thomas Nagel’s Version
   “Once we see an aspect of what we or someone else does as
   something that happens, we lose our grip on the idea that it
   has been done and that we can judge the doer and not just the
   happening. This explains why the absence of determinism is no
   more hospitable to the concept of agency than is its presence —
   a point that has been noticed often. Either way the act is viewed
   externally, as part of the course of events.” 14


  Robert Nozick’s Version
   “Without free will, we seem diminished, merely the playthings
   of external forces. How, then, can we maintain an exalted view
   of ourselves? Determinism seems to undercut human dignity,
   it seems to undermine our value. Some would deny what this
   question accepts as given, and save free will by denying deter-
   minism of (some) actions. Yet if an uncaused action is a random
   happening, then this no more comports with human value than
   does determinism. Random acts and caused acts alike seem to
   leave us not as the valuable originators of action but as an arena,
   a place where things happen, whether through earlier causes or
   spontaneously.” 15


  Peter van Inwagen’s Version
   “Here is an argument that I think is obvious (I don’t mean it’s
   obviously right; I mean it’s one that should occur pretty quickly
  13   Wiggins (1973) p. 50.
  14   Nagel (1979) p. 37.
  15   Nozick (1981) pp. 291-2
        36          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                to any philosopher who asked himself what arguments could be
                found to support incompatibilism):
                     “If determinism is true, then our acts are the consequences
                     of the laws of nature and events in the remote past. But it is
                     not up to us what went on before we were born, and neither
Chapter 4




                     is it up to us what the laws of nature are. Therefore, the con-
                     sequences of these things (including our present acts) are not
                     up to us.
                “I shall call this argument the Consequence Argument.” 16
               Note that van Inwagen’s Consequence Argument includes only
             the Determinist Objection, just one part of the standard argument.
             He also presented the Randomness Objection, and called it the
             Mind Argument. (Not referring to the human mind, but to the
             journal Mind, where many arguments of this type can be found,
             notably the 1934 article of R. E. Hobart.)
                “[It] proceeds by identifying indeterminism with chance and by
                arguing that an act that occurs by chance, if an event that occurs
                by chance can be called an act, cannot be under the control of
                its alleged agent and hence cannot have been performed freely.
                Proponents of [this argument] conclude, therefore, that free
                will is not only compatible with determinism but entails deter-
                minism.” 17
                Van Inwagen dramatized his understanding of the indetermin-
             istic brain events needed for agent causation by imagining God
             “replaying” a situation to create exactly the same circumstances
             and then arguing that decisions would reflect the indeterministic
             probabilities.
                “If God caused Marie’s decision to be replayed a very large num-
                ber of times, sometimes (in thirty percent of the replays, let us
                say) Marie would have agent-caused the crucial brain event and
                sometimes (in seventy percent of the replays, let us say) she
                would not have... I conclude that even if an episode of agent
                causation is among the causal antecedents of every voluntary
                human action, these episodes do nothing to undermine the
                prima facie impossibility of an undetermined free act.” 18

               16     Van Inwagen (1983) p. 16.
               17     ibid.
               18     Van Inwagen (2004) p. 227.
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                          37

  John Searle’s Version
  Searle argues that individual particles have statistically
predictable paths.
   “As far as human freedom is concerned, it doesn’t matter
   whether physics is deterministic, as Newtonian physics was, or




                                                                             Chapter 4
   whether it allows for an indeterminacy at the level of particle
   physics, as contemporary quantum mechanics does. Indeter-
   minism at the level of particles in physics is really no support
   at all to any doctrine of the freedom of the will; because first,
   the statistical indeterminacy at the level of particles does not
   show any indeterminacy at the level of the objects that matter
   to us – human bodies, for example. And secondly, even if there
   is an element of indeterminacy in the behaviour of physical par-
   ticles – even if they are only statistically predictable – still, that
   by itself gives no scope for human freedom of the will; because
   it doesn’t follow from the fact that particles are only statistically
   determined that the human mind can force the statistically-
   determined particles to swerve from their paths. Indetermin-
   ism is no evidence that there is or could be some mental energy
   of human freedom that can move molecules in directions that
   they were not otherwise going to move. So it really does look as
   if everything we know about physics forces us to some form of
   denial of human freedom.” 19


  Galen Strawson’s Version
  Strawson notes the argument is familiar and cites Henry
Sidgwick’s 1874 Methods of Ethics. Actually Sidgwick, who held
the 19th-century view that freedom is metaphysical, was a firm
determinist and only cites the Determinist Objection to free will.
   “It is a compelling objection. Surely we cannot be free agents,
   in the ordinary, strong, true-responsibility-entailing sense, if
   determinism is true and we and our actions are ultimately whol-
   ly determined by “causes anterior to [our] personal existence”*
   And surely we can no more be free if determinism is false and it
   is, ultimately, either wholly or partly a matter of chance or ran-
   dom outcome that we and our actions are as they are?
  19   Searle (1984) pp. 86-7
        38        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                       * H. Sidgwick, The Methods of Ethics, p. 66. This familiar
                   objection to the claim that we can be truly responsible agents
                   is of course disputed (and indeed scorned) by compatibilists,
                   but it is entirely sufficient for establishing the structure of the
                   present discussion. Cf. also An Essay on Free Will, by P. van
                   Inwagen.” 20
Chapter 4




             Colin McGinn’s Version
              “The argument is exceedingly familiar, and runs as follows.
              Either determinism is true or it is not. If it is true, then all our
              chosen actions are uniquely necessitated by prior states of the
              world, just like every other event. But then it cannot be the case
              that we could have acted otherwise, since this would require a
              possibility determinism rules out. Once the initial conditions
              are set and the laws fixed, causality excludes genuine freedom.
              On the other hand, if indeterminism is true, then, though things
              could have happened otherwise, it is not the case that we could
              have chosen otherwise, since a merely random event is no kind
              of free choice. That some events occur causelessly, or are not
              subject to law, or only to probabilistic law, is not sufficient for
              those events to be free choices. Thus one horn of the dilemma
              represents choices as predetermined happenings in a predict-
              able causal sequence, while the other construes them as inexpli-
              cable lurches to which the universe is randomly prone. Neither
              alternative supplies what the notion of free will requires, and no
              other alternative suggests itself. Therefore freedom is not pos-
              sible in any kind of possible world. The concept contains the
              seeds of its own destruction.” 21


             Paul Russell’s Version
              “...the well-known dilemma of determinism. One horn of
              this dilemma is the argument that if an action was caused or
              necessitated, then it could not have been done freely, and hence
              the agent is not responsible for it. The other horn is the argu-
              ment that if the action was not caused, then it is inexplicable
              and random, and thus it cannot be attributed to the agent, and

             20     Strawson, G. (1986) p. 25
             21     McGinn (1995) p. 80.
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                      39

   hence, again, the agent cannot be responsible for it. In other
   words, if our actions are caused, then we cannot he responsible
   for them; if they are not caused, we cannot be responsible for
   them. Whether we affirm or deny necessity and determinism, it
   is impossible to make any coherent sense of moral freedom and




                                                                         Chapter 4
   responsibility.” 22


   Derk Pereboom‘s Version
   Pereboom focuses on the Randomness and Responsibility Ob-
jections
   “Let us now consider the libertarians, who claim that we have
   a capacity for indeterministically free action, and that we are
   thereby morally responsible. According to one libertarian view,
   what makes actions free is just their being constituted (par-
   tially) of indeterministic natural events. Lucretius, for example,
   maintains that actions are free just in virtue of being made up
   partially of random swerves in the downward paths of atoms.
   These swerves, and the actions they underlie, are random (at
   least) in the sense that they are not determined by any prior
   state of the universe. If quantum theory is true, the position
   and momentum of micro-particles exhibit randomness in this
   same sense, and natural indeterminacy of this sort might also
   be conceived as the metaphysical foundation of indeterminis-
   tically free action. But natural indeterminacies of these types
   cannot, by themselves, account for freedom of the sort required
   for moral responsibility. As has often been pointed out, such
   random physical events are no more within our control than
   are causally determined physical events, and thus, we can no
   more be morally responsible for them than, in the indeterminist
   opinion, we can be for events that are causally determined.” 23
  Steven Pinker’s One-sentence Version
   “a random event does not fit the concept of free will any more
   than a lawful one does, and could not serve as the long-sought
   locus of moral responsibility.” 24


  22   Russell, P (1995) p. 14.
  23   Pereboom (1997) p. 252.
  24   Pinker (1997) p. 54.
        40        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Ishtiyaque Haji’s Version
              “Among the grandest of philosophical puzzles is a riddle about
              moral responsibility. Almost all of us believe that each one of
              us is, has been, or will be responsible for at least some of our
              behavior. But how can this be so if determinism is true and all
Chapter 4




              our thoughts, decisions, choices, and actions are simply drop-
              lets in a river of deterministic events that began its flow long,
              long before we were ever born? The specter of determinism, as
              it were, devours agents, for if determinism is true, then arguably
              we never initiate or control our actions; there is no driver in the
              driver’s seat; we are simply one transitional link in an extended
              deterministic chain originating long before our time. The puzzle
              is tantalizingly gripping and ever so perplexing — because even
              if determinism is false, responsibility seems impossible: how
              can we be morally accountable for behavior that issues from an
              “actional pathway” in which there is an indeterministic break?
              Such a break might free us from domination or regulation by
              the past, but how can it possibly help to ensure that the reins of
              control are now in our hands?” 25


             Bernard Berofsky’s Version
              “Basically, the compatibilists charged the opposition with two
              confusions. Causation, which is not freedom undermining even
              in its deterministic forms, is confused with compulsion or co-
              ercion, which, of course, is freedom-undermining. A physical
              barrier or even an internal compulsion or addiction can be an
              impediment to action; but when one acts simply because one
              wants to, one is not being impeded from acting otherwise.
              Hence, one is expressing one’s freedom by doing what one wants.
              Second, although determinism entails that all human behav-
              ior is subsumable under universal law, freedom is not thereby
              threatened, for the sorts of laws involved are merely descriptive
              (natural, scientific), not prescriptive, like the laws of a legisla-
              tive body. They just describe the way in which people behave;
              they do not force or constrain adherence. Finally, the compati-
              bilists argued that indeterminism would not be more desirable
             25     Haji (1998) p. vii.
             The Standard Argument Against Free Will                                  41

    since, under indeterminism, behavior is random and not under
    the control of the agent, a situation actually antithetical to free-
    dom.” 26


   Owen Flanagan’s Version




                                                                                       Chapter 4
    “Free actions, if there are any, are not deterministically caused
    nor are they caused by random processes of the sort counte-
    nanced by quantum physicists or complexity theorists. Free
    actions need to be caused by me, in a nondetermined and non-
    random manner.” 27


   Randolph Clarke’s Version
    “Accounts of free will purport to tell us what is required if we are
    to be free agents, individuals who, at least sometimes when we
    act, act freely. Libertarian accounts, of course, include a require-
    ment of indeterminism of one sort or another somewhere in the
    processes leading to free actions. But while proponents of such
    views take determinism to preclude free will, indeterminism is
    widely held to be no more hospitable. An undetermined action,
    It is said would be random or arbitrary. It could not be rational
    or rationally explicable. The agent would lack control over her
    behavior. At best, indeterminism in the processes leading to our
    actions would be superfluous, adding nothing of value even if it
    did not detract from what we want.” 28
    “If the truth of determinism would preclude free will, it is far
    from obvious how indeterminism would help.” 29
   Mark Balaguer’s Version
    “Any event that’s undetermined is uncaused and, hence,
    accidental. That is, it just happens; i.e., happens randomly.
    Thus, if our decisions are undetermined, then they are random,
    and so they couldn’t possibly be ‘‘appropriately non-random’’.
    Or to put the point the other way around, if our decisions are
   26    Berofsky, “Ifs, Cans, and Free Will,” in Kane (2002) p. 182.
   27    Flanagan (2003) p.135
   28    Clarke (2003) p. xiii.
   29    Clarke, Incompatibilist (Nondeterministic) Theories of Free Will. Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, retrieved September 2008
        42          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                appropriately non-random, then they are authored and con-
                trolled by us; that is, we determine what we choose and what
                we don’t choose, presumably for rational reasons. Thus, if our
                decisions are appropriately non-random, then they couldn’t
                possibly be undetermined. Therefore, libertarianism is simply
Chapter 4




                incoherent: it is not possible for a decision to be undetermined
                and appropriately non-random at the same time.” 30
                Later, Balaguer reduces his argument to J.J.C.Smart’s exhaus-
             tive determinism or indeterminism. He calls it “D-or-R-ism.”
                “Determined-or-Randomism (D-or-R-ism): None of our deci-
                sions is both undetermined and appropriately nonrandom; that
                is, all of our decisions are either (i) causally determined by prior
                events or (ii) random in the sense that they’re not appropriately
                nonrandom.” 31


               Thomas Pink’s Version
                “There are but these two alternatives. Either an action is causal-
                ly determined. Or, to the extent that it is causally undetermined,
                its occurrence depends on chance. But chance alone does not
                constitute freedom. On its own, chance comes to nothing
                more than randomness. And one thing does seem to be clear.
                Randomness, the operation of mere chance, clearly excludes
                control.” 32


               Peter Lipton’s Version
                “First, everything that happens in the world is either deter-
                mined or not. Second, if everything is determined, there is no
                free will. For then every action would be fixed by earlier events,
                indeed events that took place before the actor was born. Third,
                if on the other hand not everything is determined, then there
                is no free will either. For in this case any given action is either
                determined, which is no good, or undetermined. But if what
                you do is undetermined then you are not controlling it, so it
                is not an exercise of free will. Finally, we have the conclusion:
                there is no free will.” 33
               30     Balaguer (2004) p. 380.
               31     Balaguer (2009) p. 8.
               32     Pink (2004) p. 16.
               33     Lipton (2004) p. 89.
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                         43

  John Martin Fischer’s Version
  Fischer mistakenly attributes this dilemma to William James’s
Dilemma of Determinism, which was actually a dilemma about
regret in a deterministic world.
   “Either causal determinism is true, or it is not. If it is true, then




                                                                            Chapter 4
   we would lack freedom (in the alternative-possibilities and
   source senses). If it is false, then we would lack freedom in that
   we would not select the path into the future — we would not be
   the source of our behavior. Indeterminism appears to entail that
   it is not the agent who is the locus of control.” 34


  Joshua Greene and Jonathan Cohen’s Version
   “There are three standard responses to the problem of free
   will. The first, known as ‘hard determinism’, accepts the
   incompatibility of free will and determinism (‘incompatibil-
   ism’), and asserts determinism, thus rejecting free will. The
   second response is libertarianism (again, no relation to the
   political philosophy), which accepts incompatibilism, but
   denies that determinism is true. This may seem like a promising
   approach. After all, has not modern physics shown us that the
   universe is indeterministic? The problem here is that the sort of
   indeterminism afforded by modern physics is not the sort the
   libertarian needs or desires. If it turns out that your ordering
   soup is completely determined by the laws of physics, the state
   of the universe 10,000 years ago, and the outcomes of myriad
   subatomic coin flips, your appetizer is no more freely chosen
   than before. Indeed, it is randomly chosen, which is no help to
   the libertarian.” 35
   Kadri Vihvelin’s Version
   “Either determinism is true or it’s not. If determinism is true,
   then my choices are ultimately caused by events and conditions
   outside my control, so I am not their first cause and therefore...I
   am neither free nor responsible. If determinism is false, then
   something that happens inside me (something that I call “my
   choice” or “my decision”) might be the first event in a causal
   chain leading to a sequence of body movements that I call “my
  34   Fischer (2005) p. xxix.
  35   Greene and Cohen (2004) p. 1776.
        44        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 action”. But since this event is not causally determined, whether
                 or not it happens is a matter of chance or luck. Whether or not
                 it happens has nothing to do with me; it is not under my con-
                 trol any more than an involuntary knee jerk is under my con-
                 trol. Therefore, if determinism is false, I am not the first cause
Chapter 4




                 or ultimate source of my choices and...I am neither free nor
                 responsible.” 36


                Robert Kane’s Ascent and Descent Version
                Kane offers what may be the most attractive version of the stan-
             dard argument against free will, with a memorable diagram. He
             describes the usual determinism and randomness objections (the
             two horns of the Libertarian Dilemma) as the ascent and descent
             of what he calls “Incompatibilism Mountain.”




                Figure 4-1. Kane’s Incompatibilist Mountain.
                The ascent problem is to show free will is incompatible with
             determinism. The descent problem is to show that free will is
             compatible with indeterminism.
                Kane says that if free will is not compatible with determinism,
             it does not seem to be compatible with indeterminism either.
                 “Let us call this the ‘Libertarian Dilemma.’ Events that are
                 undetermined, such as quantum jumps in atoms, happen mere-
                 ly by chance. So if free actions must be undetermined, as liber-
                 tarians claim, it seems that they too would happen by chance.
                 But how can chance events be free and responsible actions? To
                 solve the Libertarian Dilemma, libertarians must not only show
                 that free will is incompatible with determinism, they must also
                 show how free will can be compatible with indeterminism.” 37

                36    Vihvelin (2007) Arguments for Incompatibilism. Stanford Encyclopedia of
             Philosophy, retrieved March 2011.
                37    Kane (2005) p. 34.
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                     45


An Important Asymmetry
   Note that the compatibilism of free will with determinism has
always been a great deal easier to accept than compatibilism with
indeterminism.38
   “Agnostics” on the truth of determinism and indeterminism




                                                                        Chapter 4
implicitly equate the two difficulties, whereas there is a great
asymmetry between the two parts of the standard argument.
   Indeterminism (non-rational chance) is much more difficult to
reconcile with freedom than is (causal and rational) determinism.
    Most philosophers are comfortable with the idea that their
actions are determined by their reasons and motives, their char-
acter and values, and their feelings and desires. As they should be.
   Thus it was relatively easy for David Hume to reconcile free-
dom with determinism by defining freedom as “freedom from”
coercions, primarily external forces but also internal constraints.
   But this freedom of action is not what libertarians think is the
essential freedom from pre-determinism needed to make us the
authors of our own lives.
   Two-stage models for free will (see Chapter 12) accomplish the
more difficult reconciliation of free will with indeterminism.
   Thus where Hume’s freedom of action is sometimes called
“compatibilist free will,” we can say that a two-stage model gives
us a more comprehensive compatibilism, a free will that is
compatible both with some (limited) determinism and with some
(limited) indeterminism. See Chapter 28.




  38   As Richard Taylor indicated, p. 34 above.
        46          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             What’s Wrong with the Standard Argument?
                The most straightforward way to attack the standard argument
             is to see that the three objections - determinism, randomness,
             and responsibility - really need to become three requirements for
Chapter 4




             free will. I will discuss these requirements in the next chapter. But
             to conclude our examples of the standard argument, let’s consider
             some of the ways that philosophers have gone wrong in their uses
             of the standard argument against free will
             How Determinists and Compatibilists Go Wrong
                Determinists and Compatibilists go wrong when they mistak-
             enly assume that any chance or indeterminism will lead directly
             to random actions for which we cannot be morally responsible.
                Although they are often metaphysical determinists, they lack
             confidence in the personal determination of the will, which we see
             is provided by the adequate physical determinism of our macro-
             scopic minds. And as William James said, they have an “antipa-
             thy to chance.”
                Our adequately determined will gives us adequate control
             of microscopic chaos and chance. Just as Chrysippus thought
             the universe would fall apart if a single uncaused event were to
             occur,39 some modern philosophers are equally frightened by the
             idea of objective chance, especially quantum indeterminacy.
                Some of the compatibilists’ fears of randomness are quite funny.
                “Indeterminism does not confer freedom on us: I would feel
                that my freedom was impaired if I thought that a quantum
                mechanical trigger in my brain might cause me to leap into the
                garden and eat a slug.” (J. J. C. Smart) 40
                 “For the simplest actions could not be performed in an inde-
                terministic universe. If I decide, say, to eat a piece of fish, I can-
                not do so if the fish is liable to turn into a stone or to disinte-
                grate in mid-air or to behave in any other utterly unpredictable
                manner.” (P.H.Nowell-Smith) 41
               39     See p. 7.
               40     Smart (2003) p. 63.
               41     Nowell-Smith (1948) p. 47.
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                    47


How Libertarians Go Wrong
   Libertarians go wrong when they fear that “determination” of the
will by an agent’s character, values, motives, and desires is some-
how equivalent to “determinism,” in the sense of pre-determined
before the agent began deliberations, perhaps even back before




                                                                       Chapter 4
the agent was born, as Richard Taylor and Peter van Inwagen
have speculated.
   Some critics of libertarianism suspect that libertarians also go
wrong when they try to keep some “freedom” (i.e., indetermin-
ism) “centered” in the moment of the will’s determination. Critics
say that this is at best an undetermined liberty, where the choice
is made at random from two or more equally valued possibilities
that are themselves adequately determined.
   Libertarians say that an agent must be able to do something
different in exactly the same circumstances. Agents could not
do otherwise, they say, if they are determined by any preceding
events, including the results of their immediately prior “free”
deliberations.
   Robert Kane calls this “The Indeterminist Condition:”
   “the agent should be able to act and act otherwise (choose
   different possible futures), given the same past circumstances
   and laws of nature.” 42
   Although self-determination is not pre-determination by a
strict causal chain of metaphysical determinism going back to the
big bang, some extreme libertarians over-react. They have what
William James might have called an “antipathy to determinism.”
   Despite advice from Daniel Dennett and Alfred Mele to
keep indeterminism in the early pre-deliberation stages, libertar-
ians like Kane, Peter van Inwagen, Laura Waddell Ekstrom,
and Mark Balaguer want indeterminism in the decision itself.
   Self-determination of the will only means that one is acting
consistently, in character, and according to values expressed in
one’s habits and customs, when one does the same thing in the
same circumstances.
  42   Kane (2005) p. 38.
        48          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                And since truly identical circumstances are essentially impos-
             sible, given the information of the past stored in the world and in
             the agent’s memory, this worry of the libertarians is not too seri-
             ous a problem.
                But let’s grant the possibility that an agent might be in exactly
Chapter 4




             the same circumstances in order to understand what the liber-
             tarian is worried about. Here is how Laura Waddell Ekstrom
             describes her concern,
                “Consider an agent whose act is, in such a sense, “libertarian
                free.” Now a duplicate agent in exactly similar circumstances
                governed by the same natural laws and subject to the same
                occurrence of considerations at the same points in the delibera-
                tive process will form exactly the same judgment concerning
                the best thing to do and will act accordingly. But then, given the
                consideration pattern that occurs (but might not have), there is
                no “wiggle room” for the agent in forming an evaluative judg-
                ment — it simply falls out, of necessity, from the consideration
                pattern. Hence such an account does not leave sufficient room
                for free agency.” 43
               And Robert Kane thinks that the early-stage chance offered
             by Dennett and Mele does not provide the agent with all of the
             control over actions that the libertarian is looking for.
                “Mike does not have complete control over what chance images
                and other thoughts enter his mind or influence his deliberation.
                They simply come as they please. Mike does have some control
                after the chance considerations have occurred. But then there is
                no more chance involved. What happens from then on, how he
                reacts, is determined by desires and beliefs he already has. So it
                appears that he does not have control in the libertarian sense
                of what happens after the chance considerations occur as well.
                Libertarians require more than this for full responsibility and
                free will. What they would need for free will is for the agent to
                be able to control which of the chance events occur rather than
                merely reacting to them in a determined way once they have
                occurred.” 44

               43     Ekstrom (2000) p. 121
               44     Kane (2005) p. 65.
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                     49

   Finally, let’s look at how the libertarian Peter van Inwagen
deals with randomness. He says that “libertarianism is the con-
junction of incompatibilism and the thesis that we have free will.”
45
   But all this means is that determinism is not true, that indeter-
minism is the case, that randomness and chance exist.




                                                                        Chapter 4
   Given all the objections to randomness that we have just seen,
including van Inwagen’s own “Mind Objection” (page 36), it is
clearly not enough to simply say that randomness exists. The hard
problem for free will is to understand what work it is that indeter-
minism does for freedom.
   We need to see where the indeterminism fits into a plausible
model for free will, that is to say, exactly when and where indeter-
minism can enter and help the problem, while doing minimal or
no harm to agent control, as Kane says.
   In the coming chapters we shall see that there are plenty of
sources of randomness in the world, for example, in the process
that drives chance variations in the gene pool and the subsequent
new species that result from natural selection.
   Randomness shows up in our best computers and communica-
tions systems. It introduces errors, misunderstandings, and mis-
takes in our everyday lives all the time. These errors are occasion-
ally the source of new creative ideas.
   Libertarians go wrong when they fear that their idea of freedom
will be equated with randomness and chance. Chance is only the
enabling factor that breaks the causal chain of determinism.
   Libertarians need to embrace chance in the world, in the actions
of other persons, and most importantly, in their minds.
   We shall see that this indeterminism can be either in the ear-
ly stages of deliberation where new alternative possibilities for
action are generated, or even at the moment of choice itself where
multiple undetermined liberties are possible, as Robert Kane
has long maintained for his Self-Forming Actions.

  45   Van Inwagen (1983) p. 13.
        50       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               The Standard Argument in Antiquity
                 In view of the basic conflict between human freedom and phys-
             ical causal determinism, it is hard to believe that one of the inven-
             tors of determinism, Democritus (c. 5th century BCE), intended
             it to liberate humans from the arbitrary interventions of the gods
Chapter 4




             in human affairs.
                 But Democritus apparently saw divine intervention and fore-
             knowledge as a grave threat to moral responsibility.
                 On his view, his reduction of mind to atoms and a void, work-
             ing by natural laws, was such a gain over the traditional view of
             arbitrary fate and capricious gods determining our actions, that he
             simply insisted that determinism provided humans more control
             for moral responsibility.
             The First Determinist
                Democritus was the first determinist.
                This means that the determinist objection, the first part of
             the standard argument against free will, was recognized at the
             creation of determinism, but the creator (Democritus) simply did
             not appreciate its importance.
             The First Libertarians
                The first indeterminist was Aristotle. In his Physics and Meta-
             physics he said there were “accidents” caused by “chance (τυχῆ).”
             In his Physics, he clearly reckoned chance among the causes.
             Aristotle might have added chance as a fifth cause - an uncaused
             or self-caused cause - one that happens when two causal chains
             come together by accident (συμβεβεκός). He noted that the early
             physicists found no place for chance among the causes.
                Aristotle’s solution to the problem of free will (though he very
             likely did not see any problem, since Democritus’ determinism was
             for material things and Aristotle thought living things were differ-
             ent) was likely to have been metaphysical. He probably assumed
             that the human mind was somehow exempt from the materialist
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                      51

laws of nature, whether causally determined or accidental chance,
so that our actions can depend on us (ἐφ ἡμῖν). In this respect, we
can call Aristotle the first agent-causal free-will libertarian.
   One generation after Aristotle, Epicurus (c. 4th century BCE),
proposed a physical explanation for free choice as a better basis for




                                                                         Chapter 4
moral responsibility. His solution was a random “swerve” of the
atoms to break the causal chain of determinism, giving us more
control than was possible in Democritus’ strict determinism.
   Summarizing Aristotle’s position, Epicurus saw three possibili-
ties for causes - necessity, chance, and autonomous human agency
(a “tertium quid”).
   “...some things happen of necessity, others by chance, others
   through our own agency. For he sees that necessity destroys
   responsibility and that chance is inconstant; whereas our own
   actions are autonomous, and it is to them that praise and blame
   naturally attach. It were better, indeed, to accept the legends of
   the gods than to bow beneath that yoke of destiny which the
   natural philosophers have imposed. The one holds out some
   faint hope that we may escape if we honor the gods, while the
   necessity of the naturalists is deaf to all entreaties.” 46
   Epicurus wanted a purely materialist solution to the conflict
with determinism. He proposed that his random swerves could
happen at any time and place. As long as there were some un-
caused events in the past, there would no longer be a chain of
causes back before our births limiting human agency.
   Many subsequent philosophers argued mistakenly that Epicu-
rus wanted a swerve to happen at the moment of decision - one
swerve for each decision. But this is implausible. That would make
our actions random. Epicurus could not explain when and where
randomness could occur in his idea of free will to explain moral
responsibility.
   Although Epicurus’ physical model for chance is ingenious and
anticipated twentieth-century quantum mechanics, it provides
  46   Epicurus, Letter to Menoeceus
        52       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             little of deep significance for free will and moral responsibility
             that is not already implicit in Aristotle.
                 Nevertheless, we can say that Epicurus was the first event-
             causal libertarian.
                 We can also say that the randomness objection, the second part
Chapter 4




             of the standard argument against free will, was recognized at the
             creation of indeterminism. His Stoic critics, and Epicurus himself
             provide us no specific idea of how his free will model might have
             met the objection.
             The First Compatibilist
                The first compatibilist was the Stoic Chryssipus (c. 3rd century
             BCE). He strongly objected to Epicurus’ suggestion of random-
             ness, arguing that it would only undermine moral responsibility if
             chance was the direct cause of action. Chryssipus was also aware
             of the charge that physical determinism had been equated with
             a necessitarianism that denied any human freedom. He sought a
             solution to both these objections to free will and moral responsi-
             bility.
                So we can also say that the responsibility objection, implicit in
             both parts of the standard argument against free will, was recog-
             nized at the creation of compatibilism, with its creator Chryssipus
             rejecting Epicurean randomness but also claiming that there is no
             Leucippean necessity for our human decisions.
                Chryssipus agreed with Aristotle that our decisions depend on
             us (πάρ’ ἡμᾶς). They need our assent or choice (ἁιρήσις) to act or
             not act, even if our actions are fated.
                Chryssipus felt that his compatibilism handled both objections,
             and it continues to this day as the most common model for free
             will among professional philosophers.
                A generation later, Carneades, the head of the Platonic
             Academy in the 2nd century BCE, chastised Epicurus for suggest-
             ing the swerve of the atoms as a physical solution to the free will
             problem. It would be better, he said, for Epicurus to have given
             a special power to the mind than giving it to the atoms. In this
           The Standard Argument Against Free Will                     53

regard, Carneades was favoring the metaphysical agent causal-
ism that Aristotle very likely preferred.
   But as we will see below, today we know far more about the
atoms than we know about the mind. And the power that Epicurus
imagined in the atoms provides the mind with all the random-




                                                                        Chapter 4
ness, and independence from any deterministic physical laws of
nature, that it needs to be creative and free.


  Summary
   The vast majority of philosophers and scientists who have
thought deeply about free will have been unable to confront and
overcome the standard argument against it.
   Compatibilists and determinists have simply accepted the
implications of the determinist objection and chosen to describe
the resulting degree of freedom as good enough for them. I believe
this is because their motives and desires, shaped by their character
and values, at least play a part in their “determined” decisions.
   When they consider indeterminism - the only apparent alter-
native in an “exhaustive” logical argument - they find that totally
unacceptable.
   Surprisingly, even the libertarians, who nominally accept the
need for indeterminism somewhere to break the causal chain
back to the beginning of the universe, cannot find an intelligible
location for chance in the mind/brain.
   In the next chapter, I turn the two component objections of
the standard argument into two explicit requirements that any
coherent and intelligible model of free will must satisfy.
        54       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                               m inis        m
                                      De t e r

                                                                 lism
Chapter 5




                                                       a t i b i
                                                 C omp        r min m    is
                                i n ism                 e t e
                   De   t e r m                  Soft D
            Hard
                                                                     pati     bilism
                                                            ft C o m
                                                        So
           ncom      patibil
                             ism
                                 m e n    t s                                          Inc
 H a r d I
                        q u i re             n
                      Re beSretmaicromia  p a   t i b  ilism

                     m or Li          l l
     Illus i o n i s  f      e  e W i
                           r
                          F ow Incom      p a t i b i lism
                        m                 Narr
                sibilis
     Impos                                                     a tibil ism
                                                         o m p
                                              So  ft Inc
                                                                                       yI
                        M  odel                                                Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                        a
                                                      m
                                     o u r c e Inco uence)
                                   S               l Seq
                                      (A   c t u a
                                                                         i m i t e d
                                                    e lw           ith L
                                                o d
                               - S t      age M
                          Tw o
                                                   This chapter on the web
                    informationphilosopher.com/freedom/requirements.html
                      m i n i s m
                deter
                                                              Requirements          55
            In
            Free Will Requirements
                             nism  ar       ia
                            Libert
                The major and minor requirements for human free will must
             deal explicitly with the determinist objection and the random-

                                                                    t - C   usal
             ness objection that are the core issues in the standard argument
                                                                          a
                                                             Age  n




                                                                                         Chapter 5
             against free will in the previous chapter.
                We need one requirement tol defeat the determinism objection
             and another distinctt - C   usa
                                       arequirement to defeat the randomness
             objection.Eve
                              n
                                                                           C a
                If we can meet these two requirements, we may have also elimi-
                                                                       n -     usal
                                                                  No think
             nated the responsibility objection, but some philosophers
             we can meet the responsibility objection whether or not we have
             free will, so this needs a bitS
                                              FA
         t i b i l i s m                    more thought.

co   mpa                                                   ft C  a  u s a lity
             Part One - The Randomness               SoRequirement
                 First, p a
                        there  ilismbe a Randomness Requirement, unpredict-ism
                            tibmust
      a d  I n
             able    m
                cochance events that break the causal chain of determinism
                                                                         e  r t a r ian
  Bro        in an appropriate place and time. Without            t Libbreak in the
                                                            Soa fchance
             chain, our actions are simply
                                 i a n i s m the consequences of events in the tion
             remote past.
                     i b      ar would be but one possible future.
                         ertThere                                                 e  r mina
              s t  L                                                         e  t
   Modeenhances  This randomness must be located in a placeeland
                                                                  S f-Dtime that
                         free will, not one that reduces it to pure chance. If we can
                                                 o the determinism objection.
                                             gitdefeat
             find this place and time,Citowill
        p a t i b ilism
                 Determinists   do not like this requirement!
Inc o m                 s)         of randomness threatens to make everything ism
               e ncemention
                 Any
                                                                                       in
       e q u
tive S random. (See Chrysippus’ fears on p. 7.)              d        e  t e   r m
                                       i t e d In
               Note that strong libertarians (e.g., Robert Kane) say that
                                nd Lim
             indeterminism, centered in the decision itself, is needed for
                              a
     r m i n ism
             human freedom that provides ultimate responsibility.

Dete           Some randomness - chance or indeterminism - is required.
             The problem is how to prevent that randomness from making our
             decisions themselves random.
        56     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Part Two - The Determinism Requirement
                Next, there is a Determinism Requirement - that our actions
             be adequately determined by our character and values, our
             feelings, motives, and desires.
                Randomness can not be the direct and primary cause of our
Chapter 5




             actions if we are to defeat the randomness objection and satisfy
             the determinism requirement.
                Some libertarians do not like this requirement!
                Determinists who think that determinism is all they need for
             free will call themselves compatibilists.
             Part Three - The Responsibility Requirement
                If we can meet these two requirements, can we automatically
             satisfy the Responsibility Requirement?
                We can do this by showing
                1. that the determinism we really have in the world is only
             adequate determinism and
                2. that the randomness we have (especially quantum inde-
             terminism) has negligible effect on that adequate determinism,
             but provides the alternative possibilities from which our deter-
             mined will can choose, can make a selection for which we can be
             responsible.
                These requirements should be such as to satisfy Libertarians,
             in that they ensure the unpredictable alternative possibilities
             needed for freedom.
                They should also be such as to satisfy Determinists, in that
             they ensure the adequate determinism of the will and its actions,
             causal decisions that are needed for moral responsibility.
                The requirements are straightforward, coherent, and intelligible,
             to guard against the centuries-old criticisms of free will as
             “unintelligible.”
                Let’s summarize the implications of each requirement.
                Requirements for Libertarian Free Will                57


The Randomness (Freedom) Requirement
   Over the centuries the freedom requirement has been described
in many ways. We can explicitly clarify those descriptions that are
in many cases equivalent.
     • Chance exists.




                                                                           Chapter 5
     • Indeterminism is True.
     • Our Decisions are Unpredictable (even to ourselves)
     • Our Actions are “Up to Us”
     • We have Alternative Possibilities
     • After the Fact, We Could Have Done Otherwise
     •We Start New Causal Chains
     • We Create New Information.
The Determinism (Will) Requirement
  The will requirement has had many forms corresponding to the
dogmatic forms of determinism.
  Instead of a strict causal determinism, the world offers only
adequate determinism and soft causality.
      • Adequate Determinism Is True
      • Chance Must Not Be The Direct Cause of Action
      • Our Will is Adequately Determined by Reasons
   (Character, Values, Motives, Feelings, Desires, et.)
      • Our Actions are Causally Determined by Our Will
The Moral Responsibility Requirement
  The moral responsibility requirement is a joint consequence of
randomness and adequate determinism.
     • Since we always have Alternative Possibilities
     • Since we can knowingly say , we Could Have Done Oth-
   erwise
     • Since our Actions are Causally Determined by Our Will
   and are Up to Us
     • We are Morally Responsible for our Actions
        58       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                               m inis          m
                                      De t e r

                                                       a t i b i lism
Chapter 6




                                              C    omp       r min  m   is
                                i n ism                e t e
                   De   t e r m                 Soft D
            Hard
                                                                     pati    bilism
                                                            ft C o m
                                                          So
                com  patibil
                             ism
                                m    y    o  f                                        Inc
 Hard I
        n
                         xo n o                 n    bis
                     A Ta ill PSoemsiciotmio a   t i    lism
                                           p
                   ism e W
     Ill u s i o n
                  Fre                  om  p a t i b ilism
                                                w   Inc
                    lism                  Narro
        p o s sibi
     Im                                                       a tibil  ism
                                                        o m p
                                              So ft Inc
                                                                                      yI
                        M  odel                                               Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                      p a tibilism           (Altern
                                                                                       a
                                                      m
                                     o u r c e Inco uence)
                                   S               l Seq
                                      (A   c t u a
                                                                         i m i t e d
                                                    e lw           ith L
                                                o d
                               - S t      age M
                          Tw o
                                                    This chapter on the web
                        informationphilosopher.com/freedom/taxonomy.html
                       m i n i s m
                 deter
                                                                      A Taxonomy         59
             In
             Taxonomy of FreeniWill
                               sm Positions
                                     ar         ia
                              Libert
               The free will debates of the late 20th century tended to be mono-
            logues and diatribes defending narrow niche positions against
            many other possible positions on free will.
                                                                        n t - C  ausal
                                                                    ge of carving
               This too is part of the scandal in philosophy.AInstead




                                                                                            Chapter 6
            out narrow niches and developing
                                        a  u s a l specialized new vocabularies
            an effort E      ent-C thephilosophy
            of technical terminology,
                       tovstandardize
                                                         would be better served by
                                               jargon used in the dialectic. We may
            not be able to achieve the universal, ambiguity-free language that
                                                                             n  - C a usal
            Leibniz dreamed of and logical positivists hoped for,N        o we could
                                                                        but
            try to simplify rather than complicate.
                                                FA
               The next best thing is toSprovide as complete a set of jargon
         t i b i l i s m
co   mpa    terms as we can assemble (see the Glossary, and the I-Phi
                                                                 a u s a litywebsite
                                                      Soft C
            version, which is of course a work in progress).
               Of all the terms, the most important are those used to describe
            what might  a tibe   ism called major “schools” on free will. For m
                             billoosely
      a d I n
            me,   m  p
              cothere are three historically significant terms - determinism,
                                                                        e  r t a r ianis
  Bro       libertarianism, and compatibilism. This S               Libcurrent name
                                                                ft the
                                                           lastois
            for William James’ “soft” determinism, which is the logically con-
                                     n     mwill is compatible with determinism.
                                       isfree                                                 n
                     be  r t
            tradictory notiona r i a
                                   that
                                                                            term       inatio
            st Li                                                    e
    M o d e                 Determinism
                             Hard Determinism
                                                              Self-D
                                                     Libertarian
                                                      Indeterminism

                                       Cogito
        p a t i b ilism                        Compatibilism
    o m
Inc
         q u   e n  c es)                       Soft Determinism

                                                                                   r m i n ism
                                                                              dete
     S e
tive             Figure 6-1. Traditional
                                                  In
                                         categories of the free will debates.

                                          i t e d
                                   nd Lim
               Compatibilism is an old idea, of course. Immanuel Kant

                               a
             found it in the work of the English thinkers Thomas Hobbes,
             ism
     r m i n John Locke, George Berkeley, and especially in David Hume.

Dete
             Kant described it in his 1788 Critique of Practical Reason,
                  “although the actions of men are necessarily determined by
                  causes which precede in time, we yet call then free, because
                  these causes are ideas produced by our own faculties...“
        60         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   “This is a wretched subterfuge [“miserable substitute” is a bet-
                   ter translation of ein elender Behelf, but the English phrase is
                   now famous in philosophy] with which some persons still let
                   themselves be put off, and so think they have solved, with a
                   petty word-jugglery [again, “a little quibbling” is better for einer
                   kleinen Wortklauberei], that difficult problem, at the solution of
                   which centuries have laboured in vain, and which can therefore
Chapter 6




                   scarcely be found so completely on the surface.” 1
               I agree that it is sophistry to solve the problem of free will and
             determinism by a language game that redefines freedom.
               John Stuart Mill took up the notion and it was known as the
             Hume-Mill tradition of reconciling freedom with determinism.
               William James thought this idea a “quagmire of evasion,” a
             “eulogistic terminology,” and a “mere word-grabbing game played
             by the soft determinists.” He says “they make a pretense of restor-
             ing the caged bird to liberty with one hand, while with the other
             we anxiously tie a string to its leg to make sure it does not get
             beyond our sight.” 2
             Incompatibilism Changes the Taxonomy
                “Soft” determinism became “compatibilism” in the early 20th
             century. It was, and still is, the most popular view of philosophers,
             although it was challenged when Carl Ginet and later Peter
             van Inwagen argued for “incompatibilism.” This incompatibil-
             ism was not simply arguing that determinism was not true, but
             that the presumed compatibilist premise - that free will involved,
             perhaps required, or even entailed, determinism - was not true.
                As we saw in Chapter 3, R. E. Hobart had argued in 1934 that
             free will involves determination, otherwise our willed actions
             would be random. Ginet and van Inwagen used the first part of
             the standard argument to show that if we are determined, we are
             not free. Therefore, compatibilism is not true. Q.E.D.?
                No. Logical philosophers say that the alternative is incompati-
             bilism. And they note that there are two ways that determinism
               1       Kant (1962) p. 332.
               2       James (1956) p. 149.
                            A Taxonomy of Free Will Positions              61

and free will can be incompatible. The first is the normal libertar-
ian view. Free will is true. Determinism is false.
   But there is another possibility. Free will is false and determinism
is true. This is James’ traditional “hard” determinism. Van
Inwagen convinced many philosophers that a compatibilism-
incompatibilism dichotomy made more sense than the traditional
freedom-determinism dichotomy (with compatibilism their




                                                                            Chapter 6
reconciliation). He wrote in 1983:
      “I shall argue that free will is incompatible with determinism.
      It will be convenient to call this thesis incompatibilism and to
      call the thesis that free will and determinism are compatible
      compatibilism.
      “I have no use for the terms ‘soft determinism’, ‘hard determin-
      ism; and ‘libertarianism’. I do not object to these terms on the
      ground that they are vague or ill-defined. They can be easily
      defined by means of the terms we shall use and are thus no
      worse in that respect than our terms.
      “Soft determinism is the conjunction of determinism and
      compatibilism; hard determinism is the conjunction of
      determinism and incompatibilism; libertarianism is the con-
      junction of incompatibilism and the thesis that we have free will.
      “I object to these terms because they lump together theses that
      should be discussed and analysed separately. They are therefore
      worse than useless and ought to be dropped from the working
      vocabulary of philosophers.” 3
   In my view, it is van Inwagen’s new terms that are “worse
than useless” (though they have been accepted as the standard
jargon in the current dialectic). They are useless because they
also “lump together theses that should be discussed and analysed
separately,” namely they call both libertarians and determinists
“incompatibilists.” What could be more confusing? But van
Inwagen’s new jargon has succeeded. The old terms are seen less
often today in the working vocabulary.
  3       Van Inwagen (1983) p. 13.
        62     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                If “soft” determinism was a “quagmire of evasion,” van Inwagen’s
             “incompatibilism is a deeper and darker “tarpit of confusion.”
                As Kadri Vihvelin said in her Stanford Encyclopedia of
             Philosophy article on Incompatibilism,
                   “Why an encyclopedia entry on arguments for incompatibilism?
                   (Why not an entry on the problem of free will and
Chapter 6




                   determinism?)”4
                It seems to me embarrassing for libertarians to have to describe
             themselves as “incompatibilists,” especially since incompatibilism
             “lumps together” libertarians and determinists. Randolph
             Clarke’s SEP article on free will thus has the convoluted and
             confusing title “Incompatibilist (Nondeterministic) Theories.” 5
                The van Inwagen taxonomy then looks like this,

                    Compatibilism                 Incompatibilism


                                   Hard Determinism                Libertarianism

               Figure 6-2. Van Inwagen’s compatibilism-incompatibilism categories.
                The fact that compatibilists are also determinists is obscured in
             this taxonomy. It helps the compatibilists to co-opt the term “free
             will” for their “compatibilist free will,” in opposition to a supposed
             unintelligible “libertarian free will.”
                Free will is not a puzzle to be dis-solved by the logical paradoxes
             and language games of the philosophers, especially those analytic
             language philosophers who pride themselves on their clear
             conceptual analysis.
             A New Taxonomy
                So I have developed an extended version of the traditional
             taxonomy of free will positions. Positions are defined by what they
             are, rather than what they are not. It is based on the traditional
             (hard) determinism - libertarian (indeterminist) - compatibilism
             (soft determinist) distinctions that van Inwagen thought “useless.”
               4      plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-arguments/
               5      plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/
                                                                           Determinism                                  Indeterminism

                                                    Hard Determinism           Compatibilism                                      Libertarianism
                                                                               Soft Determinism
                                                Hard Incompatibilism
                                                                                   Soft Compatibilism                     Event-Causal             Agent-Causal

                                               Illusionism




Figure 6-3. Taxonomy of Free Will Positions
                                                                          Semicompatibilism             Incompatibilism              SFA            Non-Causal

                                              Impossibilism
                                                                    Narrow Incompatibilism                Broad Incompatibilism         Soft Causality

                                              Valerian Model           Soft Incompatibilism               Modest Libertarianism            Soft Libertarianism

                                                              Source Incompatibilism          Leeway Incompatibilism                        Self-Determination
                                                                                                                            Cogito
                                                               (Actual Sequence)              (Alternative Sequences)
                                                                                                                                                                  A Taxonomy of Free Will Positions




                                                    Two-Stage Model with Limited Determinism and Limited Indeterminism
                                                                                                                                                                    63




                                                                                                                                     Chapter 6
        64     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                My new taxonomy calls a determinist a determinist, and
             arranges other positions in their proper places in the hierarchy.
                Libertarian incompatibilists are under indeterminism. Hard
             determinist incompatibilists are under determinism.
                The new hierarchy is open to the criticism that it puts compati-
             bilists at a disadvantage when claiming that their position is “free
Chapter 6




             will,” by showing clearly their deterministic position. So be it.
                Here are some brief definitions for the positions in Figure 6-2.
             For still more interrelationships, see the Glossary.
                Determinism is the position that every event is caused, in a
             chain of events with just one possible future. Historically, there are
             many kinds of determinisms or causes for the one possible future.
             They are discussed in Chapter 9.
                “Hard” determinism and “soft” determinism are terms in-
             vented by William James who lamented the fact that some deter-
             minists were co-opting the term freedom for themselves. 6
                “Hard” determinists deny the existence of free will. “Soft”
             determinists baldly claim their position as “free will.”
                Compatibilism is the most common name used today for
             James’s category of “soft” determinism. For compatibilists, free
             will is compatible with determinism, or would be, if determinism
             were true, the agnostics on determinism say.
                This makes compatibilism today much more complicated...
                We can divide two sub-categories of compatibilism, as we did
             for incompatibilsm, based on their view of determinism.
                Today’s sophisticated (and sophistical) compatibilists want to
             include both “the conjunction of compatibilism and the thesis
             that determinism is true” AND “the conjunction of compatibilism
             and the thesis that determinism is false.” They want it both ways
             (or either way), because most compatibilists today are agnostic on
             the truth of determinism. (Most are cognizant of the indetermin-
             ism of quantum physics.)
                It is thus difficult today to know what compatibilists are
             compatible with! We are being sucked deeper and deeper into
             William James’ “quagmire of evasion,” to a “tarpit of confusion.”
               6     James (1956) p. 149.
                         A Taxonomy of Free Will Positions            65

   Semicompatibilists are agnostic about free will and determin-
ism, but claim that moral responsibility is compatible with deter-
minism, in any case. Narrow incompatibilism is a similar concept.
   Hard incompatibilists think both free will and moral responsi-
bility are incompatible with determinism, which is “true.”.
   Illusionists are hard incompatibilists, who say free will is




                                                                       Chapter 6
an illusion and usually deny moral responsibility. Some say we
should preserve moral responsibility in society by maintaining
the illusion (i.e., keep the masses uninformed about the “truth” of
determinism).
   Impossibilists are also hard incompatibilists. They say moral
responsibility is provably impossible.
   Incompatibilism is the idea that free will and determin-
ism are incompatible. Incompatibilists today include both hard
determinists and libertarians. This confusion, created by analytic
language philosophers who are normally committed to clear and
unambiguous conceptualization, adds difficulties for new stu-
dents of philosophy. See pp. 59-61.
   Soft incompatibilists say that free will is incompatible with
pre-determinism, and that pre-determinism is not true. It is pref-
erable to the loose usage of the term “incompatibilist” to describe
a libertarian, since “incompatibilist” is ambiguous and also used
for determinists (hard incompatibilists).
   Source and Leeway incompatibilists locate indeterminism in
the Actual Sequence of events or Alternative Sequences. An
Actual Sequence event breaks the causal chain. Alternative
Sequences provide alternative possibilities.7
   Indeterminism is the position that there are random (chance)
events in a world with many possible futures.
   Libertarians believe that indeterminism makes free will pos-
sible. But it is not enough. Many philosophers admit indetermin-
ism may be true, but that it does not provide free will (“hard”
indeterminists?). See the standard argument against free will in
Chapter 4. If our actions are determined, we are not free. If they
  7    See Timpe (2008) for a very clear account.
        66     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             are random, we are not responsible for them. So indeterminism
             is not enough. We also need “adequate determinism” - Hobart’s
             determination - in a second stage (See Chapter 13).
                Agent-causal indeterminists are libertarians who think that
             agents originate causes for their actions. These causes are not
             events. So their actions do not depend on any prior causes. Some
Chapter 6




             call this “metaphysical” freedom.
                Non-causal indeterminists simply deny any causes whatsoever
             for libertarian free will.
                Event-causal indeterminists generally accept the view that ran-
             dom events (most likely quantum mechanical events) occur in
             the world. Whether in the physical world, in the biological world
             (where they are a key driver of genetic mutations), or in the mind,
             randomness and uncaused events are real. They introduce the
             possibility of accidents, novelty, and both biological and human
             creativity.
                Soft Causality is the idea that most events are adequately
             determined by normal causes, but that some events are not pre-
             cisely predictable from prior events, because there are occasional
             quantum events that start new causal chains with unpredictable
             futures. These events are said to be causa sui.
                Soft Libertarians accept some indeterminism in the Actual
             Sequence. They are source incompatibilists.
                Self-Determination is the traditional name for decisions that
             are the result of our choices, determined by our character and
             values, etc., decisions that are “up to us.”
                SFA is the Self-Forming Action of Robert Kane’s libertarian
             free-will model, with indeterminism centered in the choice itself.
                Two-Stage Models that combine limited Determinism and
             Indeterminism have been discussed by many thinkers, includ-
             ing William James, Henri Poincaré, Arthur Holly Comp-
             ton, Karl Popper, Daniel Dennett (Valerian Model), Henry
             Margenau, Robert Kane, John Martin Fischer, Alfred
             Mele (Modest Libertarianism), Stephen Kosslyn, Bob Doyle
                       A Taxonomy of Free Will Positions                 67

(Cogito Model), and Martin Heisenberg. See Chapter 12 and
these thinkers’ personal pages on the I-Phi website for more
details.
   Two-stage models include both “adequate determinism”
(which denies pre-determinism) and an indeterminism that is
limited to generating alternative possibilities for action. It is only
pre-determinism that is incompatible with free will.




                                                                          Chapter 6
  Two-Stage Models in a Nutshell
     Thoughts come to us freely. Actions go from us willfully.
     First chance, then choice.
     First “free,” then “will.”


   I argue that because two-stage models reconcile free will with
both determinism (as David Hume did in his compatibilism) and
with indeterminism (as William James first did), we can say that
this kind of freedom is even more compatible than standard com-
patibilism, and might be called “comprehensive compatibilism.”
   So why accept “comprehensive compatibilism?” I believe that
compatibilists have all along had excellent reasons for insisting
on some determinism in any intelligible model for free will. The
adequate determinism in my Cogito model provides the kind of
determination R. E. Hobart wanted, for example.
   It gives compatibilists the determination of their will by char-
acter, values, motives, and desires that they need, but reconcilia-
tion with a limited indeterminism also gives them the generation
of new ideas that makes them the authors of their lives and co-
creators of the universe. See Chapter 28 for more details on the
idea of a comprehensive compatibilism.
   If widely discussed, the two-stage model might help us to end
the “free will scandal in philosophy.”
   With this taxonomy of free will positions and the standard
argument against free will in mind, we are now ready to turn to
the history of the free will problem.
        68       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                               m inis        m
                                      De t e r

                                                       a t i b i lism
                                                   omp
Chapter 7




                                              C              r min  m   is
                                i n ism                e t e
                   De   t e r m                 Soft D
            Hard
                                                                     pati    bilism
                                                            ft C o m
                                                        So
                             ism
                com  patibil
                                  i s t o r y                                         Inc
 Hard I
        n
                         Th e H                    i bilism
                                       ie
                                              a  t
                             o f Ste h
                                     m  com p
                                                  l  e   m
           i o n i s m
                                 l l P  r o b
     Illus
                            W  i
                       Free Narrow Incom   p a t i b ilism

            s sibi  lism
     Im p o                                                            ism
                                                          m p a tibil
                                                 ft Inc o
                                              So                                      yI
                        M  odel                                               Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                      p a tibilism           (Altern
                                                                                       a
                                                      m
                                     o u r c e Inco uence)
                                   S               l Seq
                                      (A   c t u a
                                                                        i m i t e d
                                                    e lw          ith L
                                                o d
                               - S t      age M
                          Tw o
                                                    This chapter on the web
                                informationphilosopher.com/freedom/history
                       m i n i s m
                 deter
                                                                     The History        69
             In
             History of the Problem
                              nism   ar       ia
                              Libert
                 From its earliest beginnings, the problem of “free will” has been
             intimately connected with the question of moral responsibility.
             Most of the ancient thinkers on the problem were trying toashow
                                                                             t - C     usal
             that we humans have control over our decisions,       Agthat  n
                                                                        e our actions
             “depend on us”, and that they are not pre-determined by fate,
                                            u sal necessity, or by a natural causal




                                                                                             Chapter 7
             by arbitrary gods,-C       byalogical
             determinism.  Event
                 Almost everything written about free will to date has been ver-
                                                                                n  - C  a  usal
             bal and formal logical debate about the precise meaning      No of philo-
             sophical concepts like causality, necessity, and other dogmas of
                       m                       SFA
         t i b i l i s
             determinism.

co   mpa         The “problem of free will” is often described as laity
             of reconciling “free will” with one or more
                                                           o  ft C aofu s
                                                                       the
                                                                          amany
                                                                                 question
                                                                                     kinds
                                                         S
             of determinism. As a result, the “problem of free will” depends
             on two things,        lism
                              tibithe   exact definition of free will and which of the
             n  c  o  m   p a
                                                                                  a r i a n ism
           I determinisms        is being  reconciled.                          t
  Broad There is also an even more difficult                          Liber
                                                               Softreconciliation        for
             “libertarian” free will. How can a morally responsible will be rec-
                                a r i a n ism or objective chance? The standard ation
             onciled with
                    L  i      t
                         beragainst free will is that it can not possiblyDbeetrecon-
                                indeterminism
                                                                                    e  rmin
              s  t
   Modeciled with either randomness or determinism,Sand                  f-
             argument
                                                                       elthat  these two
                                                  i t o
                                           Cogcalled philosophy, religious accounts
             exhaust the logical possibilities.
                   ili
            tofibman’s
                 Befores m there  was   anything
    o m p a
Inc             e n  c  e   ) explored the degree of human freedom permitted
                          sfate
                                                                         i n is         m
           u                                                         r
       eq by superhuman gods. Creation myths often end in adventures of
                                                                dete
tive S the first humans clearly making choices and being held respon-  m
                                         i t e d In
                                  nd Lim
             sible. But a strong fatalism is present in those tales that foretell

             ism               a
             the future, based on the idea that the gods have foreknowledge

     r m i n of future events. Anxious not to annoy the gods, the myth-makers
Dete         rarely challenge the implausible view that the gods’ foreknowl-
             edge is compatible with human freedom. This was an early form
             of today’s compatibilism, the idea that causal determinism and
             logical necessity are compatible with free will.
        70     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                The first thinkers to look for causes in natural phenomena
             (rather than gods controlling events) were the Greek physiologoi
             or cosmologists. The reasons (λόγοι) behind the physical (φύσις)
             world became the ideal “laws” governing material phenomena. The
             first cosmologist was Anaximander, who coined the term physis
             (φύσις). He also likely combined the words cosmos (κόσμος), as
             organized nature, and logos (λόγος), as the law behind nature, in
Chapter 7




             cosmology.
                The Greeks had a separate word for the laws (or conventions) of
             society, nomos (νόμος).
             The Presocratics
                Heraclitus, the philosopher of change, agreed that there were
             laws or rules (the logos) behind all the change. The early cosmolo-
             gists’ intuition that their laws could produce an ordered cosmos
             out of chaos was prescient. Our current model of the universe
             begins with a state of minimal information and maximum dis-
             order. Early cosmologists imagined that the universal laws were
             all-powerful and must therefore explain the natural causes behind
             all things, from regular motions of the heavens to the mind (νοῦς)
             of man.
                The physiologoi transformed pre-philosophical arguments
             about gods controlling the human will into arguments about pre-
             existing causal laws controlling it. The cosmological problem be-
             came a psychological problem. Some saw a causal chain of events
             leading back to a first cause (later taken by many religious think-
             ers to be God). Other physiologoi held that although all physical
             events are caused, mental events might not be. This is mind/body
             dualism, the most important of all the great dualisms. If the mind
             (or soul) is a substance different from matter, it could have its own
             laws, different from the laws of nature for material bodies.
             Determinism
               The materialist philosophers Democritus and Leucippus,
             again with extraordinary prescience, claimed that all things,
             including humans, were made of atoms in a void, with individual
                               History of the Free Will Problem          71

atomic motions strictly controlled by causal laws. Democritus
wanted to wrest control of man’s fate from arbitrary gods and
make us more responsible for our actions. But ironically, he and
Leucippus originated two of the great dogmas of determinism,
physical determinism and logical necessity, which lead directly
to the modern problem of free will and determinism. Leucippus
stated the first dogma, an absolute necessity which left no room in




                                                                              Chapter 7
the cosmos for chance.
        “Nothing occurs at random, but everything for a reason and
      by necessity.”
        οὐδὲν χρῆμα μάτην γίνεται, ἀλλὰ πάντα ἐκ λόγου τε καὶ ὑπ’
      ἀνάγκης 1
   The consequence is a world with but one possible future, com-
pletely determined by its past. Some even argued for a great cycle
of events (an idea borrowed from Middle Eastern sources) repeat-
ing themselves over thousands of years.
   The Pythagoreans, Socrates, and Plato attempted to recon-
cile human freedom with material determinism and causal law, in
order to hold man responsible for his actions.
Aristotle
    The first major philosopher to argue convincingly for some in-
determinism was probably Aristotle. First he described a causal
chain back to a prime mover or first cause, and he elaborated the
four possible causes (material, efficient, formal, and final). Aristo-
tle’s word for these causes was ἀιτία, which translates as causes in
the sense of the multiple factors or explanations behind an event.
Aristotle did not subscribe to the simplistic “every event has a
(single) cause” idea that was to come later.
    Then, in his Physics and Metaphysics, Aristotle also said there
were “accidents” caused by “chance (τύχη).” In his Physics, he
clearly reckoned chance among the causes. Aristotle might have
added chance as a fifth cause - an uncaused or self-caused cause
  1      Leucippus, Fragment 569 - from Fr. 2 Actius I, 25, 4
        72     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             - one he thought happens when two causal chains come together
             by accident (συμβεβεκός).
               He noted that the early physicists had found no place for chance
             among their causes.
               Aristotle opposed his accidental chance to necessity:
                    “Nor is there any definite cause for an accident, but only chance
                   (τυχόν), namely an indefinite (ἀόριστον) cause. “ 2
Chapter 7




                   “It is obvious that there are principles and causes which are gen-
                   erable and destructible apart from the actual processes of gen-
                   eration and destruction; for if this is not true, everything will
                   be of necessity: that is, if there must necessarily be some cause,
                   other than accidental, of that which is generated and destroyed.
                   Will this be, or not? Yes, if this happens; otherwise not.” 3
               For Aristotle, a break in the causal chain allowed us to feel
             our actions “depend on us” (ἐφ’ ἡμῖν). He knew that many of our
             decisions are quite predictable based on habit and character, but
             they are no less free nor we less responsible if our character itself
             and predictable habits were developed freely in the past and are
             changeable in the future.
                   “If we are unable to trace conduct back to any other origins than
                   those within ourselves, then actions of which the origins are
                   within us (ἐν ἡμῖν), themselves depend upon us (ἐφ’ ἡμῖν),
                   and are voluntary (ekousia - will).” 4
                Some scholars say Aristotle did not see or confront the problem
             of free will versus determinism. But consider his arguments for
             some indeterminism, his “Sea-Battle” example against the Megar-
             ians claim that future contingency is logically impossible, and his
             belief that animals are exempt from laws of material determinism.
                One generation after Aristotle, Epicurus argued that as atoms
             moved through the void, there were occasions when they would
             “swerve” from their otherwise determined paths, thus initiating
             new causal chains. Epicurus argued that these swerves would allow
             us to be more responsible for our actions, something impossible if
               2       Aristotle (1935) Metaphysics, Book V, 1025a25
               3       Aristotle (1935) Metaphysics, Book VI, 1027a29
               4       Aristotle (1937) Nichomachean Ethics, III.v.6
                              History of the Free Will Problem            73

every action was deterministically caused. For Epicurus, the occa-
sional interventions of arbitrary gods would be preferable to strict
determinism.
   Epicurus did not say the swerve was directly involved in deci-
sions. His critics, ancient and modern, have claimed mistakenly
that Epicurus did assume “one swerve - one decision.” Following
Aristotle, Epicurus thought human agents have the ability to tran-




                                                                               Chapter 7
scend necessity and chance.
      “...some things happen of necessity, others by chance, others
      through our own agency. ...necessity destroys responsibility and
      chance is inconstant; whereas our own actions are autonomous,
      and it is to them that praise and blame naturally attach.” 5
   Parenthetically, we now know that atoms do not occasionally
swerve, they move unpredictably whenever they are in close con-
tact with other atoms. Everything in the material universe is made
of atoms in unstoppable perpetual motion. Deterministic paths
are only the case for very large objects, where the statistical laws of
atomic physics average to become nearly certain dynamical laws
for billiard balls and planets.
   So Epicurus’ intuition of a fundamental randomness was cor-
rect. We know Epicurus’ work largely from the Roman Lucretius
and his friend Cicero.
   Lucretius saw the randomness as enabling free will, even if
he could not explain how, beyond the fact that random swerves
would break the causal chain of determinism.
        “If all motion is always one long chain, and new motion aris-
      es out of the old in order invariable, and if first-beginnings do
      not make by swerving a beginning of motion so as to break the
      decrees of fate, whence comes this free will [libera]?” 6
  Cicero unequivocally denies fate, strict causal determinism,
and God’s foreknowledge. Augustine quotes Cicero,
          “If there is free will, all things do not happen according to
      fate; if all things do not happen according to fate, there is not

  5       Epicurus, Letter to Menoeceus, §133
  6       Lucretius (1982) De Rerum Natura), book 2, lines 216-250
        74     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                a certain order of causes; and if there is not a certain order of
                causes, neither is there a certain order of things foreknown by
                God.” 7

             The Stoics
                It was the Stoic school of philosophy that solidified the idea
             of natural laws controlling all things, including the mind.8 Their
Chapter 7




             influence persists to this day, in philosophy and religion. Most of
             the extensive Stoic writings are lost, probably because their doc-
             trine of fate, which identified God with Nature, was considered
             anathema to the Christian church. The church agreed that the laws
             of God were the laws of Nature, but that God and Nature were two
             different entities. In either case strict determinism follows by uni-
             versal Reason (logos) from an omnipotent and omniscient God.
                Stoic virtue called for men to resist futile passions like anger
             and envy. The fine Stoic morality that all men (including slaves
             and women) were equal children of God coincided with (or was
             adopted by) the church. Stoic logic and physics freed those fields
             from ancient superstitions, but strengthened the dogmas of deter-
             minism that dominate modern science and philosophy, especially
             when they explicitly denied Aristotle’s chance as a cause.9
                The major founder of Stoicism, Chrysippus, took the edge off
             strict determinism. Like Democritus, Aristotle, and Epicurus be-
             fore him, he wanted to strengthen the argument for moral respon-
             sibility, in particular defending it from Aristotle’s and Epicurus’s
             indeterminate chance causes.
                Whereas the past is unchangeable, Chrysippus argued that
             some future events that are possible do not occur by necessity
             from past external factors alone, but might depend on us. We have
             a choice to assent or not to assent to an action.
                Chrysippus said our actions are determined (in part by our-
             selves as causes) and fated (because of God’s foreknowledge), but
             he also said correctly that they are not necessitated. Chrysippus
             would be seen today as a compatibilist, as was the Stoic Epictetus.10
               7    Augustine (1935) Bk V, Ch. 9, Cf. Cicero, De Divinatione Book II, x 25
               8    Long (2000), Sorabji (1980) p. 70
               9    Sambursky, (1988) p. 73-76.
               10   Sharples (1983) p. 8, Long, (1986) p. 101, Sharples (1996) p. 8.
                               History of the Free Will Problem         75


Hellenistic Thinking
   Alexander of Aphrodisias, the most famous commentator
on Aristotle, wrote 500 years after Aristotle’s death, at a time when
Aristotle and Plato were rather forgotten minor philosophers in
the age of Stoics, Epicureans, and Skeptics. Alexander defended
a view of moral responsibility we would call libertarianism today.
Greek philosophy had no precise term for “free will” as did Lat-




                                                                             Chapter 7
in (liberum arbitrium or libera voluntas). The discussion was in
terms of responsibility, what “depends on us” (in Greek ἐφ ἡμῖν).
   Alexander believed that Aristotle was not a strict determinist
like the Stoics, and Alexander himself argued that some events
do not have predetermined causes. In particular, man is respon-
sible for self-caused decisions, and can choose to do or not to do
something. Alexander denied the foreknowledge of events that
was part of the Stoic identification of God and Nature.11
   Most of the ancient thinkers recognized the obvious difficul-
ty with chance (or an uncaused cause) as the source of human
freedom. Even Aristotle described chance as a “cause obscure to
human reason” (ἀιτιάν ἄδελον ἀνθρωπίνῳ λογισμῷ).
   Actions caused by chance are simply random and we cannot
feel responsible for them. But we do feel responsible. Despite more
than twenty-three centuries of philosophizing, most modern
thinkers have not moved significantly beyond this core problem
of randomness and free will for libertarians - the confused idea
that free actions are caused directly by a random event.
   Caught between the horns of a dilemma, with determinism on
one side and randomness on the other, the standard argument
against free will continues to make human freedom an unintel-
ligible mystery. See Chapter 4.
Early Christians
   A couple of centuries after Alexander, a subtle argument for
free will was favored by early Christian theologians. They want-
ed human free will in order to absolve an omnipotent God of
  11   Sharples (1983) p. 21
        76     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             responsibility for evil actions. This is called the problem of evil.
             Those who held God to be omniscient, Augustine for example,
             maintained that God’s foreknowledge was compatible with human
             freedom, an illogical position still held today by most theologians.
             Augustine argued for free will, but only as compatible with God
                “God must needs have given free will to man. God’s
                foreknowledge is not opposed to our free choice.” 12
Chapter 7




                Augustine’s more sensible contemporary, the British monk
             Pelagius (Morgan) held, with Cicero, that human freedom
             prohibited divine foreknowledge. The success of Augustine’s ideas
             led the church to judge Pelagius a heretic.13
             Classicists on Free Will in Antiquity
                Before we leave the ancients, it will be instructive to see how
             great classicists have understood what the ancients were saying
             about free will. Unfortunately, many of them are influenced by our
             modern ideas of free will, looking for specific modern theories
             like compatibilism and extreme libertarianism. I will try to point
             out these biases where they are obvious.
             Carlo Giussani
               In his 1896 Studi lucreziani (p.126), Giussani put forward the
             idea that Epicurus’ atomic swerves are involved directly in every
             case of human free action, not just somewhere in the past that
             breaks the causal chain of determinism. This goes beyond
                and leads to the mistaken conclusion that the swerves directly
             cause actions. This was the Stoics’ view of Epicurus.
                “The complete conception of the will according to Epicurus
                comprises two elements, a complex atomic movement which
                has the characteristic of spontaneity, that is, is withdrawn from
                the necessity of mechanical causation: and then the sensus, or
                self-consciousness in virtue of which the will, illuminated by
                previous movements of sensation, thought, and emotion, prof-
                its by the peculiar liberty or spontaneity of the atomic motions,
               12   Augustine, On Free Choice of the Will. Book Two, I, 7, Book Three, IV, 38
               13   Augustine, On Free Choice of the Will. Book Three, IV, 40
                             History of the Free Will Problem              77

   to direct or not to direct these in a direction seen or selected.” 14
   (Cyril Bailey translation)

Cyril Bailey
  In 1928 Bailey agreed with Giussani that the atoms of the mind-
soul provide a break in the continuity of atomic motions, other-
wise actions would be necessitated. Bailey imagined complexes of
mind-atoms that work together to form a consciousness that is




                                                                                Chapter 7
not determined, but also not susceptible to the pure randomness
of individual atomic swerves, something that could constitute
Epicurus’ idea of actions being “up to us” (πὰρ’ ἡμάς).
      “It is a commonplace to state that Epicurus, like his follow-
   er Lucretius, intended primarily to combat the ‘myths’ of the
   orthodox religion, to show by his demonstration of the unfail-
   ing laws of nature the falseness of the old notions of the arbitrary
   action of the gods and so to relieve humanity from the terrors of
   superstition. But it is sometimes forgotten that Epicurus viewed
   with almost greater horror the conception of irresistible ‘des-
   tiny’ or ‘necessity’, which is the logical outcome of the notion of
   natural law pressed to its conclusion. This conclusion had been
   accepted in its fulness by Democritus, but Epicurus conspicu-
   ously broke away from him: ‘it were better to follow the myths
   about the gods than to become a slave to the “destiny” of the
   natural philosophers: for the former suggests a hope of placat-
   ing the gods by worship, whereas the latter involves a necessity
   which knows no placation’. “ 15
   “The ‘swerve’ of the atoms is, no doubt, as the critics have
   always pointed out, a breach of the fundamental laws of cause
   and effect, for it is the assertion of a force for which no cause
   can be given and no explanation offered... But it was no slip or
   oversight on Epicurus’ part which a more careful consideration
   of his principles might have rectified. On the contrary it was a
   very deliberate breach in the creed of ‘necessity’ and is in a sense
   the hinge on which the whole of his system turns. He wished to
   secure ‘freedom’ as an occasional breach of ‘natural law’.” 16
  14   Giussani (1896) Studi lucreziani, p. 126
  15   Bailey (1964) p. 318.
  16   Bailey (1964) p. 320
        78     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             David Furley
               In 1967, Furley examined the ideas of Giussani and Bailey and
             de-emphasized the importance of the swerve in both Epicurus
             and Lucretius so as to defend Epicurus from the extreme view
             that our actions are caused directly by random swerves. (Bailey
             had denied this “traditional interpretation” of the swerve.) Furley
             argues for a strong connection between the ideas of Aristotle and
Chapter 7




             Epicurus on autonomous actions that are “up to us.”
                “If we now put together the introduction to Lucretius’ passage
                on voluntas and Aristotle’s theory of the voluntary, we can see
                how the swerve of atoms was supposed to do its work. Aristo-
                tle’s criterion of the voluntary was a negative one: the source of
                the voluntary action is in the agent himself, in the sense that
                it cannot be traced back beyond or outside the agent himself.
                Lucretius says that voluntas must be saved from a succession
                of causes which can be traced back to infinity. All he needs to
                satisfy the Aristotelian criterion is a break in the succession of
                causes, so that the source of an action cannot be traced back
                to something occurring before the birth of the agent. A single
                swerve of a single atom in the individual’s psyche would be
                enough for this purpose, if all actions are to be referred to the
                whole of the psyche.
                “But there is no evidence about the number of swerves. One
                would be enough, and there must not be so many that the
                psyche exhibits no order at all; between these limits any number
                would satisfy the requirements of the theory.
                “The swerve, then, plays a purely negative part in Epicurean
                psychology. It saves voluntas from necessity, as Lucretius says it
                does, but it does not feature in every act of voluntas. There is no
                need to scrutinize the psychology of a voluntary action to find
                an uncaused or spontaneous element in it. The peculiar vulner-
                ability of Epicurean freedom — that it seemed to fit random
                actions, rather than deliberate and purposive ones — is a myth,
                if this explanation is correct.” 17


               17   Furley (1967) p. 232.
                           History of the Free Will Problem               79


Pamela Huby
   In the same year 1967, Huby suggested that Epicurus was the
original discoverer of the “freewill problem.” Huby noted that
there had been two main free will problems, corresponding to dif-
ferent determinisms, namely theological determinism (predesti-
nation and foreknowledge) and the physical causal determinism
of Democritus.




                                                                               Chapter 7
   “In spite of the poverty of our evidence, it is quite clear that one
   main reason Epicurus had for introducing the swerve, or rather
   the swerve as a random, uncaused event, was as a solution to the
   problem of freewill. Unlike Aristotle, he fully appreciated that
   there was a problem. He believed in free will, because it seemed
   to him manifestly clear that men could originate action, but he
   could not, like Aristotle, regard this as the end of the matter.
   “...the fact remains, on the evidence of Cicero and Lucretius,
   that Epicurus still ultimately traced the freedom of the will to
   the swerve of the atoms. How exactly he did this remains a mys-
   tery.” 18

Richard Sorabji
  Sorabji’s 1980 Necessity, Cause, and Blame surveyed Aristo-
tle’s positions on causation and necessity, comparing them to his
predecessors and successors, especially the Stoics and Epicurus.
Sorabji argues that Aristotle was an indeterminist, that real chance
and uncaused events exist, but never that human actions are un-
caused in the extreme libertarian sense that some commentators
mistakenly attribute to Epicurus.
   “I shall be representing Aristotle as an indeterminist; but opin-
   ions on this issue have been diverse since the earliest times...
   “It is not always recognised that Aristotle gave any consideration
   to causal determinism, that is, to determinism based on causal
   considerations. But I shall argue that in a little-understood pas-
   sage he maintains that coincidences lack causes. To understand
   why he thinks so; we must recall his view that a cause is one of
   four kinds of explanation. On both counts, I think he is right.
  18   Huby (1967) pp. 353-62
        80     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 His account of cause, I believe, is more promising than any of
                 those current today, and also justifies the denial that coinci-
                 dences have causes.” 19

             R. W. Sharples
                Sharples’ great translation and commentary Alexander of
             Aphrodisias On Fate appeared in 1983. He described Alexander’s
             De Fato as perhaps the most comprehensive treatment surviving
Chapter 7




             from classical antiquity of the problem of responsibility (τὸ ἐφ’
             ἡμίν) and determinism. It especially shed a great deal of light on
             Aristotle’s position on free will and on the Stoic attempt to make
             responsibility compatible with determinism.
                Sharples thinks that the problem of determinism and respon-
             sibility was not realized, in the form in which it was eventually
             passed on to post-classical thinkers, until relatively late in the his-
             tory of Greek thought - at least not until after Aristotle.
                 “The mechanistic atomism of Democritus (born 460-457 B.C.)
                 may well seem to us to raise difficulties for human responsibil-
                 ity, and it seemed to do so to Epicurus, but Democritus himself
                 apparently felt no such problem.” 20
                 “The Stoic position, given definitive expression by Chrysippus
                 (c. 280-207 B.C.), the third head of the school, represents not
                 the opposite extreme from that of Epicurus but an attempt to
                 compromise, to combine determinism and responsibility.” 21

             Don Fowler
                In his 1983 thesis, “Lucretius on the Clinamen and ‘Free Will’,”
             Fowler criticized Furley’s limits on the swerve and defended the
             ancient - but seriously mistaken - claim that Epicurus proposed
             random swerves as directly causing our actions. This mistaken
             claim has become common in current interpretations of Epicurus.
                 “I turn to the overall interpretation. Lucretius is arguing from
                 the existence of voluntas to the existence of the clinamen;
               19    Sorabji (1980) p. x.
               20    Sharples (2007) p. 4.
               21    Sharples (2007) p. 8.
                            History of the Free Will Problem             81

   nothing comes to be out of nothing, therefore voluntas must
   have a cause at the atomic level, viz. the clinamen. The most nat-
   ural interpretation of this is that every act of voluntas is caused
   by a swerve in the atoms of the animal’s mind.”
  This is not an interpretation that would have been acceptable to
Epicurus, as Furley had argued. Fowler continues:
   “Furley, however, argued that the relationship between volun-




                                                                              Chapter 7
   tas and the clinamen was very different; not every act of voli-
   tion was accompanied by a swerve in the soul-atoms, but the
   clinamen was only an occasional event which broke the chain
   of causation.”

A. A. Long and D. N. Sedley
   In their great 1987 work The Hellenistic Philosophers (dedicated
to David Furley), Long and Sedley discussed Epicurus and the free
will problem at length, with references to the principal original
Greek and Latin sources.
   “Epicurus’ problem is this: if it has been necessary all along that
   we should act as we do, it cannot be up to us, with the result
   that we would not be morally responsible for our actions at all.
   Thus posing the problem of determinism he becomes arguably
   the first philosopher to recognize the philosophical centrality of
   what we know as the Free Will Question. His strongly libertar-
   ian approach to it can be usefully contrasted with the Stoics’
   acceptance of determinism.
   “It is perhaps the most widely known fact about Epicurus that
   he for this reason modified the deterministic Democritean sys-
   tem by introducing a slight element of indeterminacy to atomic
   motion, the ‘swerve’. But taken in isolation such a solution is
   notoriously unsatisfactory. It promises to liberate us from rigid
   necessity only to substitute an alternative human mechanism,
   perhaps more undependable and eccentric but hardly more
   autonomous. Epicurus’ remarks, where ‘that which depends
   on us’ (or ‘that which is up to us’) is contrasted with unstable
   fortune as well as with necessity, suggest that he meant to avoid
   this trap.” 22
  22   Long and Sedley (1987) p. 107.
        82     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Julia Annas
                In her 1992 book, The Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind, Annas
             finds it hard to see how random swerves can help to explain free
             action. But she sees clearly that randomness can provide alterna-
             tive possibilities for the will to choose from.
                 “...since swerves are random, it is hard to see how they help to
                 explain free action. We can scarcely expect there to be a ran-
Chapter 7




                 dom swerve before every free action... The role of swerves is to
                 provide alternative possibilities for volitions to choose between,
                 for there would be no point in having free will if there were no
                 genuinely open possibilities between which to select.” 23

             Tim O’Keefe
                In his 2005 study Epicurus on Freedom, O’Keefe concluded that
             Epicurus was mostly concerned with defending an open future
             against fatalism and the logical necessity of statements about
             future events. If it is true that there will be a sea battle on Monday,
             the future event is necessitated.
                 “My own thesis is that Epicurus’ main concern is not with justi-
                 fied praise and blame, but with preserving the rationality and
                 efficacy of deliberating about one’s future actions, although he
                 thinks that determinism is incompatible with both. The reason
                 for this is that a necessary condition on effective deliberation is
                 the openness and contingency of the future, and determinism
                 makes the future necessary.” 24

             John Dudley
                In his 2011 monograph Aristotle’s Concept of Chance, Dudley
             makes it clear that Aristotle rejects determinism. He says that Ar-
             istotle offers three causes (ἀιτία) that are not themselves caused.
             These are human free choice (ἐφ’ ἡμῖν), accidents (συμβεβεκός),
             and chance (τύχη for humans, and ταὐτόματον for animals and
             nature). These uncaused causes break the chain of “necessary”
             causes (ἀνάγκη), explain future contingency, and make the future
             inherently unpredictable (p. 268). He says in conclusion,
               23    Annas (1992) p. 186.
               24    O’Keefe (2005) p. 17.
                           History of the Free Will Problem             83

      “It may be said, then, that Aristotle not only was not a deter-
   minist, but that he provided an epistemological and metaphysi-
   cal explanation for the inadequacy of determinism. He argued
   profoundly not only that human free choices are not the only
   exception in an otherwise determined world, but that all events
   on earth are in the final analysis contingent, since they can all
   be traced back to a contingent starting-point. This contingent
   starting-point can be a free choice or a [sc. unusual] accident or




                                                                             Chapter 7
   chance, which can be based on both.” 25

Scholastics
   The Scholastics were medieval theologians who tried to use
Reason to establish the Truth of Religion. Because they used Rea-
son, instead of accepting traditional views based on faith and
scripture alone, they were called moderns. Thomas Aquinas
maintained that man was free but also held there was a divine ne-
cessity in God’s omniscience, that God himself was ruled by laws
of Reason. Duns Scotus took the opposite view, that God’s own
freedom demanded that God’s actions not be necessitated, even
by Reason. Both argued that human freedom was compatible with
divine foreknowledge, using sophisticated arguments originally
proposed by Augustine, that God’s knowing was outside of time,
arguments used again later in the Renaissance and by Immanuel
Kant in the Enlightenment.
   Great Jewish thinkers like Maimonides in his Guide for the
Perplexed and Chapters on Ethics argued for human freedom,
especially against the idea of omniscience in the Christian God,
though in more popular commentaries he embraced a natural law
and divine foreknowledge that controlled much human action.26
Islamic thinkers hotly debated God’s will, with the Sunni generally
determinist and the Shia inclined toward freedom. Asian religions
like Buddhism, which do not have the paradox of an omniscient
God, embrace human freedom in Karma, which includes a per-
son’s character and values that tend to shape one’s behavior, but
can always be changed by acts of will.
  25   Dudley (2011) p. 15.
  26   Argument from Free Will in Wikipedia, retrieved October 2010
        84     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             The Renaissance
                Renaissance thinkers like Pico della Mirandola and
             Giordano Bruno questioned the teachings of the church and
             asserted a perfectibility of man that required the freedom to
             improve as well as to fail. Lorenzo Valla and Pietro Pompon-
             azzi followed the Scholastics and argued that God’s foreknowl-
             edge of human actions was outside of time. The Dutch humanist
Chapter 7




             Erasmus and protestant reformer Martin Luther exchanged
             diatribes on free will. Luther’s was frankly called “The Bondage of
             the Will.” He saw nothing new in Erasmus’ work, nor do I.
             The Rationalists
                Modern philosophy began with René Descartes and the
             other continental rationalists, Gottfried Leibniz and Baruch
             Spinoza. Again, they were called modern because they tried
             to use Reason to establish the certainty of Truth (includ-
             ing Religion). Descartes found the realm of human freedom in
             the Mind, which he thought was a separate substance from the
             material Body. He advocated a mind/body dualism in which
             matter or body is determined and spirit or mind is free and by
             its nature unconstrainable and indeterminate. Spinoza objected
             to Descartes’s freedom. It involves an uncaused cause, which
             Spinoza felt was impossible. Spinoza’s freedom was compatible
             with necessity.
                Thomas Hobbes and John Bramhall were contemporaries of
             Descartes living in Europe as expatriates during the English Civil
             War. They debated Liberty and Necessity circa 1650. Hobbes held
             that liberty was simply the absence of external impediments to
             action (the modern “freedom of action”). The “voluntary” actions
             of a “free will” all have prior necessary causes and are thus deter-
             mined. He equated necessity to the decree of God. Bramhall saw
             liberty as a freedom from inevitability and predetermination, but
             saw it consistent with the prescience of God. Both were compati-
             bilists, Hobbes’ freedom was compatible with causal determinism
             and Bramhall’s with religious determinism.
                           History of the Free Will Problem               85


The Empiricists
   The British empiricist philosophers - George Berkeley, John
Locke, and David Hume - all found chance or indeterminism
unacceptable. Determinism was obviously required for us to be
responsible for our actions.
   John Locke liked the idea of Freedom and Liberty but was dis-
turbed by the confusing debates about “free will”. He thought it




                                                                               Chapter 7
was inappropriate to describe the will itself as free. The will is a
determination. It is the man who is free.
    “I think the question is not proper, whether the will be free, but
    whether a man be free.”
    “This way of talking, nevertheless, has prevailed, and, as I guess,
    produced great confusion.”27
   The empiricists saw new evidence for strict causality and deter-
minism in natural science. Isaac Newton’s mathematical theory
of motion (classical mechanics) could predict the motions of all
things based on knowledge of their starting points, their velocities,
and the forces between them. Surely the forces that controlled the
heavenly bodies controlled everything else, including our minds.
Thus the rationale for determinism was shifting from theological
or religious determinism back to the physical/causal determin-
ism of the Greek cosmologists and atomists. Leibniz imagined a
scientist who could see the events of all times, just as all times are
thought to be present to the mind of God.
      “Everything proceeds mathematically...if someone could have
    a sufficient insight into the inner parts of things, and in addi-
    tion had remembrance and intelligence enough to consider all
    the circumstances and take them into account, he would be a
    prophet and see the future in the present as in a mirror.”
   Pierre-Simon Laplace particularized this Leibniz vision as an
intelligent being who knows the positions and velocities of all the
atoms in the universe and uses Newton’s equations of motion to

  27 Locke (1959) s. 21
        86     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             predict the future. Laplace’s Demon has become a cliché for physi-
             cal determinism.
             David Hume
                Hume was a modern Skeptic. He doubted the existence of cer-
             tain knowledge and questioned causality, but he thought (cor-
             rectly, if inconsistently) that our actions proceeded from causes
             in our character. Free will is at best compatible with determin-
Chapter 7




             ism in the sense that our will caused our actions, even though the
             willed action was the consequence of prior causes. An uncaused
             cause (the “causa sui” or self-cause), or a free action generated
             randomly with no regard for earlier conditions (“sui generis” or
             self-generated), was considered absurd and unintelligible. Hume
             said “’tis impossible to admit of any medium betwixt chance and
             an absolute necessity.”28
                I see Hume as a median between antiquity and the present, per-
             haps even an Archimedean point, a fulcrum on which the world
             of freedom pivoted decisively toward physical determinism and
             the limited freedom of action allowed by Hobbes.
                There is no doubt that Hume’s reconciliation of freedom
             and necessity was a great influence on most analytic and logi-
             cal empiricist philosophers, through John Stuart Mill, G. E.
             Moore, Bertrand Russell, A. J. Ayer, and Moritz Schlick,
             as well as physical scientists like Ernst Mach.
                So what is it that distinguishes Hume’s compatibilism from ear-
             lier compatibilists from Chrysippus to Thomas Hobbes? The
             major difference can be traced to the work of empiricist philoso-
             phers John Locke and George Berkeley and of the scientist
             Isaac Newton between Hobbes and Hume.
                Locke’s “Theory of Ideas,” which limits human knowledge to
             that gathered through the senses (the mind starts as a blank slate
             with no innate ideas) was an enormous influence on Hume. Hume
             is often simply regarded as one of the three British empiricists who
             put knowledge of the “things themselves” with their “primary”
             qualities, beyond the reach of our perceptions. It is this standard
               28 Hume (1978) A Treatise of Human Nature, p. 171.
                         History of the Free Will Problem              87

view of Hume, as one denying unknowable concepts, particularly
the notion of “causation,” that inspired the positivists to declare
such concepts “meaningless” and “metaphysical.”
   But Hume is much more complex, as a careful reading of the
Treatise and especially the Enquiry concerning Human Under-
standing shows. Hume did not deny causation. He embraced it.
What he did say is that empirical methods could not prove causal-




                                                                            Chapter 7
ity, as observations only show a “constant conjunction” of events,
a “regular succession” of A followed by B, which leads the mind to
the inference of cause and effect.
   Thus we cannot “know” causation and “matters of fact” as we
can know the “relations of ideas” such as mathematics and logic.
But we have a natural belief in causation and in many matters of
fact.
   A major theme of Hume’s work, perhaps his core contribution,
is that “Reason” cannot motivate our Beliefs. Reason is an evalu-
ative tool only. It is “Feeling” and “Passion” that motivates our
“natural” beliefs, judgments, and actions.
   Most earlier and later philosophers make the feelings and pas-
sions subject to reason. Hume turned this around and based his
ideas of morality on sentiments and feelings. He denied that one
could ever produce reasoned arguments to derive “ought” from
“is,” but that we naturally hold many of our moral beliefs simply
based on our feelings and moral sentiments. And that only these
Passions, not Reason, are capable of motivating us to action. In a
most famous observation, he says..
      “I cannot forbear adding to these reasonings an observation,
   which may, perhaps, be found of some importance. In every
   system of morality, which I have hitherto met with, I have al-
   ways remark’d, that the author proceeds for some time in the or-
   dinary way of reasoning, and establishes the being of a God, or
   makes observations concerning human affairs; when of a sud-
   den I am surpriz’d to find, that instead of the usual copulations
   of propositions, is, and is not, I meet with no proposition that
   is not connected with an ought, or an ought not. This change
   is imperceptible; but is, however, of the last consequence. For
        88     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                as this ought, or ought not, expresses some new relation or af-
                firmation, ‘tis necessary that it shou’d be observ’d and explain’d;
                and at the same time that a reason should be given, for what
                seems altogether inconceivable, how this new relation can be a
                deduction from others, which are entirely different from it.” 29
                What is true in moral thinking is true in our physical
             understanding; we have a natural belief in causality, says Hume.
Chapter 7




             Although it is not an empirically justified “idea” and thus not
             knowledge, we have a natural feeling about how one billiard ball
             causes a second one to move.
                Similarly, we judge a person praiseworthy or blameworthy
             because we see the causal connection between a person’s charac-
             ter, volition, and resulting actions. This agrees with Hobbes, and it
             will show up later in R. E. Hobart and Peter F. Strawson.
                Hume’s greatest contribution to the free will debates was to
             “reconcile” freedom and necessity.
                “But to proceed in this reconciling project with regard to the
                question of liberty and necessity; the most contentious ques-
                tion of metaphysics, the most contentious science; it will not
                require many words to prove, that all mankind have ever agreed
                in the doctrine of liberty as well as in that of necessity, and that
                the whole dispute, in this respect also, has been hitherto merely
                verbal...
                “By liberty, then, we can only mean a power of acting or not
                acting, according to the determinations of the will; this is, if we
                choose to remain at rest, we may; if we choose to move, we also
                may. Now this hypothetical liberty is universally allowed to be-
                long to every one who is not a prisoner and in chains. Here,
                then, is no subject of dispute.” 30
                For Hume, there was no such thing as chance. Human igno-
             rance leads to all our ideas of probability. This was the view of
             all the great mathematicians who developed the calculus of prob-
             abilities - Abraham de Moivre before Hume and Pierre-Simon
             Laplace after him. And, following de Moivre, Hume called
             chance a mere word.
               29   Hume (1978) Treatise, p. 469.
               30   Hume (1975) Enquiry, p. 95.
                           History of the Free Will Problem               89

   “Though there be no such thing as Chance in the world; our
   ignorance of the real cause of any event has the same influence
   on the understanding, and begets a like species of belief or opin-
   ion.” 31
  Most compatibilists and determinists since Hobbes and Hume
never mention the fact that a causal chain of events going back
before our birth would not provide the kind of liberty they are




                                                                               Chapter 7
looking for. But Hume frankly admits that such a causal chain
would be a serious objection to his theory.
   “I pretend not to have obviated or removed all objections to
   this theory, with regard to necessity and liberty. I can foresee
   other objections, derived from topics which have not here been
   treated of. It may be said, for instance, that, if voluntary actions
   be subjected to the same laws of necessity with the operations
   of matter, there is a continued chain of necessary causes, pre-
   ordained and pre-determined, reaching from the original cause
   of all to every single volition, of every human creature. No con-
   tingency anywhere in the universe; no indifference; no liberty.
   While we act, we are, at the same time, acted upon.” 32
   To escape this objection, we must imagine that Hume wanted
some kind of agent-causal freedom in voluntarist acts.
   Hume knew the ancients better than most, and of the ancients,
his favorite was Cicero.. His Dialogues concerning Natural Religion
is on some level largely a paraphrase of Cicero’s De Natura Deorum.
  Probabilists
  One might naively think that the development of modern prob-
ability theory and statistics would have encouraged acceptance of
chance in human affairs, but surprisingly, the major theorists of
probability were determinists. The mathematical distribution of
possible outcomes in games of chance was formally derived inde-
pendently by a number of great mathematicians in the eighteenth
century - Abraham De Moivre (1667-1754), Daniel Bernoulli
(1700-1782), Laplace (1749-1827), and Carl Friedrich Gauss
(1777-1855). Laplace disliked the disreputable origins of this the-
ory and renamed it the “calculus of probabilities.”
  31   Hume (1975) Enquiry, p. 56.
  32   Hume (1975) Enquiry, p. 99.
        90     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Kant
                Immanuel Kant’s reaction to Newtonian determinism, and
             to David Hume’s criticism of obtaining certain knowledge based
             only on our sense perceptions, was to admit determinism as cor-
             rect in the physical or phenomenal world, but he set limits on this
             determinism. Kant subsumed causality and determinism under
             his idea of Pure Reason. Indeed he made determinism a precondi-
Chapter 7




             tion for rational thought. But he set limits on what we can know
             by pure speculative Reason, in order to make room for belief in a
             timeless noumenal (or mental) world that includes God, freedom,
             and immortality.
                    “I cannot even make the assumption − as the practical in-
                terests of morality require − of God, freedom, and immortal-
                ity, if I do not deprive speculative reason of its pretensions to
                transcendent insight. For to arrive at these, it must make use of
                principles which, in fact, extend only to the objects of possible
                experience, and which cannot be applied to objects beyond this
                sphere without converting them into phenomena, and thus ren-
                dering the practical extension of pure reason impossible. I must
                therefore, abolish knowledge, to make room for belief.” 33
                Kant’s noumenal world is a variation on Plato’s concept of Soul,
             Descartes’ mental world, and the Scholastic idea of a world in
             which all times are present to the eye of God. His idea of free will
             is a most esoteric form of compatibilism. Our decisions are made
             in our souls outside of time and only appear determined to our
             senses, which are governed by our built-in a priori categories of
             understanding, like space and time.
                “We then see how it does not involve any contradiction to assert,
                on the one hand, that the will, in the phenomenal sphere − in
                visible action − is necessarily obedient to the law of nature, and,
                in so far, not free; and, on the other hand, that, as belonging to
                a thing in itself, it is not subject to that law, and, accordingly, is
                free.” 34

               33   Kant (1952) “The Critique of Pure Reason.” p. 10.
               34   Kant (1952) “The Critique of Pure Reason.” p. 9.
                              History of the Free Will Problem                       91

   If Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason can be seen as a reaction to
David Hume’s skeptical attitude toward knowledge that depends
on sense data, the parallel between Hume and Kant is even stron-
ger in Kant’s Critique of Practical Reason.
   Hume and Kant both sought a reconciling of freedom and
necessity or causality. Where Hume said we could not reason
to knowledge of causality, for example, but could have a natural




                                                                                          Chapter 7
belief in causality because of our moral sentiments and feelings,
so Kant claims that his Practical Reason establishes freedom in a
noumenal realm whose grounding principle is morality. Freedom
is the condition for the moral law.
        “Freedom, however, is the only one of all the ideas of the
    speculative reason of which we know the possibility a priori
    (without, however, understanding it), because it is the condi-
    tion of the moral law which we know.” 35
   In an early letter to a friend, Kant described the workings of his
mind as involving chance, and in terms that sound remarkably
like my Cogito model, - “The mind must...lie open to any chance
suggestion which may present itself.” He described his method...
    “In mental labour of so delicate a character nothing is more
    harmful than preoccupation with extraneous matters. The
    mind, though not constantly on the stretch, must still, alike in
    its idle and in its favourable moments, lie uninterruptedly open
    to any chance suggestion which may present itself. Relaxations
    and diversions must maintain its powers in freedom and mo-
    bility, so that it may be enabled to view the object afresh from
    every side, and so to enlarge its point of view from a microscop-
    ic to a universal outlook that it adopts in turn every conceivable
    standpoint, verifying the observations of each by means of all
    the others.” 36
  At the same time that Kant was inventing his most fanciful
other-worldly explanation of free will, his contemporary Samuel
Johnson uttered this brief analysis of the problem.
    “We know our will is free, and there’s an end on’t.”
  35   Kant (1952) “The Critique of Practical Reason.” p. 329.
  36   Letter to Marcus Herz, February 21, 1772, Werke, x, p. 127 (cited by Norman
Kemp Smith, Commentary to Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, p. xxii)
        92     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Five Post-Kantian Shocks to Determinism
                Since the age of Newton and Kant, very few philosophers have
             offered genuinely new ideas for reconciling our sense of human
             freedom with physical determinism, which for most thinkers also
             implies causality, certainty, necessity, and predictability of the one
             possible future consistent with determinism.
                This is despite three great advances in science that critically
Chapter 7




             depend on the existence of real chance in the universe and two
             developments in logic and mathematics that question the status of
             philosophical certainty.
                The history of the problem of free will cannot be addressed
             without being aware of these shocking developments in an eighty-
             year period that eroded the foundations of classical deterministic
             thinking in five areas of thought.
             Evolution
                Charles Darwin’s explanation of biological evolution in 1859
             requires chance to create variation in the gene pool. The alterna-
             tive is a deterministic law controlling such change, which implies
             that information about all species has existed for all time. Or per-
             haps the idea that there is no real change. The “Great Chain of
             Being” from Plato’s Timaeus to the middle ages maintained that
             all the species - from the smallest organisms, through man at the
             pinnacle of the natural world, then up to God through various
             types of supernatural angels - had existed for all time, at least since
             the creation. Darwin’s work confirmed that Becoming was as real
             and important as Being (another great dualism).
             Thermodynamics
                Ludwig Boltzmann’s attempts, starting in 1866, to derive the
             second law of thermodynamics (increasing entropy and irrevers-
             ibility) from the classical mechanical motions of gas particles
             (atoms) failed until he introduced probability (chance) and treated
                         History of the Free Will Problem               93

the atoms statistically. He was ridiculed by his physicist colleagues
in Germany, who rejected the idea of atoms, let alone real chance
in the universe.
   After Boltzmann, the presumed certain laws of physics became
irreducibly statistical laws.
Logic




                                                                             Chapter 7
   Aristotle’s logic was accepted as the paradigm of truth for over
2000 years until Gottlob Frege in 1879 and Bertrand Russell’s
Principia Mathematica in 1910 failed to establish a logical basis for
mathematics and found the first of the paradoxes that call logic
into question.
Quantum Mechanics
   Werner Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle in 1927 is
believed by many thinkers to have put an end to the absolute
determinism implied by Newton’s laws, at least for atoms. Classi-
cal mechanics is now seen as simply the limiting case of quantum
mechanics for macroscopic (large) systems. Even before Heisen-
berg, Max Born had shown in 1926 that in collisions of atomic
particles we could only predict the probabilities for the atomic
paths, confirming Boltzmann’s requirement for microscopic ran-
domness.
   So the original two cases for irreducible randomness, implicit in
the work of Darwin in 1859, explicitly made by Boltzmann in the
1870’s, and espoused as philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce’s
Tychism and William James’ answer to determinism, have in the
20th century found an explanation in quantum indeterminacy.
Mathematics
   Kurt Gödel’s incompleteness theorem in 1937 proved there
would always be true propositions that could not be proved in any
consistent mathematical system complex enough to include the
integers.
        94     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Determinists
                Many modern philosophers admit to being “hard” determin-
             ists (as William James called them). They maintain that there is
             just one possible future, primarily because there is a single causal
             sequence of events from the beginning of time. Some argue that
             without “strict” causality knowledge would be impossible, since
             we could not be sure of our reasoning process and deduced truths.
Chapter 7




             Note that there are many arguments for the truth of determinism.
             See Chapter 9.
             Libertarians
                Libertarians argue that free will is incompatible with any and
             all determinism. Many libertarians still hold a dualist view, with
             an immaterial Mind able to circumvent causal laws that constrain
             the physical Body. Critics call the libertarian view incoherent and
             unintelligible if it denies determinism and causality, which they
             take to be a basic requirement for modern science - for some it is
             the basis for logic and reason. And many libertarians admit their
             unhappiness with chance as the source of human freedom.
             Compatibilists
                William James’ “soft” determinists claim that free will is com-
             patible with determinism, since if determinism did not hold, they
             think that their will could not determine their actions, which
             would be random. Though our will is itself caused, these causes
             include our own character, and this is enough freedom for them,
             even if our character was itself determined by prior causes.
                Broadly speaking, philosophers after Kant can be divided into
             four main groups,
                    • those who continued to accept compatibilism (or even
             determinism),
                   • those who simply asserted human freedom (some even
             admitting chance as a factor),
                             History of the Free Will Problem                   95

     • those philosophers and scientists who reacted, most of them
negatively, to the specific new form of chance and “indetermin-
ism” introduced by quantum mechanics in the 1920’s,
     • and those active in recently renewed debates about free will,
with lots of philosophical analysis and logic chopping, but virtu-
ally nothing new of substance.
Germans in the 19th century




                                                                                     Chapter 7
   Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel’s greatest contribution to
philosophy was to stress the importance of time and process over
mechanism, with its implicit predictability. Just as Aristotle was
more this-worldly than his mentor Plato, so Hegel brings Kan-
tian ideas down from the timeless noumenal realm into an evolv-
ing world. He spoke of an absolute freedom of the individual “in
itself,” a concept following Kant, the “an sich.” But in his dialectical
idealism, the individual subject (or being) goes on to see itself in
the light of others as objects (the non-being). He calls this the “for
itself,” Kant’s “für sich.” The final stage of his “aufhebung” unites
these to become the “in and for itself,” At this point, Hegel’s free-
dom is a will that is the will of a community (Being). He says,
“Freedom and will are for us the unity of subjective and objective.”
“Freedom also lies neither in indeterminateness nor in determi-
nateness, but in both.” 37
   Hegel’s idealist colleagues Johann Fichte and Friedrich
Schelling were very enthusiastic about freedom for the indi-
vidual, the “I,” which was Kant’s “transcendental subject.” They
wanted the I to be “unconditioned,” an undetermined thing in
itself (unbedingtes Ding an sich). For Schelling, this freedom was
freedom from both Nature and God.
        “The defenders of Freedom usually only think of showing
    the independence of man from nature, which is indeed easy.
    But they leave alone man’s inner independence from God, his
    Freedom even with respect to God, because this is the most dif-
    ficult problem.
  37    Hegel (1967) Introduction, Sect. 8. Two-stage model or contradiction?
        96     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   “Thus since man occupies a middle place between the non-
                being of nature and the absolute Being, God, he is free from
                both. He is free from God through having an independent root
                in nature; free from nature through the fact that the divine is
                awakened in him, that which in the midst of nature is above
                nature.” 38
                Arthur Schopenhauer’s essay “On the Freedom of the Will”
             won the prize of the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences in 1839.
Chapter 7




             His description of his predecessors’ work (pp. 65-90) is extensive.
             He defined absolute freedom - the liberum arbitrium indifferentiae
             - as not being determined by prior grounds.
                “Under given external conditions, two diametrically opposed
                actions are possible.”
               Schopenhauer found this completely unacceptable.
                “If we do not accept the strict necessity of all that happens
                by means of a causal chain which connects all events without
                exception, but allow this chain to be broken in countless plac-
                es by an absolute freedom, then all foreseeing of the future...
                becomes...absolutely impossible, and so inconceivable.” 39

             The Rise of Statistical Thinking
                In the 1820’s the great French mathematician Joseph Fourier
             noticed that statistics on the number of births, deaths, marriages,
             suicides, and various crimes in the city of Paris had remarkably
             stable averages from year to year. The mean values in a “normal
             distribution” (one that follows the bell curve or “law of errors”) of
             statistics took on the prestige of a social law. The Belgian astrono-
             mer and statistician Adolphe Quételet did more than anyone
             to claim these statistical regularities were evidence of determin-
             ism.
                Individuals might think marriage was their decision, but since
             the number of total marriages was relatively stable from year to
             year, Quételet claimed the individuals were determined to marry.

               38   Schelling (1936) p. 458
               39   Schopenhauer (1995) p 64.
                          History of the Free Will Problem             97

Quételet used Auguste Comte’s term “social physics” to describe
his discovery of “laws of human nature,” prompting Comte to
rename his theory “sociology.”
   Quételet’s argument for determinism in human events is quite
illogical. It appears to go something like this:
      • Perfectly random, unpredictable individual events (like the
   throw of dice in games of chance) show statistical regularities




                                                                            Chapter 7
   that become more and more certain with more trials (the law
   of large numbers).
      • Human events show statistical regularities.
      • Human events are determined.
   Quételet might more reasonably have concluded that individ-
ual human events are unpredictable and random. Were they de-
termined, they might be expected to show a non-random pattern,
perhaps a signature of the Determiner.
   In England, Henry Thomas Buckle developed the ideas of
Quételet and also argued that statistical regularities proved that
human free will was nonexistent.
   A few thinkers questioned the idea that individual random
events were actually determined simply because their statisti-
cal averages appeared to be determined. Bernard Bolzano
(1781-1848) and Franz Exner (1802-1880) were both professors
at Prague in the 1830’s and 40’s. They had a famous correspon-
dence in which they discussed the possibility of free will. Bolzano,
a Catholic priest, was stripped of his teaching post because his
ideas were anathema to the Catholic Austrian government that
paid his salary. One outcome of the revolution of 1848 was a re-
form of Austrian education aimed at diminishing the power of the
Catholic religion, especially in education. Exner was the principal
architect of this curriculum reform, and a central secular tenet
was to teach the concept of probability, to encourage students to
take responsibility for their own lives.
   In France, two philosophers, Charles Renouvier (1815-1903)
and Alfred Fouillée (1838-1912), argued for human freedom
        98     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             and based it on the existence of absolute chance. In his Essais
             de Critique Générale, Renouvier generally followed Kant, but he
             moved human freedom from Kant’s imaginary noumenal realm
             into the phenomenal world, which for Renouvier included con-
             tingent events. In La Liberté et le Déterminisme, Fouillée denied
             necessity and determinism.
                Every philosopher after Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species
Chapter 7




             was affected by the explanation of evolution as random variation
             followed by natural selection. A few embraced it, and found that it
             gave support to their ideas of human freedom, based on the liber-
             ating notion of chance. But few offered a convincing idea of how
             exactly chance as a cause could be made consistent with moral
             responsibility.
                Charles Sanders Peirce was deeply impressed by chance as a
             way to bring diversity and “progress” (in the form of increasingly
             complex organisms) to the world. Obviously modeling his think-
             ing on the work of Darwin, Peirce was unequivocal that chance
             was a real property of the world. He named it Tyche, and made
             tychism the basis for the evolutionary growth of variety, of irregu-
             lar departures from an otherwise mechanical universe, including
             life and Peirce’s own original thoughts. But Peirce did not like
             Darwin’s fortuitous variation and natural selection. He falsely
             associated it with the Social Darwinist thinking of his time and
             called it a “greed philosophy.” Peirce also rejected the determinis-
             tic evolution scheme of Herbert Spencer, and proposed his own
             grand scheme for the evolution of everything including the laws
             of Nature! He called this synechism, a coined term for continuity,
             in clear contrast to the random events of his tychism.
                    Peirce (correctly) reads Aristotle as espousing absolute
             chance and offering a tertium quid beyond chance and necessity.
             Aristotle, he says, holds that events come to pass in three ways,
             namely
                “(1) by external compulsion, or the action of efficient causes, (2)
                by virtue of an inward nature, or the influence of final causes,
                and (3) irregularly without definite cause, but just by absolute
                chance.” 40
               40   Peirce (1958) Vol. 6, p. 28
                             History of the Free Will Problem             99

   Peirce is boastful about his knowledge of early philosophers,
and we know he was familiar with the ancient Stoic objection
to chance (since at least Chrysippus and Cicero) as the cause of
human actions. The Stoics objected that we cannot be responsible
for chance actions. Peirce agrees, saying
       “To undertake to account for anything by saying baldly that
   it is due to chance would, indeed, be futile. But this I do not




                                                                               Chapter 7
   do. I make use of chance chiefly to make room for a principle
   of generalization, or tendency to form habits, which I hold has
   produced all regularities.” 41
   William James, in The Will to Believe, simply asserted that
his will was free. As his first act of freedom, he said, he chose to
believe his will was free. He was encouraged to do this by reading
Charles Renouvier.
   James coined the terms “hard determinism” and “soft deter-
minism” in his lecture on “The Dilemma of Determinism.” He
described chance as neither of these, but “indeterminism.” He
said,
      “The stronghold of the determinist argument is the antipathy
   to the idea of chance...This notion of alternative possibility, this
   admission that any one of several things may come to pass is,
   after all, only a roundabout name for chance.” 42
  James was the first thinker to enunciate clearly a two-stage
decision process, with chance in a present time of random alter-
natives, leading to a choice which grants consent to one possibility
and transforms an equivocal future into an unalterable and simple
past. There are undetermined alternatives followed by adequately
determined choices.
    “What is meant by saying that my choice of which way to walk
   home after the lecture is ambiguous and matter of chance?...It
   means that both Divinity Avenue and Oxford Street are called
   but only one, and that one either one, shall be chosen.” 43
  James very likely had the model of Darwinian evolution in
mind. Unlike his colleague Charles Peirce, from whom he learned
  41   ibid.
  42   James (1956) p. 153
  43   James (1956) p. 155
        100     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              much about chance, James accepted Darwin’s explanation of
              human evolution.
                 John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) did great work on probability
              in his System of Logic, but like the continental mathematicians
              was a confirmed determinist. His endorsement of Hume’s recon-
              ciliation of free will with determinism came to be known as the
              Hume-Mill thesis. Mill accepted Hume’s view that human actions
Chapter 7




              would some day be explainable by laws of human nature as sure
              as Newton’s laws of physical nature. If this were not so, he feared
              for science itself.
                 “At the threshold of this inquiry we are met by an objection,
                 which, if not removed, would be fatal to the attempt to treat hu-
                 man conduct as a subject of science. Are the actions of human
                 beings, like all other natural events, subject to invariable laws?”
                 “The question, whether the law of causality applies in the same
                 strict sense to human actions as to other phenomena, is the cel-
                 ebrated controversy concerning the freedom of the will: which,
                 from at least as far back as the time of Pelagius, has divided both
                 the philosophical and the religious world. The affirmative opin-
                 ion is commonly called the doctrine of a Necessity, as asserting
                 human volitions and actions to be necessary and inevitable. The
                 negative maintains that the will is not determined, like other
                 phenomena, by antecedents, but determines itself; that our voli-
                 tions are not, properly speaking, the effects of causes, or at least
                 have no causes which they uniformly and implicitly obey.
                 “I have already made it sufficiently ‘apparent’ that the former of
                 these opinions is that which I consider the true one.” 44
                 Mill’s godson Bertrand Russell also had no doubt that cau-
              sality and determinism were needed to do science. “Where de-
              terminism fails, science fails,” he said. Russell could not find in
              himself “any specific occurrence that I could call ‘will’.”
                 Henri Bergson, in his “Time and Free Will,” argued that time
              in the mind (he called it dureé or duration) was different from
              physical time. In particular, because minds were evolving living
                44   A System of Logic, Bk VI, Ch II, Of Liberty and Necessity
                               History of the Free Will Problem        101

things with memories of all their past experience, they could not
be treated as collections of mechanical atoms with no such memo-
ries, so minds were not subject to deterministic laws.
   Friedrich Nietzsche knew Darwin and perhaps knew of the
debates in the German universities about probability and irrevers-
ibility. He may have been impressed by mechanistic explanations
for everything including human affairs. His “eternal return” is




                                                                             Chapter 7
consistent with microscopic particles (atoms) following determin-
istic paths that eventually repeat themselves. His aphoristic and
polemical writing style makes his real position on free will hard
to fathom. Nietzsche both denied the will and even more strongly
claimed that as overmen we must choose to make ourselves. This
choice has even greater weight because it would be repeated again
and again in his vision of an eternal return.
   Henri Poincaré describes a two-stage process in mathemati-
cal discoveries, in his lectures to the Paris Société de Psychologie
around 1907. The first stage is random combinations, which he
likens to Epicurus’ “hooked atoms” ploughing through space in
all directions, like a “swarm of gnats.” He apologizes for the crude
comparison, but says
      “the right combination is to be found by strict calculations
   [which] demand discipline, will, and consequently conscious-
   ness. In the subliminal ego, on the contrary, there reigns what
   I would call liberty, if one could give this name to the mere ab-
   sence of discipline and to disorder born of chance.” 45
   In 1937, at the Paris Centre de Synthése, a week of lectures was
delivered on inventions of various kinds, including experimental
science, mathematics, and poetry. The mathematician Jacques
Hadamard described the conference in his book The Psychology
of Invention in the Mathematical Field (1949) Hadamard’s empha-
sis was on the discovery or invention of mathematical theories
and his main subject was Henri Poincaré.
   Hadamard assures us that Poincaré’s observations do not impute
discovery directly to pure chance. He says
  45   Poincaré (2003) p. 60
        102     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  “Indeed, it is obvious that invention or discovery, be it in math-
                  ematics or anywhere else, takes place by combining ideas.”
                  “It cannot be avoided that this first operation takes place, to a
                  certain extent, at random, so that the role of chance is hardly
                  doubtful in this first step of the mental process. But we see that
                  the intervention of chance occurs inside the unconscious.” 46
                 The first step is only the beginning of creation, for the following
Chapter 7




              step, says Hadamard,
                  “Invention is discernment, choice...it is clear that no significant
                  discovery or invention can take place without the will of find-
                  ing.” 47
                 Poincaré is apparently the second thinker, after William James,
              to see random combinations of ideas in the unconscious mind,
              followed by willful decisions or choices made consciously.
                 Moritz Schlick (1882-1936) was a founder of the great Vi-
              enna Circle of Logical Empiricism, which included Ludwig
              Wittgenstein in its early years. Like Wittgenstein, Schlick
              thought some problems could be dis-solved by logical analysis.
              They were pseudo-problems, of which “the so-called problem of
              the freedom of the will” was an old one.
                   “this pseudo-problem has long since been settled by the efforts
                  of certain sensible persons; and, above all...— with exceptional
                  clarity by Hume. Hence it is really one of the greatest scandals
                  of philosophy that again and again so much paper and print-
                  er’s ink is devoted to this matter... I shall, of course, say only
                  what others have already said better; consoling myself with the
                  thought that in this way alone can anything be done to put an
                  end at last to that scandal.” 48

              Quantum Indeterminacy
                In 1925 Max Born, Werner Heisenberg, and Pascual
              Jordan, formulated their matrix mechanics version of quantum
                46    Hadamard (1945) pp. 29-30.
                47    Hadamard (1945) p. 30.
                48    Schlick (2008) Ch. VII.
                             History of the Free Will Problem           103

mechanics as a superior formulation of Neils Bohr’s old quantum
theory. Matrix mechanics confirmed discrete energy levels and
random “quantum jumps” of electrons between the energy levels,
with emission or absorption of photons accompanying the jump.
   In 1926, Erwin Schrödinger developed wave mechanics as
an alternative formulation of quantum mechanics. Schrödinger
disliked the abrupt jumps. His wave mechanics was a continuous,




                                                                              Chapter 7
even deterministic, theory.
   Within months of the new wave mechanics, Max Born showed
that while Schrödinger’s wave function evolved over time deter-
ministically, it only predicted the positions and velocities of atom-
ic particles probabilistically.
   Heisenberg used Schrödinger’s wave functions to calculate the
“transition probabilities” for electrons to jump from one energy
level to another. Schrödinger’s wave mechanics was easier to visu-
alize and much easier to calculate than Heisenberg’s own matrix
mechanics.
   In early 1927, Heisenberg announced his indeterminacy prin-
ciple limiting our knowledge of the simultaneous position and
velocity of atomic particles, and declared that the new quantum
theory disproved causality.
   “We cannot - and here is where the causal law breaks down - ex-
   plain why a particular atom will decay at one moment and not
   the next, or what causes it to emit an electron in this direction
   rather than that.” 49
   More popularly known as the Uncertainty Principle in quan-
tum mechanics, it states that the exact position and momentum
of an atomic particle can only be known within certain (sic) lim-
its. The product of the position error and the momentum error is
greater than or equal to Planck’s constant h/2π.
                             ΔpΔx ≥ h/2π
   Indeterminacy (Unbestimmtheit) was Heisenberg’s original
name for his principle. It is a better name than the more popular
uncertainty, which connotes lack of knowledge. The Heisenberg
  49 Heisenberg, W (1972) p. 119.
        104     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              principle is an ontological and real lack of information, not merely
              an epistemic lack, a result of human ignorance.
                 Later in 1927, Bohr announced his complementarity principle
              and the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics that
              argued for a dualist combination of wave and particle aspects for
              atoms and electrons.
                 Schrödinger argued vociferously against the random quantum
Chapter 7




              jumps of Bohr and Heisenberg and for a return to his easily visual-
              ized, deterministic, and continuous physics.
                 Albert Einstein, Max Planck, Schrödinger, and other lead-
              ing physicists were appalled at Born’s assertion that quantum
              mechanics was probabilistic and Heisenberg’s claim that strict
              causality was no longer tenable. Einstein’s famous reaction was
              “The Lord God does not play dice.” Planck said,
                 “the assumption of absolute chance in inorganic nature is
                 incompatible with the working principle of physical science.
                 “This means that the postulate of complete determinism is
                 accepted as a necessary condition for the progress of psycho-
                 logical research.” 50
                 Just a few years earlier, in 1919, Schrödinger and his mentor
              Franz Serafin Exner (son of the 19th-century educator) had
              been strong disciples of Ludwig Boltzmann. They were con-
              vinced that Boltzmann’s kinetic theory of gases required a micro-
              scopic world of random and chaotic atomic motions.
                 Why did Schrödinger switch from an indeterminist to a deter-
              minist philosophy, then adhere to it the rest of his life? Perhaps
              because his work now put him in the company of Einstein and
              Planck? Planck stepped down from his chair of theoretical physics
              at the University of Berlin and gave it to Schrödinger, who won the
              Nobel prize in 1933. It took nearly thirty more years and another
              world war before the Nobel committee gave Max Born the prize
              for his probabilistic interpretation of the wave function.

                50   Planck (1981) pp. 154-5.
                            History of the Free Will Problem            105

   In his Gifford Lectures of 1927, Arthur Stanley Eddington
had described himself as unable “to form a satisfactory concep-
tion of any kind of law or causal sequence which shall be other
than deterministic.” 51
   Eddington had already established himself as the leading inter-
preter of the new relativity and quantum physics. His astronomi-
cal measurements of light bending as it passes the sun had con-




                                                                              Chapter 7
firmed Einstein’s general relativity theory.
   A year later, in response to Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle,
Eddington revised his lectures for publication as The Nature of the
Physical World. There he announced “It is a consequence of the
advent of the quantum theory that physics is no longer pledged
to a scheme of deterministic law,” 52 and enthusiastically identified
indeterminism with freedom of the will.
   But Eddington left himself open to the charge since Epicurus’
time, that chance could not be identified with freedom. He was
apparently unaware of the work of William James or Henri
Poincaré to make deliberation a two-stage process - first random
possibilities, then a choice. A decade later, in his 1939 book The
Philosophy of Physical Science, just a few years before his death, he
reluctantly concluded there is no “halfway house” between ran-
domness and determinism, 53 an echo of David Hume’s claim that
there is “no medium betwixt chance and an absolute necessity.” 54
   Niels Bohr mentioned the free will and causality discussions
in 1929, but he spoke vaguely, with his vision of complementarity,
and likened them to subjective and objective views:
      “Just as the freedom of the will is an experiential category of
   our psychic life, causality may be considered as a mode of per-
   ception by which we reduce our sense impressions to order...
   the feeling of volition and the demand for causality are equally
   indispensable elements in the relation between subject and ob-
   ject which forms the core of the problem of knowledge.” 55
  51   Eddington (1928) p. 294.
  52   Eddington (1928) p.
  53   Eddington (1939) p.
  54   Hume (1978) p. 171.
  55   Bohr (1936) p.
        106     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 The German philosopher Ernst Cassirer was close to many of
              the physicists in this debate and had a profound influence on some
              of them. Cassirer also influenced the predominantly deterministic
              views of other philosophers, themselves untrained in physics, who
              tried to understand the implications of quantum indeterminism
              for their philosophies. In his 1936 book Determinism and Indeter-
              minism in Modern Physics, Cassirer made the case an ethical one,
Chapter 7




              saying
                   “all truly ethical action must spring from the unity and persis-
                 tence of a definite ethical character. This in itself shows us that it
                 would be fatal for ethics to tie itself to and, as it were, fling itself
                 into the arms of a limitless indeterminism.” 56
                 Max Born had been first to see that chance and probability
              were essential to quantum mechanics, as they had been to the
              statistical laws of physics since Boltzmann. Unfortunately Born
              was strongly influenced by Cassirer, the non-scientist philosopher
              who said “we cannot do away with the guiding concept of deter-
              minism.” Born concluded somewhat dialectically that free will
              was just a subjective phenomenon,
                  “I think that the philosophical treatment of the problem of free
                 will suffers often from an insufficient distinction between the
                 subjective and objective aspect.”57
                Born approvingly quotes Cassirer, from the last chapter of
              Determinism and Indeterminism in Modern Physics,
                     “whether causality in nature is regarded in the form of
                 rigorous ‘dynamical’ laws or of merely statistical laws...In
                 neither way does there remain open that sphere of ‘freedom’
                 which is claimed by ethics.” 58
                 Some biologists quickly objected to the idea of physical uncer-
              tainty in the human mind because large amounts of matter ensure
              adequate regularity of the statistical laws. 59
                56   Cassirer (1956), p. 209.
                57   Born (1964) p. 127.
                58   Original source, Cassirer (1956), p. 209.(Note: Standard Argument.)
                59   C. G. Darwin, Science, 73, 653, June 19, 1931.
                            History of the Free Will Problem          107

   But physicist Arthur Holly Compton defended the
Eddington suggestion, with the idea of an amplifier that would
allow microscopic random events to produce macroscopic ran-
dom events.60 Four years earlier, the biologist Ralph Lillie had
pointed out that natural selection was just such an amplifier of
microscopic randomness.61
   This naive model for free will came to be known as the mas-




                                                                            Chapter 7
sive switch amplifier. It was open to the ancient criticism that we
can not take responsibility for random actions caused by chance.
Compton defended the amplifier in his 1935 book The Freedom
of Man, but like Eddington, later denied he was trying to show
that human freedom was a direct consequence of the uncertainty
principle. If physics were the sole source of our information, he
said, we should expect men’s actions to follow certain (sic) rules
of chance.62
   Much later, in the Atlantic Monthly of 1957, Compton saw the
two-stage process of chance preceding choice.
     “When one exercises freedom, by his act of choice he is him-
   self adding a factor not supplied by the [random] physical con-
   ditions and is thus himself determining what will occur.” 63
   John Eccles, the great neurophysiologist, took Eddington’s
suggestions seriously and looked for places in the brain where
quantum uncertainty might be important. He decided on the syn-
apses, where the axon of one neuron communicates with the den-
drite of another neuron across a narrow gap (less than 1000 Ang-
stroms). In his 1953 book The Neurophysiological Basis of Mind,
Eccles calculated the positional uncertainty of the tiny synaptic
knob. He found it to be 20 Angstroms in 1 second, a relatively tiny
but perhaps significant fraction of the synaptic gap or cleft.64
   One other scientist and sometime philosopher, Henry
Margenau, saw quantum uncertainty as necessary for free will,
but that there were “more steps” needed to explain freedom. In his
Wimmer Lecture of 1968, he said,
  60   A. H. Compton, Science, 74, 1911, August 14, 1931.
  61   Ralph Lillie, Science, 66, 139, 1927
  62   The Human Meaning of Science, 1940
  63   Atlantic Monthly, October, 1957; reprinted in Compton (1967)
  64   Eccles (1953) pp. 271-286.
        108      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   “Freedom cannot appear in the domains of physiology and
                  psychology if it is not already lodged in physics...embracing
                  the belief that freedom is made possible by indeterminacies in
                  nature will not solve the problem of freedom...it permits only
                  one first step towards its solution.”65
                 Ιnstead of Ernst Cassirer’s view “that it would be fatal for eth-
              ics to tie itself to and, as it were, fling itself into the arms of a limit-
Chapter 7




              less indeterminism,” Margenau embraced indeterminism as just
              the first step toward a solution of the problem of human freedom.
                 Margenau lamented that his position
                  “forces us to part company with many distinguished moral
                  philosophers who see the autonomy of ethics threatened when
                  a relation of any sort is assumed to exist between that august
                  discipline and science.”
                Margenau clearly means his longtime mentor.
                  “Ethics, says Cassirer, should not be forced to build its nests in
                  the gaps of physical causation, but he fails to tell where else it
                  should build them, if at all.” 66
                Then in his 1982 book Einstein’s Space and Van Gogh’s Sky,
              Margenau condensed his model into a single paragraph, with two
              components - Compton’s chance and choice.
                  “Our thesis is that quantum mechanics leaves our body, our
                  brain, at any moment in a state with numerous (because of its
                  complexity we might say innumerable) possible futures, each
                  with a predetermined probability. Freedom involves two com-
                  ponents: chance (existence of a genuine set of alternatives) and
                  choice. Quantum mechanics provides the chance, and we shall
                  argue that only the mind can make the choice by selecting (not
                  energetically enforcing) among the possible future courses.” 67
                 We note sadly that Margenau does not cite the earlier work of
              Compton (or the philosopher Karl Popper’s 1977 adaptation of
              Compton - see below). Perhaps because free will was not a topic
              for mainstream scientific journals, he felt no need for rigorous
                65    Margenau (1968)
                66    Margenau (1968) p. 71.
                67    Margenau and Leshan (1982) p. 240.
                           History of the Free Will Problem            109

references and scrupulous priority of ideas. But Margenau pays a
price, his own work does not get referred to by later thinkers.
   Most other Nobel-prize-winning scientists and their philo-
sophical interpreters could not reconcile quantum mechanics and
the uncertainty principle with human freedom, concluding only
that strict determinism was certainly not the case for the physical
or phenomenal world.




                                                                             Chapter 7
Quantum Mysteries
  We should mention a few bizarre suggestions by scientists on
how some of the more mysterious properties of “quantum reality”
might help explain consciousness and free will.
  Roger Penrose claims, in his 1989 book The Emperor’s New
Mind that non-locality and quantum gravity are involved in the
mind. Like Eccles, he speculates that single-quantum sensitive
neurons are playing an important role deep inside the brain. But
he says he needs large numbers of neurons to cooperate:
   “Such co-operation, I am maintaining, must be achieved quan-
   tum-mechanically; and the way that this is done is by many
   different combined arrangements of atoms being ‘tried’ simul-
   taneously in linear superposition perhaps a little like the quan-
   tum computer...The selection of an appropriate (though prob-
   ably not the best) solution to the minimizing problem must be
   achieved as the one-graviton criterion (or appropriate alterna-
   tive) is reached - which would presumably only occur when the
   physical conditions are right”68
  David Hodgson extended Penrose’s ideas in his 1991 book
Mind Matters. He claims that
   “My discussion of quantum mechanics has confirmed [the
   mind’s] indeterministic character; and has also suggested that
   quantum mechanics shows that matter is ultimately ‘non-ma-
   terial’ and non-local, and that perhaps mind and matter are
   interdependent.”69

  68   Penrose (1989) p. 437
  69   Hodgson (1991) p. 381
        110     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Penrose went further in 1994 in his book Shadows of the Mind,
              calculating that tens of thousands of neurons could exist in a
              coherent correlated superposition of states for one-fortieth of a
              second (the fundamental alpha-rhythm rate). He cites the idea of
              a dualistic “mind-stuff ” influencing the “quantum choices” with
              its “free will.”
                   “With the possibility that quantum effects might indeed trig-
Chapter 7




                 ger much larger activities within the brain, some people have
                 expressed the hope that, in such circumstances, quantum inde-
                 terminacy might be what provides an opening for the mind to
                 influence the physical brain. Here, a dualistic viewpoint would
                 be likely to be adopted, either explicitly or implicitly. Perhaps
                 the ‘free will’ of an ‘external mind’ might be able to influence
                 the quantum choices that actually result from such non-deter-
                 ministic processes. On this view, it is presumably through the
                 action of quantum theory’s R-process that the dualist’s ‘mind-
                 stuff ’ would have its influence on the behaviour of the brain.”70
                 (p. 349)
                 The idea that mental processes or even just macroscopic entities
              can “influence” quantum events (e.g., by changing probabilities)
              is called downward causation. John Eccles argued that wave
              functions might be influenced because they are neither matter nor
              energy and are thus an ideal vehicle for the interaction between
              non-physical mind and physical matter. Eccles thought this idea
              was first suggested by Henry Margenau.
                 Penrose provides considerable evidence for correlated states
              in the microtubules within the cell’s cytoskeleton, then describes
              chemical evidence for connecting the microtubules and con-
              sciousness in anaesthesia.71
                 Henry Stapp is another physicist employing quantum strange-
              ness. In his 2003 Mind, Matter, and Quantum Mechanics, Stapp
              argues that mental intentions and strong “mental efforts” can
              influence quantum wave functions and produce correlated behav-
              iors over large regions of the brain. Resembling Penrose’s argu-
              ments (without any reference), Stapp says:
                70   Shadows of the Mind, p. 349.
                71   Shadows of the Mind, p. 357-370.
                           History of the Free Will Problem            111

      “It should be mentioned here that the actions P are nonlo-
   cal: they must act over extended regions, which can, and are
   expected to, cover large regions of the brain. Each conscious
   act is associated with a Process I action [collapse of the wave
   function] that coordinates and integrates activities in diverse
   parts of the brain. A conscious thought, as represented by the
   von Neumann Process I, effectively grasps as a whole an entire
   quasi-stable macroscopic brain activity.”72




                                                                             Chapter 7
Behavioral Freedom
  In 2009, the neurobiologist and geneticist Martin Heisen-
berg, son of quantum physicist Werner Heisenberg, found evi-
dence for a combination of random and lawful behavior in ani-
mals and unicellular bacteria. They can originate actions, so are
not simply Cartesian stimulus-response mechanisms.
   Evidence of randomly generated action — action that is distinct
   from reaction because it does not depend upon external stimuli
   — can be found in unicellular organisms. Take the way the bac-
   terium Escherichia coli moves. It has a flagellum that can rotate
   around its longitudinal axis in either direction: one way drives
   the bacterium forward, the other causes it to tumble at random
   so that it ends up facing in a new direction ready for the next
   phase of forward motion. This ‘random walk’ can be modulated
   by sensory receptors, enabling the bacterium to find food and
   the right temperature.
  In higher organisms, Heisenberg finds that the brain still may
include elements that do a random walk among options for action.
   As with a bacterium’s locomotion, the activation of behav-
   ioural modules is based on the interplay between chance and
   lawfulness in the brain. Insufficiently equipped, insufficiently
   informed and short of time, animals have to find a module that
   is adaptive. Their brains, in a kind of random walk, continuous-
   ly preactivate, discard and reconfigure their options, and evalu-
   ate their possible short-term and long-term consequences.73

  72   Mind, Matter, and Quantum Mechanics, p. 252.
  73   Nature, 14 May 2009, p. 165
        112        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              Philosophers Specializing in Free Will
              Mortimer Adler
                 In the late 1950’s, Mortimer Adler compiled a massive two-
              volume history of The Idea of Freedom. It covers at great length
              ideas of political freedom and freedom from external constraints,
              as well as the central freedom of the individual will to choose from
Chapter 7




              among possibilities that are not necessary or predictable.
                 In an attempt to classify types of freedom, Adler invents three
              categories that he hopes are “dialectically neutral” - the circum-
              stantial freedom of self-realization (freedom from coercion,
              political end economic freedom, etc.), the acquired freedom
              of self-perfection (making decisions for moral reasons rather
              than desires and passions), and the natural freedom of self-
              determination (the normal freedom of the will).
                 Self-perfection is the idea from Plato to Kant that we are only
              free when our decisions are for reasons and we are not slaves to
              our passions. Adler also includes many theologically minded phi-
              losophers who argue that man is only free when following a divine
              moral law, which may have led to Hegel’s freedom of a stone
              “falling freely” according to Newton’s law of gravity.
                 Sinners, they say, do not have this free will, presumably to make
              sinners responsible for evil in the world despite an omniscient and
              omnipotent God.
                 Self-determination covers the classic problem of free will. Do
              our choices determine our will, or are they part of a causal chain?
                 Most of Adler’s freedoms are actually compatible with classical
              physics. In his over 1400 pages, Adler devotes only six pages to
              brief comments on quantum mechanical indeterminism.74 Adler
              depends heavily on the thoughts of Max Planck and Erwin
              Schrödinger, who along with major thinkers like Einstein, Louis
              de Broglie, and David Bohm, rejected indeterminism.
              Karl Popper
                The philosopher Karl Popper had a famous collaboration over
              some decades with the neuroscientist John Eccles. The two were
              74       The Idea of Freedom, v. 1, p. 461-466.
                             History of the Free Will Problem              113

mind/body or mind/brain dualists who hoped to discover the
mind to be more than a mere “epiphenomenon” of the material
brain. They considered quantum effects, initially to dismiss them,
and later to reconsider them.
   In their dialogue X, Eccles said, “It is not possible I think to
utilize quantum indeterminacy.” Popper replied,
    “I do of course agree that quantum theoretical indeterminacy in




                                                                                 Chapter 7
    a sense cannot help, because this leads merely to probabilistic
    laws, and we do not wish to say that such things as free decisions
    are just probabilistic affairs. The trouble with quantum mechan-
    ical indeterminacy is twofold. First, it is probabilistic, and this
    doesn’t help much with the free-will problem, which is not just
    a chance affair. Second, it gives us only indeterminism.”75
   To this point, Popper reflects the overall negative reaction of the
scientific and philosophical communities to indeterminism. But
in his 1965 Arthur Holly Compton memorial lecture Of Clouds
and Clocks, Popper celebrated Compton’s contributions to the
question of human freedom, including the insufficient idea of the
quantum uncertainty amplifier. But then he goes on to describe
a two-stage decision process modeled on Darwinian natural se-
lection. Can we doubt these were directly inspired by Compton’s
later remarks and Compton’s 1931 references to Ralph Lillie and
evolution?
   Any intelligible explanation for free will must include both in-
determinism and adequate determinism, resembling biological
evolution, Popper says,
    “New ideas have a striking similarity to genetic mutations,”
    “Mutations are, it seems, brought about by quantum theoreti-
    cal indeterminacy (including radiation effects). On them there
    subsequently operates natural selection which eliminates inap-
    propriate mutations. Now we could conceive of a similar pro-
    cess with respect to new ideas and to free-will decisions. That is
    to say, a range of possibilities is brought about by a probabilistic
    and quantum mechanically characterized set of proposals, as it
    were - of possibilities brought forward by the brain. On these
    there operates a kind of selective procedure which eliminates

  75    Popper and Eccles, 1977,
        114      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   those proposals and those probabilities which are not accept-
                   able to the mind.” 76
                 In 1977 Popper gave the first Darwin Lecture, at Darwin Col-
              lege, Cambridge. He called it Natural Selection and the Emergence
              of Mind. In it he said he had changed his mind (a rare admission
              by a philosopher) about two things. First he now thought that nat-
              ural selection was not a “tautology” that made it an unfalsifiable
Chapter 7




              theory. Second, he had come to accept the random variation and
              selection of ideas as a model of free will.
                   “The selection of a kind of behavior out of a randomly offered
                   repertoire may be an act of indeterminism; and in discussing
                   indeterminism I have often regretfully pointed out that quan-
                   tum indeterminacy does not seem to help us; for the amplifica-
                   tion of something like, say, radioactive disintegration processes
                   would not lead to human action or even animal action, but only
                   to random movements.”
                 This is the randomness objection of the standard argument..
                   “I have changed my mind on this issue. A choice process may be
                   a selection process, and the selection may be from some reper-
                   toire of random events, without being random in its turn. This
                   seems to me to offer a promising solution to one of our most
                   vexing problems, and one by downward causation.” 77
                 Karl Popper is thus the third thinker (or fourth, if we liberally
              interpret Compton) to describe a two-stage mental process, after
              William James and Henri Poincaré. He also solves the problem
              of indeterminism directly causing our decisions. Note Popper’s
              not so subtle shift of the realm of chance to the material body
              (his “World 1”) and the realm of determination to the mind (his
              “World 2”). The traditional dualism from the ancients to Kant
              made the material body the realm of phenomenal determinism
              and the mind or spirit the noumenal realm of freedom, God, and
              immortality.
                 76     Popper and Eccles, 1977, pp. 539-540
                 77     Darwin College Lecture, (1977) Parts of this lecture are available online as a
              rare audio recording of Popper.
                 http://www.spokenword.ac.uk/record_view.php?pbd=gcu-a0a0r2-b
                              History of the Free Will Problem                         115


Elizabeth Anscombe
  The physicist Richard Feynman also proposed a Comp-
ton-style Geiger-counter event followed by a bomb explosion.
This caught the attention of Wittgenstein scholar Elizabeth
Anscombe in her inaugural lecture at Cambridge University,
where she said
      It has taken the inventions of indeterministic physics to shake




                                                                                             Chapter 7
    the rather common dogmatic conviction that determinism is a
    presupposition or perhaps a conclusion, of scientific knowledge.
    Feynman’s example of the bomb and Geiger counter smashes
    this conception; but as far as I can judge it takes time for the les-
    son to be learned. I find deterministic assumptions more com-
    mon now among people at large, and among philosophers, than
    when I was an undergraduate. 78

P. F. Strawson
   In his 1962 landmark essay Freedom and Resentment, Peter F.
Strawson changed the subject from free will itself to the question
of moral responsibility.79 Strawson said he could make no sense of
the truth or falsity of determinism, indeterminism, or free will.
But even if determinism were true, he argued, we would contin-
ue to act as if persons were morally responsible and deserving of
praise and blame, gratitude and resentment.
   Strawson was following David Hume’s naturalist arguments
that our moral sentiments are simply given facts beyond the skep-
ticism of logic and critical thought. Hume the Naturalist had no
problem deriving Ought from Is - something shown logically
impossible by Hume the Skeptic. See p. 86.
   Strawson himself was optimistic that compatibilism could rec-
oncile determinism with moral obligation and responsibility. He
accepted the facts of determinism. He felt that determinism was
true. But he was concerned to salvage the reality of our attitudes
even for libertarians, whom he described as pessimists about
determinism.
    78    Anscombe (1971) p. 24.
    79    Strawson, P.F. (1962) A pupil of H. P. Grice, Strawson belonged to the so-
called “School of Ordinary Language Philosophy” under the leadership of J. L. Austin
in post-war Oxford.
        116     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 “What I have called the participant reactive attitudes are essen-
                 tially natural human reactions to the good or ill will or indif-
                 ference of others towards us, as displayed in their attitudes and
                 actions. The question we have to ask is: What effect would, or
                 should, the acceptance of the truth of a general thesis of deter-
                 minism have upon these reactive attitudes? More specifically,
                 would, or should, the acceptance of the truth of the thesis lead
                 to the decay or the repudiation of all such attitudes? Would, or
Chapter 7




                 should, it mean the end of gratitude, resentment, and forgive-
                 ness; of all reciprocated adult loves; of all the essentially per-
                 sonal antagonisms?
                 “But how can I answer, or even pose, this question without
                 knowing exactly what the thesis of determinism is? Well, there
                 is one thing we do know; that if there is a coherent thesis of
                 determinism, then there must be a sense of ‘determined’ such
                 that, if that thesis is true, then all behaviour whatever is deter-
                 mined in that sense. Remembering this, we can consider at least
                 what possibilities lie formally open; and then perhaps we shall
                 see that the question can be answered without knowing exactly
                 what the thesis of determinism is.”80
                Strawson felt that the truth of determinism would in no way
              repudiate such attitudes, even the feeling of resentment, unless
              what he called “participant” attitudes were universally replaced by
              “objective” attitudes.
              Harry Frankfurt
                 In 1969 Harry Frankfurt changed the debate on free will and
              moral responsibility with a famous thought experiment that chal-
              lenged the existence of alternative possibilities for action. The
              traditional argument for free will requires alternative possibilities
              so that an agent could have done otherwise, without which there
              is no moral responsibility.
                 Frankfurt posited a counterfactual demon who can intervene
              in an agent’s decisions if the agent is about to do something dif-
              ferent from what the demon wants the agent to do. Frankfurt’s
              demon will block any alternative possibilities, but leave the agent
              to “freely choose” to do the one possibility desired by the demon.
                80   Strawson (1962) p. 10
                         History of the Free Will Problem                117

Frankfurt claimed the existence of the hypothetical control mech-
anisms blocking alternative possibilities would be irrelevant to the
agent’s free choice. This is true when the agent’s choice agrees with
the demon, but obviously false should the agent disagree. In that
case, the demon would have to block the agent’s will and the agent
would surely notice.
   Compatibilists had long been bothered by alternative possi-




                                                                               Chapter 7
bilities, needed in order that agents “could have done otherwise.”
They knew that determinism allows only a single future - just one
actual causal chain of events - and were delighted to get behind
Frankfurt’s examples as proofs that alternative possibilities, per-
haps generated in part by random events, did not exist. Frankfurt,
like Strawson, argued for moral responsibility without libertar-
ian free will.
   Note, however, that Frankfurt actually assumes that genu-
ine alternative possibilities do exist. If not, there is nothing for
his counterfactual intervening demon to block. John Martin
Fischer called these alternative possibilities “flickers of free-
dom.” Without these virtual alternatives, Frankfurt would have to
admit that there is only one “actual sequence” of events leading to
one possible future. “Alternative sequences” would be ruled out.
Since Frankfurt’s demon, much like Laplace’s demon, has no way
of knowing the actual information about future events - such as
an agent’s decisions - until that information comes into existence,
such demons are not possible and Frankfurt-style thought experi-
ments, entertaining as they are, cannot establish the compatibilist
version of free will.
Richard Taylor’s Fatalism
   In 1962, the agent-causalist libertarian philosopher Taylor
wrote a tongue-in-cheek article in the Philosophical Review enti-
tled “Fatalism.” It was not about fatalism exactly, but about the log-
ical determinism that results from the truth conditions of certain
propositions. It was the Master Argument of Diodorus Cronus
that denies future contingency, also discussed by Aristotle in
terms of a future “sea-batttle.”
        118     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Taylor had five years earlier explained correctly that Aristotle
              did not deny future contingency. Statements about future events
              occurring are neither true nor false. The word is indeterminate
              about the open future.
                 Determinist philosophy being so popular, Taylor’s Fatalism ar-
              ticle was widely anthologized, and taken by many to be a proof of
              determinism. One of those taken in was the young David Foster
Chapter 7




              Wallace, who wrote an undergraduate philosophy thesis in 1985
              attempting to disprove Taylor’s argument, with an elaborate sym-
              bolic logical argument developed with one of his professors.81
                 Wallace was arguably deeply discouraged by the deterministic
              fatalism promoted by academic philosophers. This view had driv-
              en the young William James near suicide in 1869, and may have
              contributed to the young Wallace’s tragic death in 2008.
              Daniel Dennett
                 Daniel Dennett, perhaps the leading spokesman for Com-
              patibilism, is a strong critic of any genuine indeterminism in free
              will. Yet in his 1978 book Brainstorms, he proposed an influen-
              tial “model of decision making” with a two-stage account of free
              will. In his chapter “On Giving Libertarians What They Say They
              Want,” Dennett clearly separates random possibilities from deter-
              mined choices.
                 But does Dennett, following James, Poincaré, and Popper, see
              that this solves the problem of indeterminism in free will that has
              plagued philosophy since Epicurus’ “swerve” of the atoms? He
              says, a bit sarcastically, that his model
                 “puts indeterminism in the right place for the libertarian, if
                 there is a right place at all [my emphasis].” 82
                 And after giving six excellent reasons why his suggestion is
              what libertarians are looking for, Dennett then suggests that the
              randomness generator might as well have been a computer-gener-
              ated pseudo-random number generator. He says
                81   Wallace (2011)
                82   Dennett (1978) p. 295.
                            History of the Free Will Problem          119

   “Isn’t it the case that the new improved proposed model for
   human deliberation can do as well with a random-but-deter-
   ministic generation process as with a causally undetermined
   process?” 83
   This completely misses the libertarian’s point, which needs ran-
domness that breaks the causal chain of pre-determinism back to
the universe origin! But then Dennett’s argument for libertarian-




                                                                            Chapter 7
ism may just be a compatibilist’s straw man. He does not pursue
it in his later works, such as Elbow Room, The Varieties of Free
Will Worth Wanting (Dennett, 1984) or the more recent Freedom
Evolves (2003).
   Dennett’s model was inspired by many sources. One was David
Wiggins’ Towards a Reasonable Libertarianism, which cited Ber-
trand Russell and Arthur Stanley Eddington as suggesting
quantum indeterminism. Another was Herbert Simon’s 1969
two-stage “generate and test” model for a creating problem-solv-
ing computer.84 Simon’s model is itself a computer version of Dar-
win’s random variation and natural selection model for biologi-
cal evolution. Another source was Jacques Hadamard’s book.
Dennett quotes the poet Paul Valéry (as Hadamard quoted), who
imagines two agents (in one mind?)
     “It takes two to invent anything. The one makes up combina-
tions; the other one chooses.”85
   But as we have seen, this was Poincaré’s idea which Valéry
picked up at the 1937 Synthése conference. Some evidence now
exists that Poincaré’s work was in fact inspired by William James.
They both say that alternative possibilities “present themselves.”
   Nevertheless, Dennett’s article is so influential in the philo-
sophical community that two-stage models for free will are some-
times called “Valerian.” See Chapter 25 for more on Dennett.

  83   Dennett (1978) p. 298.
  84   Simon (1981)
  85   Dennett (1978) p. 293, Hadamard (1945), p. 30.
        120     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              Peter van Inwagen
                 In his 1983 “An Essay on Free Will,” Peter van Inwagen
              changed the taxonomy of free will positions. For the previous
              century, there were basically three positions - determinist, liber-
              tarian, and compatibilist (James’s name for this was “soft” deter-
              minist). The compatibilists were usually described as following a
              traditional view handed down from Hobbes to Hume to Mill to
Chapter 7




              Schlick.
                 Van Inwagen caused a stir by arguing that compatibilism is
              demonstrably false, even admitting Frankfurt’s denial of alternative
              possibilities (which implies only one “actual sequence” of events),
              in what has come to be called his Consequence Argument.
                 In short, if compatibilism traces the causes of our actions, in the
              “actual sequence” of events, back to events before we existed, then
              our actions are simply the consequences of those earlier events
              and are “not up to us.” Speaking as a logical philosopher, he con-
              cludes that
                  “the free-will thesis and determinism are incompatible. That is,
                  incompatibilism is true.”
                  “To deny the free-will thesis is to deny the existence of moral
                  responsibility, which is absurd...Therefore, we should reject de-
                  terminism.” 86
                 This has been obvious to libertarians since Epicurus. It is the
              first half of the standard argument against free will. Van Inwa-
              gen called the second half his Mind Argument.
                 Van Inwagen called for a new position in the free will debates
              he called “Incompatibilism.” It is more than just saying determin-
              ism is false. It is the assumed interdependence of free will and
              determinism that he claims is false. Unfortunately, there are two
              ways to be incompatibilist, the libertarian and the hard determin-
              ist. Incompatibilism lumps these opposites together.
                 Van Inwagen replaced the traditional dichotomy determinism-
              libertarian (with the reconciliation position compatibilism). His
              new scheme was compatibilism - incompatibilism, with incom-
                86    Van Inwagen (1983) p. 223.
                             History of the Free Will Problem           121

patibilism a messy category that lumps together hard determin-
ism and libertarians - strange bedfellows indeed. See p. 60.
Robert Kane
   Robert Kane is the leading spokesman for Libertarianism.
Before Kane, in the late twentieth century, Anglo-American phi-
losophers had largely dismissed libertarian free will as a “pseudo-
problem.” Most philosophers and scientists thought free will was




                                                                              Chapter 7
compatible with determinism, or perhaps impossible because of
determinism.
   In his 1985 book Free Will and Values, aware of earlier propos-
als by Eccles, Popper, and Dennett, but working independently,
Kane proposed an ambitious amplifier model for a quantum ran-
domizer in the brain - a spinning wheel of fortune with probabil-
ity bubbles corresponding to alternative possibilities, in the mas-
sive switch amplifier tradition of Compton and Gomes. Kane says:
   “neurological processes must exist corresponding to the ran-
   domizing activity of the spinning wheel and the partitioning
   of the wheel into equiprobable segments (red, blue, etc.) cor-
   responding to the relevant R-alternatives.” 87
  Kane was not satisfied with this early model. He explains that
the main reason for failure is
    “locating the master switch and the mechanism of amplifica-
   tion...We do not know if something similar goes on in the brains
   of cortically developed creatures like ourselves, but I suspect it
   must if libertarian theories are to succeed.”88
   Unlike Daniel Dennett, who put randomness in the first
stage of a two-stage model, Kane locates indeterminism in the
final moment of choice, in the decision itself.
   Kane’s major accomplishment is to show that an agent can still
claim moral responsibility for “torn” decisions that were made
at indeterministically, provided there exist equally good reasons
whichever way the decisions go. Critics who say that indetermin-
ism necessarily destroys the kind of control needed for moral
responsibility have been shown wrong by Kane.
  87   Kane (1985) p. 147.
  88   Kane (1985) p. 168.
        122     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Kane claims that the major criticism of all indeterminist liber-
              tarian models is explaining the power to choose or do otherwise
              in “exactly the same conditions,” something he calls “dual ratio-
              nal self-control.” Given that A is the rational choice, how can one
              defend doing B under exactly the same circumstances? 89 Kane’s
              critics say that such a “dual power” is arbitrary, capricious, and
              irrational. But he disagrees
Chapter 7




                 Apart from the fact that information-rich systems with a his-
              tory are never in the exact same conditions, and ignoring the fact
              that random alternative possibilities are very unlikely to repeat,
              an adequately determined will might very likely make the same
              choice, for the same reasons, from the same set of alternative
              possibilities.
                 But this was not Kane’s main interest. He says it is the agent’s
              effort that is the main cause in cases of moral and prudential
              choices where the agent is “torn” between a moral and a self-
              interested alternative. Kane says that indeterminism might tip the
              scales against one option, making it fail, and in favor of another,
              making it succeed. But the main cause for the successful choice
              should not be the indeterminism, says Kane. It is the agent’s effort
              that is the main cause, since the successful choice is brought about
              by that effort, for the reasons and desires that motivated the effort.
                 In 2005, Kane published A Contemporary Introduction to Free
              Will, a comprehensive survey of the recent positions on free will,
              perhaps the most comprehensive since Mortimer Adler. Kane
              adds two more freedom classifications to Adler’s three categories.
                 Self-control is a variation on Adler’s acquired freedom of Self-
              perfection to include the arguments of the many “New Compati-
              bilists” who are more concerned about moral responsibility than
              free will, such as Harry Frankfurt and John Martin Fischer.
                 Self-formation is a variation of Adler’s natural freedom of Self-
              determination to include Kane’s own “self-forming actions” (SFA)
              that are a subset of self-determining actions.90 Kane requires that
              an SFA is an indeterministic “will-setting action” that helps form

                89    Kane (1985) p. 59.
                90    Adler (1961) p. 122. Self-realization is Adler’s third freedom.
                               History of the Free Will Problem           123

our character. Later, other actions can be determined by our char-
acter, but we can still assert “ultimate responsibility” (UR) for
those actions, to the extent they can be traced back to earlier SFAs.
  Kane cites Elizabeth Anscombe’s remark that determinism is
becoming more common, and insightfully notes that
   “One may legitimately wonder why worries about determinism
   persist at all in the twenty-first century, when the physical sci-




                                                                                Chapter 7
   ences - once the stronghold of determinist thinking - seem to
   have turned away from determinism.” 91
   Indeed, today it is determinism that is “metaphysical.”
   We shall see in Chapter 24 that Kane remains an ardent sup-
porter of quantum indeterminism playing a major role in the
solution to the free will problem. It is no longer a quantum event
amplified by chaos that triggers a decision, but the general low-
level noise in the brain that adds enough indeterminacy.
Richard Double
  Richard Double, in his 1991 book The Non-Reality of Free
Will, agrees with Kane that libertarian free will must have the
“dual ability” to choose otherwise with rational control. But he
says this is impossible:
      “My conclusion is that the deep reason why no libertarian
   view can satisfy all three conditions [ability-to-choose-other-
   wise, control, and rationality] is that the conditions are logically
   incompatible. Hence, libertarianism, despite its intuitive appeal,
   turns out to be incoherent.” 92

Two Classicists on Doing Otherwise
  There is a rich history of linguistic and logical quibbles among
compatibilists over the ability to do otherwise. G. E. Moore
and A. J. Ayer said that one could have done otherwise, if one
had chosen to do so, i.e., if things in the past had been different.
But since the “fixed past” could never be different (in retrospect)
one could not have so chosen, according to compatibilists (and
determinists).
  91   Kane (2002) p. 7.
  92   Double (1991) p. 222.
        124          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 In 1987 two classicists, Anthony Long and David Sedley,
              speculated that Epicurus’ swerve of the atoms might be limited
              to providing undetermined alternative possibilities for action,
              from which the mind’s power of volition could choose in a way that
              reflects character and values, desires and feelings.
                 “It does so, we may speculate, not by overriding the laws of phys-
                 ics, but by choosing between the alternative possibilities which
Chapter 7




                 the laws of physics leave open.” 93
                 Long and Sedley assume a non-physical (metaphysical) ability of
              the volition to affect the atoms, which is implausible. But the idea
              that a physical volition chooses - (consistent with and adequately
              determined by its character and values and its desires and feelings)
              from among alternative possibilities provided randomly by atomic
              indeterminacy - is plausible to Long and Sedley.
              Ted Honderich
                 Ted Honderich, the major spokesman for “Hard Determinism,”
              in 1988 published his 750-page The Theory of Determinism, with
              excursions into quantum mechanics, neuroscience, and conscious-
              ness.
                 Unlike most of his colleagues specializing in free will, Honderich
              did not succumb to the easy path of compatibilism, by simply de-
              claring that the free will we have (and should want, says Dennett) is
              completely consistent with determinism, namely a “voluntarism” in
              which our will is completely caused by prior events.
                 Nor does Honderich go down the path of incompatibilism, look-
              ing for non-physical substances, dualist forms of agency, or simply
              identifying freedom with Epicurean chance, as have many scientists
              with ideas of brain mechanisms amplifying quantum mechanical
              indeterminism to help with the uncaused “origination” of actions
              and decisions.
                 Honderich does not claim to have found a solution to the prob-
              lem of free will or determinism, but he does claim to have con-
              fronted the problem of the consequences of determinism. He is
              “dismayed” because the truth of determinism requires that we give
              up “origination” with its promise of an open future, restricting -
              though not eliminating - our “life hopes.”
                93     Long and Sedley (1987) p. 111.
                            History of the Free Will Problem                125


   Though he is determinism’s foremost champion, Honderich
characterizes it as a “black thing.” He passionately feels the real loss,
when he follows his reason to accept the truth of determinism.
   Honderich faults both Compatibilists and Incompatibilists on
three counts. First, he says that moral responsibility is not all that
is at stake, there are personal feelings, reactive attitudes, problems
of knowledge, and rationalizing punishment with ideas of limited




                                                                                  Chapter 7
responsibility. Second, these problems can not be resolved by logi-
cal “proofs” nor by linguistic analyses of propositions designed to
show “free” and “determined” are logically compatible. And third,
he faults their simplistic idea that one or the other of them must be
right. Although he does not call it a scandal, Honderich is describ-
ing the scandal in philosophy.
   And unlike some of his colleagues, Honderich does not com-
pletely dismiss indeterminism and considers the suggestion of
“near-determinism.” He says,
    “Maybe it should have been called determinism-where-it-mat-
    ters. It allows that there is or may be some indeterminism but
    only at what is called the micro-level of our existence, the level of
    the small particles of our bodies.” 94

Alfred Mele
   Alfred Mele, in his 1995 book Autonomous Agents, argued,
mostly following Dennett, that libertarians should admit that the
final stages of deliberation are (adequately) determined and only al-
low indeterminism in the early stages of the decision process. While
he himself has made no commitment to such indeterminism, and
wonders how it could be physically possible, he offers the idea to
others as a “modest libertarianism.”95 Mele’s model satisfies the tem-
poral sequence requirements for libertarian free will (see Chapter
5), even if he does not see the possible location of indeterminism in
the brain.
    “Where compatibilists have no good reason to insist on determin-
    ism in the deliberative process as a requirement for autonomy,
    where internal indeterminism is, for all we know, a reality, and
  94    Honderich (2002) p. 5.
  95    Mele (1995) pp. 211-220
        126         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  where such indeterminism would not diminish the nonultimate
                  control that real agents exert over their deliberation even on the
                  assumption that real agents are internally deterministic — that
                  is, at the intersection of these three locations — libertarians may
                  plump for ultimacy-promoting indeterminism. Modest libertar-
                  ians try to stake out their view at this intersection.” 96

              Paul Russell
Chapter 7




                Paul Russell, also in 1995, suggested that the location of the
              break in the causal chain might be put between willings, which
              might be uncaused, and actions, which would be determined. This
              goes against the common sense use of the word “will,” but Russell
              correctly puts something “free” before a final “will.”
              Randolph Clarke
                 In his 2003 book Libertarian Accounts of Free Will, Randolph
              Clarke assessed suggestions of Daniel Dennett and Alfred
              Mele. He found them inadequate. His work, he says, was carried
              out by thinking alone and required no specialized knowledge of nat-
              ural science. At best, he concludes, indeterminism in processes lead-
              ing to our actions is superfluous, adding nothing of value and pos-
              sibly detracting from what we want. In a 2000 article called “Modest
              Libertarianism,” he ignores Mele’s suggestion of early-stage indeter-
              minism and “places indeterminism in the direct production of the
              decision,” as does Robert Kane and other “event-causal” libertar-
              ians, such as Laura Waddell Ekstrom and Mark Balaguer.
                 As we saw in Chapter 4, recent libertarian philosophers defend
              “incompatibilism” (note that they usually mean libertarianism)97
              but have not reached general agreement on an “intelligible” account
              of how, when, and perhaps most importantly, where indeterminism
              enters the picture - without making our actions purely random.
                 They include Randolph Clarke, Laura Waddell Ekstrom,
              Carl Ginet, Timothy O’Connor, Peter Van Inwagen, and
              David Wiggins. David Widerker independently developed
              Kane’s strong 1985 criticism of Frankfurt-style examples, in defense
              of incompatibilist (libertarian) free will.
                 96     Mele (1995), p. 235
                 97     Cf., Randolph Clarke’s SEP article, awkwardly entitled “Incompatibilist (Nonde-
              terminsitic) Theories of Free Will”
                              History of the Free Will Problem            127

   Unfortunately, their works are full of a dense jargon defining
(sometimes obscuring) subtle differences in their views - agent cau-
sation, event causation, non-occurrent causation, reasons as causes,
intentions, undefeated authorization of preferences as causes, non-
causal accounts, dual control, plurality conditions, origination,
actual sequences and alternative sequences, source and leeway
compatibilism, revisionism, restrictivism, semicompatibilism, and




                                                                                Chapter 7
narrow and broad incompatibilism. (See our Glossary of Terms in
the appendix for some clarification of this dense terminology.)
   Not a few compatibilist/determinist philosophers have, following
Peter F. Strawson, turned the conversation away from the “unin-
telligible” free will problem to the problem of moral responsibility.
Peter’s son, Galen Strawson, is one. He accepts determinism out-
right on the grounds that a causa sui is simply impossible. Where
Sir Peter says that the truth of determinism would not change our
attitudes about moral responsibility, his son Galen says it makes
moral responsibility impossible.
John Martin Fischer
   John Martin Fischer calls his position semicompatibil-
ism. Fischer says free will may or may not be incompatible with
determinism, but his main interest, moral responsibility, is not
incompatible. Fischer recently edited a four-volume, 46-contribu-
tor, 1300+ pages compendium of articles on moral responsibility
- entitled Free Will, a reference work in the Critical Concepts in Phi-
losophy series (Routledge 2005).
   In it, Fischer explains that his colleagues are setting aside the
“unintelligible” problem of free will.
      Some philosophers do not distinguish between freedom and
   moral responsibility. Put a bit more carefully, they tend to begin
   with the notion of moral responsibility, and “work back” to a no-
   tion of freedom; this notion of freedom is not given independent
   content (separate from the analysis of moral responsibility). For
   such philosophers, “freedom” refers to whatever conditions are
   involved in choosing or acting in such a way as to be morally re-
   sponsible.98
  98   Fischer (2005), Vol.1, p. xxiii.
        128       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Derk Pereboom, Saul Smilansky, and the psychologist Daniel
              Wegner follow many earlier thinkers and say that libertarian free
              will is incoherent and an illusion. Pereboom agrees with Galen
              Strawson that moral responsibility is impossible.
                 Smilansky may share the “dismay” that Ted Honderich sees in
              the apparent loss of control implicit in determinism. But unlike the
              others who find it uplifting and therapeutic to disabuse the public of
Chapter 7




              illusions about free will, Smilansky thinks that we need to maintain
              the public illusion of free will, as did the 18th-century Lord Kames,
              because the illusion of libertarian free will is arguably positive, and
              probably even morally necessary.
              The Garden of Forking Paths
                 Jorge Luis Borges’ stories have proved fertile ground for phil-
              osophical metaphors. Robert Kane describes the “free will laby-
              rinth” and John Martin Fischer and his colleagues created a pop-
              ular blog on free will called the “Garden of Forking Paths.” 99 I was a
              contributor to the GFP blog until it was closed in early 2010. Some
              of the bloggers created a new blog, with a more restricted member-
              ship. It too has a Fischer-inspired name - “Flickers of Freedom.” 100
              The new blog focuses on moral responsibility and the philosophy of
              action.
              Experimental Philosophy
                 Experimental philosophy consists of opinion polls on common
              philosophical questions, intended to quantify the positions of the
              philosophically naive or untrained public, the so-called “folk” of
              “folk psychology.” Experimental philosophers have a blog.101
                 One of the X-Phi surveys attempted to establish the “folk”
              intuitions on the classic philosophical question of free will and
              determinism. Unfortunately, experimental philosophers fol-
              low John Martin Fischer and define free will as the “control
              condition” for moral responsibility. So their questions are really
              about the moral responsibility of two kinds of agents, those com-
              pletely determined and others assumed to have libertarian free will.
                99    gfp.typepad.com
                100   agencyandresponsibility.typepad.com/flickers-of-freedom
                101   experimentalphilosophy.typepad.com
                            History of the Free Will Problem                       129

   The earliest surveys, by Shaun Nichols,102 tended to show that
participants believed in agent causality, that “incompatibilism was
true.” Later surveys, notably by Eddy Nahmias,103 tend to show the
opposite, that the folk have compatibilist intuitions.
   Note the convoluted, post van Inwagen, titles like that of Nahmias
et al., “Is Incompatibilism Intuitive?”
   The experimental philosophers established that many of those




                                                                                         Chapter 7
interviewed want to hold even the determined agents responsible
for their crimes, especially when the crime raises emotions, either
because it is a particularly heinous crime or because it harms some-
one close to the person being interviewed.
   In relatively abstract situations, the idea that the agent was
determined (by any number of determining factors) was enough to
provide mitigating circumstances. But as the crime stirred up strong
emotions in the person judging the action, the agent was more likely
to be held morally responsible, even if the agent was clearly deter-
mined.
   Sadly, experimental philosophers describe their results using
Peter van Inwagen’s distinction between “incompatibilist” or
“compatibilist” intuitions, which makes interpretations difficult.
   The results say very little about free will, but a lot about what
Peter F. Strawson knew, that we would not easily give up natural
feelings about praise and blame, gratitude and resentment.
   What X-Phi has shown is that when their emotions rise up,
those judging an action are more likely to react with an attitude of
blame and seek punishment for the action. Holding an agent mor-
ally responsible is a function of how hurtful their action is to the
one judging the action. This result is quite believable for normal
persons. It is the reason jurors are selected from persons with no
connections to the accused or the plaintiff.

   102 Nichols (2004) Folk Psychology of Free Will Mind & Language, 19, 473-502.
   103 Eddy Nahmias et al. (2006). Is Incompatibilism Intuitive? Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 73(1): 28-53.
        130       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              Major Forks in the Garden Paths
                  We conclude our historical review with a diagram identifying
              some major turning points in the history of the free will problem.
              It is disappointing to see that many philosophers have turned away
              from liberty, from freedom, more particularly away from indeter-
              minism and chance, away from alternative possibilities in an open
              future, to questions not about freedom directly, but about moral
Chapter 7




              responsibility in the one possible actual future.




                Figure 7-1. Forking paths in the free will debates.


                The Scandal Today
                The view of most philosophers over the history of philosophy
              seems to be something like this...
                 “Science can never prove that indeterminism exists. Quantum
                 physics may be wrong. So scientists cannot logically deny
                 determinism. Objective chance would make us random. There-
                 fore, compatibilists can teach students that we are determined, yet
                 still morally responsible (or not, for hard determinists).”
                              History of the Free Will Problem                         131

   As we noted in Chapter 2, John Searle recently wrote in his
2007 book Freedom and Neurobiology, “The persistence of the free
will problem in philosophy seems to me something of a scandal.”
And in a breakthrough of sorts, Searle admits that he could never
see, until now, the point of introducing quantum mechanics into
discussions of consciousness and free will.
   Now he says we know two things,




                                                                                             Chapter 7
   “First we know that our experiences of free action contain both
   indeterminism and rationality...Second we know that quantum
   indeterminacy is the only form of indeterminism that is indis-
   putably established as a fact of nature...it follows that quantum
   mechanics must enter into the explanation of consciousness.”104
   Indeed it does. Despite a century of failed attempts, can we con-
vince Searle and other philosophers that quantum indeterminism
followed by an adequate if not strict determinism is the most plau-
sible and practical two-stage model for free will?
   In the next few chapters we look more closely at determinism
(actually many determinisms), libertarianism, and compatibilism.
   Then in Chapter 12, we will look at a number of suggestions
for two-stage models of free will, combinations of some limited
indeterminism and limited determinism.

   - aye, chance, free will, and necessity - no wise incompatible - all inter-
   weavingly working together. The straight warp of necessity, not to be
   swerved from its ultimate course - its every alternating vibration, indeed,
   only tending to that; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given
   threads; and chance, though restrained in its play within the right lines
   of necessity, and sideways in its motions directed by free will, though
   thus prescribed to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the last
   featuring blow at events.
   Herman Melville, Moby-Dick, Ch. 47, p. 213. Melville knew his Aristotle.105




  104   Searle (2007) p. 74-75
  105   Thanks to Robert Kane for this 1850 insight into the will as a tertium quid.
       132        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis       m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp        min   m  is
Chapter 8




                                i n ism                e t e r
                   De   t e r m                 Soft D
            Hard
                                                                     pati    bilism
                                                            ft C o m
                                                        So
                               ism
                       patibil
        n        com
                                     t u     a  l ,                                   Inc
 Hard I
                                  Ac mliceom, patibilism
                                     s s Sieb
                                  Po                l e
                  ism
                                             a  b
                                  Prob
            n
    Illusio
                                                       p a t i b ilism
                                         r o w I ncom
                                       r  Na
              o s s i b ilism
     Im     p                                                          ism
                                                          m p a tibil
                                                 ft Inc o
                                               So                                     yI
                        M  odel                                               Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                      p a tibilism           (Altern
                                                                                       a
                                                      m
                                     o u r c e Inco uence)
                                   S               l Seq
                                      (A   c t u a
                                                                        i m i t e d
                                                    e lw          ith L
                                                o d
                               - S t      age M
                          Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                        informationphilosopher.com/freedom/probability.html
                            m i n i s m
                      deter
                                                               Actual, Possible, Probable 133
               In
               Actual, Possible, nProbable
                                   ism     ar             ia
                                    Libert
                  As a philosopher who was trained in physics, I think I can
               see why philosophers trained in logic may be uncomfortable

                                                                       t - C a usal
               with libertarian solutions to the problem of free will that involve
               indeterminism and uncertainty, ontological and       n
                                                                ge chance.
                                                              Aobjective
                                      a u s   l of our problem, let’s take a brief
                  So, before we leave the history
                                            a
                             ent-C
               look at the history
                         Evthinkers
                                    of chance. I believe it can provide powerful




                                                                                                      Chapter 8
               insights for          who work in logic and language alone.
                  At the very beginning of our problem, in the 5th centuryC
                                                                          n -  a usal
                                                                              BCE,
                                                                   No denying
               we find the first determinist philosopher, Leucippus,
               randomness and chance.
                              m                     SFA
              a t i b i l i s
                      “Nothing occurs by chance (μάτην), but there is a reason

comp
                      (λόγου) and necessity (ἀνάγκης) for everything.” 1 ality
                                                              C              aus
                                                     Soft philosopher,
              A century later, the first indeterminist                    Aristot-
           le, embraced chance,
                         t i b i l ismbut he worried  that it was obscure and unin-

           n c o mp
           telligible. a
                       In  the    Metaphysics, Aristotle makes the case for chance
                                                                             a r i a n ism
         I                                                                 t
  B  road and uncaused causes (causa sui).                         Liber    ft
                                                             o but only chance
                   “Nor is there any definite cause for an S
                                                           accident,

                           r t a r nism (ἀόριστον) cause.” 2
               (τυχόν), namely an indefinite
                                   i a                                                         i n a t ion
                         e
                   Lib description of chance as “obscure” (ἄδηλος)                         m
                                                                                     ttoerrea-
     o d  e stAristotle’s                                               e  l f - D echance:
   M       son     led centuries     of philosophers    to deny the   S
                                                                     existence    of
                     “Causes from which chance
                                          C      gitoresults might happen are indeter-
                                               oobscure
           t i b i l   m
                  ibysaccident
                  minate;  hence    chance  is          to human reason and is a cause
       p a
Incom uences)                                                                                    ism
                                (συμβεβεκός).”        3



     S e q      And another century later, we find the first compatibilist
                                                                                    r m
                                                                               te happen   i
                                                                                         phi-n
tive
                                                   d  In
           losopher, Chrysippus, warning of the calamity that
                                                 e                     dewould
                                    L im     i t
               if even one chance event were to occur.

                    m        n d
                          aby causal necessity.
       r m   n  i s
            “Everything that
           ihappens
                             happens is followed by something else which

De t e      depends  on  it                      Likewise, everything that
                    is preceded by something with which it is causally con-
                      nected. For nothing exists or has come into being in the cosmos
                  1       Leucippus, Fragment 569 - from Fr. 2 Actius I, 25, 4
                  2       Metaphysics, Book V, 1025a25
                  3       Metaphysics, Book XI, 1065a33
       134     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   without a cause. The universe will be disrupted and disintegrate
                   into pieces and cease to be a unity functioning as a single sys-
                   tem, if any uncaused movement is introduced into it.“ 4
                The cosmos that we have is actually built on top of a micro-
             scopic chaos that was the case from the beginning of the universe.
             The challenge for philosophy - and physics, one that is addressed
             by information philosophy, is to understand the cosmic creative
             process that has generated and maintained the visible macro-
Chapter 8




             scopic order, in the continuous presence of noise and irreducible
             chance in the microcosmos.
                We shall see that the order is the result of laws of nature, as the
             ancients thought. But today laws are only probabilistic and statisti-
             cal (I will define the difference between probability and statistics).
                The laws only appear to be certain and deterministic because of
             the law of large numbers in probability and the correspondence
             principle (or law of large quantum numbers) in physics.
                We saw that Heraclitus wanted a law or an account (logos)
             behind all change and that Anaximander said the universe must
             have a “cosmos-logos.” Philosophers divided on the question of
             whether change (becoming) was real (being). Plato sided with
             Parmenides on the idea that Truth could not change. Some con-
             cluded that logically true statements could have controlling power
             over the future. The “dialectical” philosopher Diodorus Cronus
             developed his language game to show that the future is determined
             by true statements about it. Diodorus specialized in puzzles like
             the sorites paradox - how many grains does it take to make a heap.
                But future contingency seemed more like a problem than a
             puzzle. It remains actively discussed as a defense of fatalism by
             philosophers like Richard Taylor, Peter van Inwagen, and
             David Foster Wallace.
                Diodorus is an “actualist.” His Master Argument (κύριος
             λόγος) can be translated as the “authorized, proper, real, or actual”
             argument. According to it, there is only one possible future. The
             Master Argument is the granddaddy of all logical, nomological,

               4       Chrysippus
                                  Actual, Possible, Probable            135

and perhaps even theological arguments for determinism. The
Greek for “Master” (κύριος) translates the Hebrew Ba’al (Lord) in
the Bible.
The Actual
   The first serious philosophical discussion of the actual and the
possible was that of Aristotle, and it is the denial of the possible
in Aristotle’s sense (the potential) that forms the core of my argu-




                                                                          Chapter 8
ment that is a scandal to deny this kind of potential to our stu-
dents. So let’s look start with Aristotle’s concepts for the actual.
   Aristotle uses two words for the actual (one he invented). They
both have the sense of “realized.” The first is energeia (ἐνέργεια),
which means an action that is the result of work (ἔργον) or a deed
(as opposed to words - ἔπος). Energeia also has the meaning of
modern energy (that does work). Its Indo-European root werg- is
the source of our word for work (German Werk).
   Aristotle’s invented word for action is entelecheia (ἐντελεχεία).
He built it from en (in) + telos (end or purpose) + echein (to
have). An act then has fulfilled and realized its end.
   Note that an action has normally happened. One can talk about
a hypothetical action in the future, of course, but Aristotle’s mean-
ing carries the sense of something that is completed and is now in
what modern philosophers call the “fixed past.” The actual con-
trasts with the possible, which is something that has not yet hap-
pened.
   Actualists believe that everything that is going to happen is
already actual in some sense (because it is a true statement that
it will happen, because its cause is already present, because it is
physically determined, because God foreknows it, etc.)
The Possible
   Aristotle’s word for the possible was dynamis (δύναμις), power,
capacity, or capability. The Romans translated it as potentia, thus
our potential. Aristotle contrasts actuality to potentiality in Meta-
physics, Book IX, saying that “we call a man a theorist even if he
is not theorizing at the moment. He has the capacity to theorize.5
  5    Metaphysics, IX, 1048a35
       136     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Aristotle chastises thinkers like Diodorus who say that an agent
             cannot act when he is not acting. They deny the potential for act-
             ing. They believe only the actual is possible. So an agent not acting
             cannot possibly act. Aristotle said it is easy to see the absurdity of
             this idea.
                But ancient and modern actualists continued to pursue this ab-
             surd idea. Just as you cannot change the past, you cannot change
             the one possible future. “Change it from what to what?,” asks
Chapter 8




             Daniel Dennett, for example.
             The Probable
                The subtle difference between provable and probable marks a
             critical distinction between logical philosophers and mathemati-
             cians, on the one hand, and scientists on the other. The former
             is the realm of certainty, of absolute truths, of determinism. In
             the latter we find uncertainty, relative doubts, indeterminacy, and,
             above all, chance.
                Both words derive from the same Latin verb, probare, to test,
             from the noun probus, good. The ancient Indo-European word is
             formed from two roots that mean pro (forward) and be (to be, to
             exist, to grow).
                About the same time that Isaac Newton was discovering
             his laws that provided the foundation for physical determinism,
             mathematicians were discovering the laws of probability. One
             might think that studying the “doctrine of chances,” they would
             have been circumspect about the certainty of their results. But,
             being mathematicians, they had no doubts whatsoever.
                As hard as it seems to believe, the mathematicians who gave us
             probability did not think that objective, ontological chance was
             real. On the contrary, they believed deeply that chance was merely
             epistemic, human ignorance, the product of finite minds, by com-
             parison with the infinite mind of God.
                Chance is atheistic. It questions God’s omniscience.
                                     Actual, Possible, Probable           137

   The Bernoullis, De Moivre, Laplace, Legendre, and Gauss
all knew that random events are distributed in what Charles
Sanders Peirce first called a “normal distribution,” the familiar
bell-shaped curve.
   Abraham de Moivre (1667-1754) was regarded by Newton
as the greatest mathematician in England, but being a French
Huguenot refugee, he could not find work, so made his living
selling a gambler’s handbook entitled The Doctrine of Chances, in




                                                                            Chapter 8
which he derived most of the famous formulas of probability that
are associated with better known mathematicians like Laplace and
Gauss. His first sentence tells us everything we need to know.
      “The Probability of an Event is greater or less, according to the
      number of Chances by which it may happen, compared with
      the whole number of Chances by which it may happen or fail.” 6
   De Moivre’s assumption is that the events are random, indepen-
dent of one another, and that they are equiprobable. Equiprobabil-
ity means that no information exists to make one more probable
than another. This is sometimes called the principle of indiffer-
ence or the principle of insufficient reason.
   If contrary information did exist, it could and would be revealed
in large numbers of experimental trials, which provide “statistics”
on the different “states.”

  Probabilities are a priori theories.
  Statistics are a posteriori, the results of experiments.

   In his book, de Moivre worked out the mathematics for the
binomial expansion of (p - q)n by analyzing the tosses of a coin.
   If p is the probability of a “heads” and q = 1 - p the probability
of “tails,” then the probability of k heads is
                       Pr(k) = (n!/(n - k)! k!)p(n - k)qk
  He also was the first to approximate the factorial for large n as
                            n! ≈ (constant) √n nn e-n
  6       De Moivre (1756) p. 1.
       138      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy
Chapter 8




                Figure 8-1. De Moivre’s binomial expansion (vertical lines) and his continuous ap-
             proximation, the normal distribution. This became the “law” of experimental errors.
                De Moivre then fitted a smooth curve to the probabilities Pr(k)
             and was the first to derive the “normal” bell curve. 7 De Moivre
             also derived the “central limit theorem,” that in the limit of large
             numbers of independent random events, the distribution asymp-
             totically approaches the normal,
                When social scientists started to collect statistics on various
             human activities like births, deaths, marriages, and suicides, they
             found distributions remarkably like the above curves. They might
             have concluded that individual human characteristics are distrib-
             uted randomly, by chance. But they decided just the opposite.
             Perhaps seduced by the idea that the regularities they found were
             “lawlike,” they illogically concluded that human characteristics
             must be determined, but some unknown laws, to produce these
             “lawlike” regularities.
                Immanuel Kant argued this as early as 1784, suggesting that it
             undermines the concept of free will..
                 “No matter what conception may form of the freedom of the
                 will in metaphysics, the phenomenal appearances of the will,
                 i.e., human actions, are determined by general laws of nature
               7       For an animation of how discrete probabilities become continuous, see De
             Moivre’s I-Phi web page. informationphilosopher.com/solutions/scientists/de_moivre
                                         Actual, Possible, Probable       139

      like any other event of nature...Thus marriages, the consequent
      births and the deaths, since the free will seems to have such a
      great influence on them, do not seem to be subject to any law
      according to which one could calculate their number before-
      hand. Yet the annual (statistical) tables about them in the ma-
      jor countries show that they occur according to stable natural
      laws... Individual human beings, each pursuing his own ends
      according to his inclination and often one against another (and
      even one entire people against another) rarely unintentionally




                                                                            Chapter 8
      promote, as if it were their guide, an end of nature which is un-
      known to them.” 8
   As we saw in Chapter 7 (p. 91) , the social scientists Adolphe
Quételet and Henry Thomas Buckle developed this idea to
claim that the “laws of human nature” are as deterministic as those
of physical nature.
   Then in the mid-nineteenth century, the scientists James
Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann showed that, by anal-
ogy with the social laws, that the regular macroscopic properties
of gases, including the “gas laws” describing pressure, volume, and
temperature, could be derived on the assumption that the motions
of individual gas particles were independent random events. The
famous “Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution” is essentially identical
to Figure 8-1.
   At that point, some laws of classical physics appeared to be sta-
tistical laws only. And in the twentieth century, quantum mechan-
ics showed that the laws of physics are irreducibly probabilistic.
   So today, we can say that the laws of nature are fundamen-
tally indeterministic, although chance shows up primarily in the
microscopic world. Regularities that we see in the macroscopic
world, including the laws of classical physics, are the results of the
central limit theorem and the law of large numbers of indepen-
dent physical events.
   The information that we gain from probabilities in quantum
physics turns out to be surprising and non-intuitive. Before
we return to the subject of free will, we need to build on our
  8       Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Intent.
       140     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             understanding of classical probabilities to explain the mysterious
             properties of quantum-mechanical wave functions, which some
             philosophers think can help us understand major philosophical
             problems like consciousness and free will.
             Quantum Probabilities
                  The probabilistic nature of quantum physics is captured per-
             fectly in the “wave function,” which propagates in space and time
Chapter 8




             to tell us the probability of finding a quantum particle at any given
             point and time. It is the quantum equivalent of Newton’s equations
             of motion for a classical particle, which we imagine is localized at
             all times and is travelling in a well-defined path, like a billiard ball
             across a pool table.
                The wave function, on the other hand, diffuses from a start-
             ing point where the particle is initially localized, travelling in
             many directions at the speed of light. In principle, given enough
             time, and without an experimental measurement that localizes
             the particle, the wave function fills all space. This means simply
             that there exists some probability of finding the particle anywhere
             within its relativistic light cone.
                At the 1927 Solvay conference, Albert Einstein went to the
             chalkboard to complain that when a particle is measured, on the
             right side of the room, for example, the finite probability of find-
             ing it on the left side of the room, which existed an instant earlier,
             has collapsed at a speed faster than light to the right side.
                Clearly, the new quantum mechanics violates his special theory
             of relativity, he said. Then, eight years later, he and his Princeton
             colleagues, Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, argued that two
             particles initially localized at a central point and described by a
             single wave function propagating from that central point would
             have an even stranger property. If one particle was found, say again
             on the right side of the room, we would instantly know where the
             other particle was, on the left side.
                How, they asked, could local information on the right side travel
             instantly to affect the distant particle on the left side, again, faster
                                        Actual, Possible, Probable      141

than the speed of light. Einstein suggested that quantum reality
has a “non-local” property. Although Einstein never accepted this
aspect of quantum theory, the non-locality has been confirmed in
many experiments first suggested by John Bell as tests of his Bell’s
Theorem.
   Let’s see how information philosophy explains the apparent
infinite speed of information transmission when a wave function
“collapses. Figure 8-2 shows the famous “two-slit” experiment.




                                                                          Chapter 8
The wave function for a particle is travelling through the two slits
and interfering with itself, as waves do. The “interference pattern”
at the screen predicts the likelihood of finding particles at differ-
ent places along the screen. This pattern is statistically confirmed
by thousands of experiments, one particle at a time.




  Figure 8-2. The two-slit experiment
   Now what happens when the experiment captures a particle at
a specific location on the screen, say on the right side somewhere.
This experiment could be very large, in principle many miles
across, as current tests of nonlocality are achieving. What happens
to all that probability on the left side?
       142     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy
Chapter 8




               Figure 8-3. The wave function has collapsed.
                The information philosophy explanation of the collapse of the
             wave function is that no matter or energy has been transferred
             from one place to another. It is only information about probabili-
             ties that changed. Note that the information has not been trans-
             mitted from one place to another. That would allow faster-than-
             light signalling.
                New information enters the universe when a measurement is
             made that locates the particle at a specific point on the screen. At
             that moment, the probability of finding the particle anywhere else
             collapses to zero. We can better understand this by considering a
             macroscopic example. Consider a horse race.
                When the nose of one horse crosses the finish line, its probabil-
             ity of winning goes to certainty, and the finite probabilities of the
             other horses, including the one in the rear, instantaneously drops
             to zero. This happens faster than the speed of light, since the last
             horse is in a “spacelike” separation from the first.



               Figure 8-4. The probability of a trailing horse winning collapses instantly.
                                        Actual, Possible, Probable      143

   Note that probability, like information, is neither matter nor
energy. When a wave function “collapses” or “goes through both
slits” in the dazzling two-slit experiment, nothing physical is trav-
eling faster than the speed of light or going through the slits. No
messages or signals can be sent using this collapse of probability.
Actualism, Possibilism, and Probabilism
   If actualism gives us only one possible future (and one uni-




                                                                          Chapter 8
verse), possibilism is the idea that there are an infinite number
of possible futures, each with its own universe. It is ironic to find
compatibilist philosophers who deny the alternative possibilities
essential to libertarian free will, but who embrace David Lewis’
picture of “nearby” possible worlds as philosophically important.
   Probabilism is the idea that all our knowledge is contingent,
based on empirical evidence, hence only statistical and probable.
Without possibilities, there is no meaning to probabilities.
   Information theory is based on the existence of different
possibilities and their probabilities.
   Can we see the history of the free will problem as being fought
along the actualism-possibilism dimension? Looking back to the
traditional determinism-libertarianism-compatibilism taxonomy9
that we had before Peter van Inwagen changed it to compatibil-
ism vs. incompatibilism, can we see this new dichotomy as justi-
fying the traditional taxonomy?

                       Determinism                    Libertarianism
                      as Actualism?                  as Possibilism?


                                   Compatibilism
                                  as Probabilism?

  Figure 8-5. Justifying the traditional taxonomy.
   In my view, libertarians need possibilism and the underlying
indeterminism, uncertainty, and chance that provides our open
futures. And compatibilists should consider probabilism.
  9     See Chapter 6.
        144      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                               m inis        m
                                      De t e r

                                                       a t i b i lism
                                              C    omp       r min  m    is
                                i n ism                e t e
                                                Soft D
Chapter 9




                        t e r m
                   De
            Hard
                                                                     pati     bilism
                                                            ft C o m
                                                        So
                     patibil
                             ism
                                          i s m s
                                     rmin
        n       com                                                                    Inc
 Hard I
                        Dete                     tibilism
                                              Semic
                                                    om       pa

             n   ism
     Illusio                                                           ism
                                                        m p a tibil
                                                wI  nco
                    lism                  Narro
        p o s sibi
     Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                         o m p
                                              So  ft Inc
                                                                                       yI
                        M  odel                                                Leewa t
                   an
            Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                        a
                                                      m
                                     o u r c e Inco uence)
                                   S               l Seq
                                      (A   c t u a
                                                                         i m i t e d
                                                    e lw           ith L
                                                o d
                               - S t      age M
                          Tw o
                                                   This chapter on the web
                         informationphilosopher.com/solutions/determinisms
                         m i n i s m
                   deter
                                                           Determinisms            145
            In
            Determinisms nism
                      rtaria   Libe
               Determinism is the idea that everything that happens, includ-
           ing all human actions, is completely determined by prior events.
           There is only one possible future, and it is completely predict-
                                                                          t - C  a  usal
           able in principle, most famously by Laplace’s Supreme        n
                                                                Age Intelligent
           Demon, assuming perfect knowledge of the positions, velocities,
                                     C  a u  althe void.
                                            sin
           and forces for all the  -   atoms
                       EvenIt strongly suggest that determinism should be
               More strictly,




                                                                                       Chapter 9
           distinguished from pre-determinism, the idea that the entire past
                                                                              n - C  a usal
           (as well as the future) was determined at the origin ofN       ouniverse.
                                                                        the
               Determinism is sometimes confused with causality, the idea
           that all events have causes.S
                                               FA
         t i b i l i s m                     Despite David Hume’s critical attack

co   mpa   on the necessity of causes, and despite compatibilists’
           respect for Hume as the modern founderftofC
                                                        o       a usality many
                                                              compatibilism,
                                                                                  great

           philosophers embrace causality andSdeterminism very strongly.

                   m  p a ibilismit to the very possibility of logic and reason.
           Some even tconnect
                                                                                       nism
         I n
           Andc o  Hume himself believed strongly, if inconsistently,rin     t a r i a
                                                                                 neces-
  Broad sity. “‘tis impossible to admit any medium         S   ft Libechance and
                                                             obetwixt
           necessity,” he said.
                            a r i a    ism
                                    nsaid “The law of causation, according to whichination
                 L        t
               BertrandrRussell
                       e
                    ib can theoretically be predicted by means                 t erm
        e   s t
           later   events                                             f - D  e
                                                                            of   earlier
   Mod events, has often been held to be a priori, a necessity   Sel of thought, a
           category without which science  ogitowould not be possible.”
                                                                            1
                                         C
                     m events may themselves not be completely determined
      p a t i b ilissome
               But
Incom ubyenprior  c e   ) This does not mean they are without causes, just
                      sevents.
                                                                        n is        m
                                                                  r m i
      eq that their causes are probabilistic. Such an event is then indeter-
                                               e d In        dete
tive S minate. It might or might not have happened. It is sometimes
                                           i t
                                    nd Lim
           called a “causa sui” or self-caused event. But a probabilistically

             ism                 a
           caused event may in turn be the adequately deterministic cause

     r m i n
           for following events. These later events would therefore not be
Dete       predictable from conditions before the uncaused event. We call
           this “soft” causality. Events are still caused, but they are not always
           predictable or completely pre-determined.
               1     Russell (1960) p. 179
        146     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Uncaused events are said to break the “causal chain” of events
              back to a primordial cause or “unmoved mover.” Aristotle’s
              “accidents” and Epicurus’ “swerve” are such uncaused causes.
                 There is only one basic form of indeterminism. There is only
              one irreducible freedom, based on a genuine randomness that
              provides for a world with breaks in the causal chain. Quantum
              mechanics is the fundamental source for irreducible objective
              indeterminacy and unpredictability in the physical, biological,
              and human worlds.
Chapter 9




                 By contrast, there are many determinisms, depending on what
              pre-conditions are considered to be determinative of an event or
              action. This chapter identifies more than a dozen distinguishable
              determinisms, though they overlap a great deal.
                 Philosophers and religious thinkers may feel ill-equipped
              to discuss the conflict between a physical freedom based on
              quantum physics and their own particular (logical or physical)
              determinism. Because interpretations of quantum mechanics are
              difficult even for physicists, most recent philosophers dodge the
              issue and declare themselves agnostic on the truth of determinism
              or indeterminism.
                 Even some philosophers who accept the idea of human free-
              dom are uncomfortable with the randomness implicit in quan-
              tum mechanics and the indeterminacy principle. True chance is
              problematic, even for many scientists. This included some, like
              Max Planck, Albert Einstein, and Erwin Schrödinger, who
              discovered the quantum world. And for traditional philosophers
              in a religious tradition, chance has been thought to be an atheistic
              idea for millennia, since it denies God’s foreknowledge. Chance,
              they say, is only epistemic, the result of human ignorance.
                 But quantum indeterminacy is real and ontological. There is
              objective chance in the physical world.
              The Determinisms
                Actualism is the idea that only whatever actually happens
              could ever have happened. It denies the existence of alternative
                                               Determinisms             147

possibilities for actions. This idea began with the logical soph-
istry of Diodorus Cronus’ Master Argument for determinism.
Statements about a future event that are true today necessitate the
future event.
   Sophisticated defenses of this idea include the so-called Frank-
furt cases, which claim that an agent’s actions can be free even
if a hypothetical intervening controller can change the agent’s
decisions, preventing any alternative possibilities that might have
appeared as what John Martin Fischer calls “flickers of free-




                                                                          Chapter 9
dom.”.
   Behavioral Determinism assumes that our actions are reflex
reactions developed in us by environmental or operant condition-
ing. This is the Nurture side of the famous Nature/Nurture debate
- note that both are determinisms. This view was developed to
an extreme by B. F. Skinner in the early 20th century, who had
great success “programming” the behaviors of animals, but never
with perfect control of behavior. Many cognitive scientists are
behaviorists who see the mind as a computer that has been pro-
grammed, by accident or deliberately, by education, for example.
   Biological Determinism finds causes for our actions in our
genetic makeup. This is the Nature side of the Nature/Nurture
debate. Again, both sides are determinisms. There is little doubt
that our genes pre-dispose us to certain kinds of behavior. But
note that our genes contain a miniscule fraction of the informa-
tion required to determine our futures. Most of the information in
the adult brain is acquired through life experiences.
   Causal Determinism assumes that every event has an anteced-
ent cause, in an infinite causal chain going back to Aristotle’s
Prime Mover. Nothing is uncaused or self-caused (causa sui).
Galen Strawson supports this view with his Basic Argument.
Note that there are always multiple causes for any event. Basically,
all the events that are in the past light-cone of an event can have a
causal relationship with the event.
   Cognitive Science Determinism results from a computational
model of mind that sees the mind as a computer. The mind may
        148     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              be evolving its own computer programs, but the overall process is
              completely pre-determined, say cognitive scientists, and philoso-
              phers like Daniel Dennett.
                 Fatalism is the simple idea that everything is fated to happen,
              so that humans have no control over their future. Notice that fate
              might be an arbitrary power and need not follow any causal or
              otherwise deterministic laws. It can thus include the miracles of
              omnipotent gods, and thus be a theological fatalism. Some philos-
              ophers use the term fatalism loosely to cover other determinisms.
Chapter 9




              Richard Taylor’s well-known article, Fatalism, in the Philosoph-
              ical Review, was about logical arguments denying future contin-
              gency. The Idle Argument claimed that since things are fated, it is
              “idle” to take any actions at all, since they can have no effect.
                 Historical Determinism is the dialectical idealism of Hegel or
              the dialectical materialism of Marx that are assumed to govern
              the course of future history. Marxists have often felt they could
              revise the past to suit their purposes, but claimed that the future is
              economically determined.
                 Logical Determinism reasons that a statement about a future
              event happening is either true or it is not true. This is the Principle
              of Bivalence and the Law of the Excluded Middle. If the statement
              is true, logical certainty then necessitates the event. Aristotle’s
              Sea Battle and Diodorus Cronus’ Master Argument are the clas-
              sical examples of this kind of determinism. If the statement about
              the future is false, the event it describes can not possibly happen.
              In logic, as in other formal systems, truth is outside of time, like
              the foreknowledge of God. Fortunately, logic can constrain our
              reasoning, but it cannot provide us with knowledge about the
              physical world nor can it constrain the world.
                 Linguistic Determinism claims that our language determines
              (at least limits) the things we can think and say and thus know. The
              Sapir-Whorf hypothesis claims that speech patterns in a language
              community constrain the conceptual categories of a linguistic
              community and thus determine thought.
                                               Determinisms             149

   Mechanical Determinism explains man as a machine. If
Newton’s laws of classical mechanics govern the workings of the
planets, stars, and galaxies, goes the argument, surely they govern
man the same way. Note that although René Descartes described
human bodies and all animals as deterministic machines, he said
that the human mind was free and undetermined (indeterminata).
   Necessitarianism is a variation of logical and causal determin-
ism that claims everything is simply necessary. This was Leucip-
pus’ view at the beginning of determinism. This was the most




                                                                          Chapter 9
popular name for determinists in the 18th century, when they were
opposed to libertarians.
   Neuroscientific Determinism assumes that the neurons are
the originators of our actions. “My neurons made me do it.” The
Libet experiments have been interpreted to show that decisions
are made by the brain’s neurons significantly before any action of
conscious will.
   Nomological Determinism is a broad term to cover determin-
ism by laws, of nature, of human nature, etc.
   Physical Determinism extends the laws of physics to every
atom in the human mind and assumes that the mind will some-
day be perfectly predictable, once enough measurements are
made. The paradigmatic case is that of Laplace’s Demon. Knowing
the positions, velocities, and forces acting on every particle in the
world, the demon can know the entire past and future. All times
are visible to such a super intelligence.
   Psychological Determinism is the idea that our actions must
be determined by the best possible reason or our greatest desire.
Otherwise, our acts would be irrational. Since all the possible ac-
tions are presented to the mind, determined by prior actions, the
choice is not really made by the agent.
   Pre-determinism claims that everything that ever happens
was pre-determined at the beginning of the universe. Theological
predestination is similar, but if God is assumed to be omnipo-
tent, the events may have been pre-destined more recently. Some
        150     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

              theologians insist that God is unchanging and outside of time, in
              which case predestination reduces to pre-determinism.
                 Religious or Theological Determinism is the consequence of
              the presumed omniscience of God. God has foreknowledge of all
              events. All times are equally present to the eye of God (Aquinas’
              totem simul). Note the multiple logical inconsistencies in the idea
              of an omnipotent, omniscient, benevolent God. If God knows
              the future, he obviously lacks the power to change it. And if
              benevolence is assumed, it leads to the problem of evil.2
Chapter 9




                 Spatio-temporal Determinism is a view based on special rela-
              tivity. The “block universe” of Hermann Minkowski and Albert
              Einstein is taken to imply that time is simply a fourth dimension
              that already exists, just like the spatial dimensions. The one possi-
              ble future is already out there, up ahead of where we are now, just
              like the city blocks to our left and right. J. J. C. Smart is a philoso-
              pher who holds this view. He calls himself “somewhat of a fatalist.”
                 Finally, Compatibilism is the idea that Free Will is compat-
              ible with Determinism. Compatibilists believe that as long as our
              Mind is one cause in the causal chain then we can be responsible
              for our actions, which is reasonable. But they think every cause,
              including our decisions, are pre-determined. Compatibilists are
              Determinists. Although some modern compatibilists say they are
              agnostic on the truth of determinism (and indeterminism).
                 Some of these determinisms (behavioral, biological, histori-
              cal-economic, language, and psychological) have demonstrable
              evidence that they do in fact constrain behaviors and thus limit
              human freedom. But others are merely dogmas of determinism,
              believed primarily for the simple reason that they eliminate ran-
              dom chance in the universe.
                 Chance is anathema to most philosophers and many scientists.
              But without indeterminacy, there are simply no possibilities for
              the world to be different from what these many determinisms
              claim that it will be.



                2     See page 5.
                                                 Determinisms             151



Do the Laws of Physics Deny Human Freedom?
   Of all the determinisms listed here, physical determinism
stands out as a special case.
   All the fanciful logical, theological, and nomological determin-
isms described here are basically just ideas.
   Isaac Newton’s classical mechanics was also an idea at first, of
course, just a theory.




                                                                            Chapter 9
   But then it was confirmed experimentally, by observations that
have grown more and more accurate with every passing decade.
   To be sure, the theory has been revised and refined, first for the
case of matter moving at velocities that are a significant fraction of
the speed of light. Albert Einstein’s special theory of relativity
goes beyond classical mechanics, but it asymptotically approaches
the classical theory as velocities go to zero.
   The next grand refinement was Einstein’s general theory, but it
too corresponds to ordinary Newtonian physics in the limit.
   The most important refinement is the quantum mechanics of
Werner Heisenberg and Neils Bohr. Again, it corresponds to
the classical theory, in the limit of large numbers of particles.
   When Arthur Stanley Eddington revised his 1927 Gifford
lectures for publication as The Nature of the Physical World, there
he dramatically announced
      “It is a consequence of the advent of the quantum theory that
      physics is no longer pledged to a scheme of deterministic law.” 1
  There is nothing in the laws of physics, or any wider “laws of
nature,” that in any way puts constraints on human freedom.




  1       Eddington (2005)
         152      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
Chapter 10




             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                      patibil
                              ism
                                           a n i s m
                                     rtari
        n        com                                                                    Inc
 Hard I
                         Libe                      tibilism
                                               Semic
                                                     om       pa

             n    ism
     Illusio                                                            ism
                                                         m p a tibil
                                                 wI  nco
                     lism                  Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                               So  ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                   This chapter on the web
                    informationphilosopher.com/freedom/libertarianism.html
                        m i n i s m
                  deter
                                                                Libertarianism            153
              In
              Libertarianism nism
                          rtaria
                               Libe
                Libertarianism is a school of thought that says humans are free,
             not only from physical determinism, but from all the other diverse
             forms of determinism described in chapter 9.
                                                                                n t - C  ausal
                Libertarians believe that strict determinism              ge freedom are
                                                                        Aand
             incompatible. Freedom seemsl to require some form of indeter-
                                           inathe
                                           C        a
                                                usdecision
             minism somewhere
                              v   e n  t -                   process.
                            E
                Most libertarians in the past have been mind/body dualists
                                                                                             byusal




                                                                                               Chapter 10
             who, following René Descartes, explained human freedom
                                                                                     n  - C
                                                                                  o indeter-a
             a separate mind substance that somehow manages to                Nact
             ministically in the physical world. Some, especially Immanuel
                       m                           SFA only exists in a transcendental
         t i   i l i s
             Kant, believed that our freedom
             b
co   mpa     or noumenal world, leaving the physical world to belcompletely
                                                                       a u s  a   ity
                                                             So t C
             deterministic. How this works remains afmystery.
                Religious libertarians say that God has given man a gift of free-
             dom. But at
                           p a      lismtime they say that God has foreknowledge of sm
                                 ibisame
                               tthe
      a d  I n co
             everythingm      that man will do. Another mystery.                 e r t a r iani
  Bro                                                                oft Lib are called
                In recent free will debates, these dualistSexplanations
             “agent-causal libertarianism.
                                     i a  n i s m ” The idea is that humans have some tion
                t   L   i   ertar
             kind of metaphysical
                          b                   agency (an ability to act) that cannot beina
                                                                                     e t erm
          e   s                                                               f - D
   Mod One alternative to dualism is “event-causal                          l
             explained       in  terms    of physical  causes.
                                                                        Selibertarianism,      ”
             in which at least some           C  o g i t
                                                 physicalo  or brain  events  are   uncaused
            ti
             orb  i l i s m
                   indeterministically           caused. Note that eliminating strict
    o m p a
Inc          determinism
               e n    c  es)      does   not  eliminate   causality.
                                                                            i n is          m
           u
       eq We can still have events that are caused by indeterministic
tive S prior                                                       dete r m
                                            t e d In
                        events. And these indeterministic events have prior causes,
                                          i
                                   nd Lim
             but those prior causes are not sufficient to determine the events

             ism                a
             precisely. In modern physics, for example, events are only statisti-
     r m i n
Dete
             cal or probabilistic. We can call this “soft” causality, meaning not
             pre-determined but still having a causal explanation.
                Still another libertarian position is to say that human freedom
             is uncaused or simply non-causal. This would eliminate causality.
         154     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Some philosophers like Carl Ginet think “reasons” or “inten-
               tions” are not causes and describe their explanations of libertarian
               freedom as “non-causal.”
                  But we do not have to avoid causes completely to provide free-
               dom, just admit that some events are only probabilistically caused.
                  A conservative or “modest” event-causal libertarianism has
               been proposed by Daniel Dennett and Alfred Mele. They and
               many other philosophers and scientists have proposed two-stage
               models of free will (discussed in Chapter 12) that keep indeter-
Chapter 10




               minism in the early stages of deliberation, limiting it to creating
               alternative possibilities for action.
                  Some strong event-causal libertarians believe that one’s actions
               are caused but not completely “determined” by events prior to a
               decision, including one’s character and values, reasons and mo-
               tives, and one’s feelings and desires. In the view of the leading lib-
               ertarian philosopher Robert Kane, reasons and motives are con-
               tributing causes, but indeterminism “centered” in the moment of
               choice can also contribute to actions done “of one’s own free will.”
                  Critics of Kane’s libertarianism attack his view as unintelligible.
               They argue that no coherent idea can be provided for such a late
               role for indeterminism. Kane’s response is that this is not the case.
               In the “torn” decisions of his Self-Forming Actions (SFAs), the
               agent has excellent reasons, and chooses for those reasons, for
               whichever action is selected.
                  Until recently I too was a critic of Kane, worried that any ran-
               domness in the moment of choice would make chance the direct
               and primary cause of our actions. But I have changed my mind, as
               we will see in Chapter 13.
                  Kane’s “torn” decisions are not completely random, They are
               those cases when previous deliberations in the two-stage model
               have not narrowed down options to a single choice. What remains
               are choices that are caused by the agent’s reasons and motives,
               consistent with character and values, etc., but not yet fully decided
               despite the agent’s best efforts to come to a decision.
                                                 Libertarianism            155

   When indeterminism makes one or more of the remaining
options fail, Kane says that it is the effort of the agent that deserves
to get the credit as the “cause” of the option that succeeds.
   The first libertarian, Epicurus, argued that as atoms moved
through the void, there were occasions when they would “swerve”
from their otherwise determined paths, thus initiating new causal
chains.
   The modern equivalent of the Epicurean swerve is quantum
mechanical indeterminacy, again a property of atoms. We now




                                                                             Chapter 10
know that atoms do not just occasionally swerve, they move
unpredictably whenever they are in close contact with other atoms.
   Everything in the material universe is made of atoms and sub-
atomic particles in unstoppable perpetual motion. Deterministic
paths are only the case for very large objects, where the statistical
laws of atomic physics average to become nearly certain dynami-
cal laws for billiard balls and planets.
   Many determinists and compatibilists are now willing to ad-
mit that physics has shown there is real indeterminism in the
universe. I believe that libertarians should agree with them, and
accept their criticism that if nothing but chance was the direct
cause of our actions, that would not be the freedom with respon-
sibility that compatibilists are looking for.
   Determinists and compatibilists might also agree that if chance
is not a direct cause of our actions, it would do no harm. In which
case, libertarians should be able to convince them that if chance
provides real alternatives to be considered by the adequately
determined will, it provides real alternative possibilities for
thought and action. It provides freedom and creativity.
   Libertarians can give the determinists, at least open-minded
compatibilists agnostic about determinism, the kind of freedom
they say they want, one that provides an adequately determined
will and actions for which they can take responsibility.
   This is the goal of the two-stage models of free will discussed in
Chapters 12 and 13.
         156      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
Chapter 11




                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                      patibil
                              ism
                                           i l i s m
                                     patib
        n        com                                                                    Inc
 Hard I
                      Com                      Se m
                                                    ibilism
                                                    i c o mp    at

             n    ism
     Illusio                                                            ism
                                                         m p a tibil
                                                 wI  nco
                     lism                  Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                               So  ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                           i m i t e d
                                                     e lw            ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                    This chapter on the web
                    informationphilosopher.com/freedom/compatibilism.html
                        m i n i s m
                  deter
                                                                Compatibilism             157
              In
              Compatibilism nism
                                      ar        ia
                               Libert
               Compatibilists argue that determinism is compatible with
           human freedom, and that indeterminism is not compatible or at
           best incoherent. They feel (correctly) that there must be a a
                                                                                t - C      usal
                                                                                        deter-
           ministic or causal connection between our will              Agand n
                                                                           e our actions.
           This allows us to take responsibility for our actions, including
           credit for the good-and    C   a u  salfor the bad.
                                           blame
               As long
                               ntagent is free from external coercion, they have
                        Easvethe
           freedom of action. This is the compatibilist freedom we have,
                                                                                   n  - C   a usal
                                                                              iso




                                                                                               Chapter 11
           according to Thomas Hobbes and David Hume. ItN                        the “nega-
           tive freedom” of Isaiah Berlin.
                       m                        SFA
         t i b i l i s
               Compatibilists (or “soft determinists”           as they have been known

co   mpa   since William James) identify free will with freedomliof
           the lack of external constraints. We are free,
                                                              o ft Canda u
                                                                         wes a
                                                                            have
                                                                                 tyaction -
                                                                                    free will,
                                                            S
           if we are not in physical chains. But freedom of the will is different
           from freedom             sm
                           tibofiliaction.
           n  c o  m   p a
                                                                                     a  r i a n ism
         I                                                                         t
                                                                            ber of events
  Broad Many compatibilists accept the view ofSa ocausal
               And    our wills    can be   free, even   if we are in physical  chains.
                                                                      ft Lichain
           going back indefinitely in
                                  i a n i s mtime, consistent with the laws of nature, tion
           with the plan
              t  L  i b ertaofr an omniscient God, or with other determinisms.     e  t e  r m  ina
            s                                                                -D we are
   Modefree, they say. And they think causality in nature
           As long as our own will is included in that causallfchain,
                                                                       Seis related     to the
           very possibility of reason     C        i t o
                                              oglogic. Without causality, they say, we
                                              and
          t i b
           couldili s m
                    not  be  certain   of  the  truths of our arguments.
      p a
Incom ueCompatibilists
                  c  es)                                                      n is
                                    don’t mind all their decisions being caused by          m
               n
                                                                        r m
      eq a metaphysical chain of events, as long as they are not in physicali
tive S chains.
                                              e d In               dete
                                          i t
                                   nd Lim
               We think compatibilists should be classified according to the

             ism                a
           particular determinisms they think are compatible with human
     r m i n
Dete
           freedom. It is one thing to claim compatibility with physics,
           another to claim compatibility with God’s foreknowledge, etc.
               An increasing number of compatibilists, often reluctantly, ac-
           cept the view that random quantum mechanical events occur in
         158     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               the world. Whether in the physical world, in the biological world
               (where they are a key driver of genetic mutations), or in the mind,
               randomness and uncaused events are real.
                  Other compatibilists, Daniel Dennett, for example, simply
               insist that such genuine irreducible randomness is not needed for
               human freedom, or even for biological evolution. Others point
               out that even if strict determinism were true (which it isn’t), com-
               patibilist freedom of action, in David Hume’s sense, would still
               exist. I agree. This would be so.
                  Quantum events introduce the possibility of accidents, novelty,
Chapter 11




               and human creativity. Compatibilists who admit that such inde-
               terminism exists might very likely be convinced of a stronger
               argument for human freedom that still provides an adequately
               determined will.
                  I call this “comprehensive compatibilism,” in which free will
               is compatible both with adequate determinism (limited to the
               real determinism that we have in the world) and with indeter-
               minism (constrained to not causing any of our actions directly,
               but simply providing alternative possibilities for the adequately
               determined will to choose from).
                  Comprehensive compatibilism is developed in Chapter 28.
               Giving Compatibilists What They Want
                 1. They Want Determinism, especially determination of their
               will by their motives and feelings, their character and values.
                 So let us ask them two simple questions:
                  “First, Do you agree that there is some physical indetermin-
                  ism in the universe?” By which of course we mean quantum
                  mechanical indeterminacy.
                  “And second, do you agree that quantum mechanical indeter-
                  minism normally has no observable effect on large physical
                  structures?” By which we mean that the world is “adequately
                  determined.”
                                                           Compatibilism     159

   2. They Want Intelligible Freedom. Let’s ask a third simple ques-
tion,
   “If the indeterminism only provided genuine possible alterna-
   tives for action and thought, if it did not impair the adequately
   determined will in any way, if it does not directly cause any
   action, is such a freedom and element of unpredictability
   acceptable?”
  3. They Want Moral Responsibility. So finally, let’s ask one last
question,
   “Would you agree that the adequately determined will, making




                                                                               Chapter 11
   its selection from among such unpredictable actions or
   thoughts, can be held morally responsible for its choices?”
  If you are a compatibilist, what are your answers?
Incompatibilism
   Peter van Inwagen gave incompatibilism a new meaning in
his 1983 Essay on Free Will. His new definition changed the tax-
onomy of free will positions (see Chapter 6). Van Inwagen accepts
the lack of alternative possibilities (in what he calls the Direct
Argument and others describe as the Actual Sequence of events),
as compatibilists have done, especially since the 1969 work of
Harry Frankfurt.
   Incompatibilists of many stripes now appear - Source Incom-
patibilists, Leeway Incompatibilists, Hard and Soft Incompatibil-
ists, and Broad and Narrow Incompatibilists. Libertarians - of
many kinds as well - all get lumped together with Hard Determin-
ists as Incompatibilists in van Inwagen’s new catch-all category.


      Compatibilism                     Incompatibilism


                       Hard Determinism                     Libertarianism
  Figure 11-1. A compatibilist-incompatibilist taxonomy.
         160       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis         m
                                       De t e r

                                                          a t i b i lism
                                                 C    omp      r min   m  is
                                 i n ism                 e t e
                    De   t e r m                  Soft D
             Hard
                                                                               bilism
Chapter 12




                                                                C o m pati
                                                             ft
                        patibil
                                ism
                                 o d     e    l s         So
                com
                            e M                                                         Inc
        11




 H       ard In
                     St a g      ill
                  wo- FreSeemW       a t i b ilism
                T             icom p

 Ill u s i o n ism  of                       ism
                                                             patib  il
                                                     n c o m
                                           Nar row I
               o s s i b ilism
      Im     p                                                           ism
                                                            m p a tibil
                                                   ft Inc o
                                                 So                                     yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                    This chapter on the web
                 informationphilosopher.com/freedom/two-stage_models.html
                       m i n i s m
                 deter
                                                            Two-Stage Models          161
             In
             Two-Stage Models
                          nismof Free Will
                                      ar       ia
                               Libert
                 In our history of the free will problem (Chapter 7), we found

                                                                   n  t  -    ausal
              several thinkers who developed two-stage solutions to the classical
                                                                           C
              problem of free will, among them William James Age(1884), Henri
                                     a u s a l
              Poincaré (about 1906), the physicist   Arthur Holly Compton

                          vent-C
              (1931, 1955), the philosopher Mortimer Adler (1961), the math-
              ematicianEJacques    Hadamard, the philosopher Karl Popper
              (1965, 1977), the physicist and philosopher Henry Margenau
                                                                          n  - C  a usal
              (1968, 1982), the philosophers Daniel DennettN(1978)    o and




                                                                                                    11
                                                                                            Chapter 12
              Robert Kane (1985), the classicists Anthony Long and David
                       m                  SFA (1989), Julia Annas (1990),
         t i b i l i s
              Sedley (1987), Roger Penrose

     mpa
              Alfred Mele (1995), Benjamin Libet and Stephen y             Kosslyn
                                                                     l i t
co            cist and biologist Martin Heisenberg
                                                                 s a
                                                       ft Cauthe neurogeneti-
              (2004), John Searle (2007), and most recently,
                                                   So(2009).
                    m  p a ibilismtwo-stage model has been in development
                 My own tCogito
                                                                                    n ism
                co the 1970’s, and will be discussed in the next chapter.
            Insince                                                     r t a r i a
  Broad                                                    Soft L
                                                                      ibe
             William James (1884)
                                           m
                                         is two-stage model of free will is that James ation
                                     anfirst
                                ofrithe
                The genius
                     i    e r t a
                       bindeterminism the source for what he calls “alternative    e r min
            s  t  L                                                            e t
   Modepossibilities” and “ambiguous futures.”                    Self-D
           makes

                The chance generation of
                                           C og  itoalternative possibilities for action
                                               such
         a
           does
           t i b    smin any way limit his choice to one of them. For James,
                 ilinot
       p
Incom uchance      c       ) the direct cause of actions. James makes it clear that
                         snot
                     eischoice                                               n is       m
       eq     e n
                                                                       r m i
                                                                  dete
           it  is his            that “grants consent” to one of them.
tive S                                                         In
                  “Accepting the possibilityLofim   i t    d
                As James biographer Robert Richardson puts it,
                                                        e
                          m      a n d          chance does not mean accepting a

     m                i s
                  world that is random.
                   n for freedom.”
                 iword
                                        It  means  realizing that chance is another

Deter In 1884 James asked some Harvard Divinity School students to
                                       1




             consider his choice for walking home after his talk.

             1       James (2010) p. 21.
         162     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     “What is meant by saying that my choice of which way to walk
                     home after the lecture is ambiguous and matter of chance?...It
                     means that both Divinity Avenue and Oxford Street are called
                     but only one, and that one either one, shall be chosen.” 2
                  With this simple example, James was the first thinker to enun-
               ciate clearly a two-stage decision process, with chance in a pres-
               ent time of random alternatives, leading to a choice which grants
               consent to one possibility and transforms an equivocal ambiguous
               future into an unalterable and simple past. There is a temporal
               sequence of undetermined alternative possibilities followed by an
               adequately determined choice where chance is no longer a factor.
Chapter 12




                  James also asked the students to imagine his actions repeated
               in exactly the same circumstances, a condition which is regarded
               today as one of the great challenges to libertarian free will. In the
        11




               following passage, James anticipates much of modern philosophi-
               cal modal reasoning and physical theories of multiple universes.
                     “Imagine that I first walk through Divinity Avenue, and then
                     imagine that the powers governing the universe annihilate ten
                     minutes of time with all that it contained, and set me back at
                     the door of this hall just as I was before the choice was made.
                     Imagine then that, everything else being the same, I now make
                     a different choice and traverse Oxford Street. You, as passive
                     spectators, look on and see the two alternative universes,--one
                     of them with me walking through Divinity Avenue in it, the
                     other with the same me walking through Oxford Street. Now,
                     if you are determinists you believe one of these universes to
                     have been from eternity impossible: you believe it to have been
                     impossible because of the intrinsic irrationality or accidental-
                     ity somewhere involved in it. But looking outwardly at these
                     universes, can you say which is the impossible and accidental
                     one, and which the rational and necessary one? I doubt if the
                     most ironclad determinist among you could have the slightest
                     glimmer of light on this point.” 3
                  James’s two-stage model effectively separates chance (the inde-
               terministic free element) from choice (an arguably determinate
               decision that follows causally from one’s character, values, and
                 2       James (1056) “The Dilemma of Determinism,” p. 149.
                 3       ibid., p. 155.
                                   Two-Stage Models of Free Will           163

especially feelings and desires at the moment of decision). In his
1890 book The Principles of Psychology, James said there were five
types of decision. In the first, the reasonable type,
        “arguments for and against a given course seem to settle them-
      selves in the mind and to end by leaving a clear balance in favor
      of one alternative…. In this easy transition from doubt to as-
      surance we seem to ourselves almost passive; the reasons which
      decide us appearing to flow in from the nature of things, and to
      owe nothing to our will. We have, however, a perfect sense of
      being free, in that we are devoid of any feeling of coercion….
      It may be said in general that a great part of every deliberation
      consists in the turning over of all the possible modes of con-




                                                                                     11
                                                                             Chapter 12
      ceiving the doing or not doing of the act in point. The moment
      we hit upon a conception which lets us apply some principle of
      action which is a fixed and stable part of our Ego, our state of
      doubt is at an end.” 4
   Where do the alternative possibilities for action come from?
From past experiences - initially involuntary and later from ob-
serving the experiences of others, all these the results of chance
- we build up a stock of possibilities in our memory.
      “We learn all our possibilities by the way of experience. When
      a particular movement, having once occurred in a random, re-
      flex, or involuntary way, has left an image of itself in the mem-
      ory, then the movement can be desired again, proposed as an
      end, and deliberately willed.
      “A supply of ideas of the various movements that are possible left
      in the memory by experiences of their involuntary performance is
      thus the first prerequisite of the voluntary life.” 5
   In the fifth kind of decision, James sees room for creativity that
allows us to do something beyond what the given reasons would
logically imply. Note that in a deterministic universe, there are
no genuinely new creative acts. Determinism is “information-
preserving.” There is “nothing new under the sun.”

  4       James (2007) p. 531
  5       James (2007) p. 487-8. The italics are in the original
         164     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                         “In the fifth and final type of decision, the feeling that the
                     evidence is all in, and that reason has balanced the books, may
                     be either present or absent. But in either case we feel, in decid-
                     ing, as if we ourselves by our own wilful act inclined the beam;
                     in the former case by adding our living effort to the weight of
                     the logical reason which, taken alone, seems powerless to make
                     the act discharge; in the latter by a kind of creative contribution
                     of something instead of a reason which does a reason’s work.” 6
                 James’ “mental evolution” was clearly inspired by Charles Dar-
               win’s biological evolution.
                     “A remarkable parallel, which I think has never been noticed,
Chapter 12




                     obtains between the facts of social evolution on the one hand,
                     and of zoölogical evolution as expounded by Mr. Darwin on
                     the other...
        11




                     [“In mental evolution], if anywhere, it would seem at first sight
                     as if that school must be right which makes the mind passively
                     plastic, and the environment actively productive of the form
                     and order of its conceptions; which, in a word, thinks that all
                     mental progress must result from a series of adaptive changes,
                     in the sense already defined of that word...It might, accordingly,
                     seem as if there were no room for any agency other than this;
                     as if the distinction we have found so useful between “spon-
                     taneous variation,” as the producer of changed forms, and the
                     environment, as their preserver and destroyer, did not hold in
                     the case of mental progress; as if, in a word, the parallel with
                     Darwinism might no longer obtain...
                     “But, in spite of all these facts, I have no hesitation whatever in
                     holding firm to the Darwinian distinction even here...
                     “And I can easily show...that as a matter of fact the new con-
                     ceptions, emotions, and active tendencies which evolve are
                     originally produced in the shape of random images, fancies,
                     accidental out-births of spontaneous variation in the functional
                     activity of the excessively instable human brain.” 7

                 6       James (2007) p. 534.
                 7       James (1880) p. 441.
                              Two-Stage Models of Free Will              165


Henri Poincaré (about 1906)
   Henri Poincaré was called the “last universalist” because he
was a great contributor to so many fields in mathematics, but his
work was also broad in physics, philosophy, and psychology. Wil-
liam James read Poincaré and the great thinker knew James work.
There is some sign of direct influence.
   Poincaré speculated on how his mind works when he is solving
mathematical problems. He had the critical insight that random
combinations and possibilities are generated, some in an uncon-
scious way with chance involved, then they are selected among,
perhaps initially also by an unconscious process, but then by a




                                                                                   11
                                                                           Chapter 12
definite conscious process of validation.
      “It is certain that the combinations which present themselves
      to the mind in a kind of sudden illumination after a somewhat
      prolonged period of unconscious work are generally useful and
      fruitful combinations… all the combinations are formed as a
      result of the automatic action of the subliminal ego, but those
      only which are interesting find their way into the field of con-
      sciousness… A few only are harmonious, and consequently at
      once useful and beautiful, and they will be capable of affecting
      the geometrician’s special sensibility I have been speaking of;
      which, once aroused, will direct our attention upon them, and
      will thus give them the opportunity of becoming conscious… In
      the subliminal ego, on the contrary, there reigns what I would
      call liberty, if one could give this name to the mere absence of
      discipline and to disorder born of chance.” 8
  Poincaré was thus the second thinker to propose the two-stage
process of random alternatives followed by selection of one choice.
Jacques Hadamard (1945)
   In his 1945 book Psychology of Invention in the Mathemati-
cal Field, Hadamard described the Synthèse conference in Paris
in 1936 organized to study creativity. The conference focused on
Henri Poincare’s two-stage approach to problem solving, in
which the unconscious generates random combinations. In his
book, Hadamard quoted the poet Valéry (as did Dennett later),
  8       Poincaré (2003)
         166     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               summarizing the conference opinion. For Hadamard, it captured
               Poincaré’s description of how the combination of random ideas is
               followed by a choice of the best combination. Chance alone is not
               enough.
                     “...it is obvious that invention or discovery, be it in mathematics
                     or anywhere else, takes place by combining ideas.
                     “However, to find these, it has been necessary to construct the
                     very numerous possible combinations, among which the useful
                     ones are to be found.
                     “It cannot be avoided that this first operation take place, to a
Chapter 12




                     certain extent, at random, so that the role of chance is hardly
                     doubtful in this first step of the mental process.
                     “It is obvious that this first process, this building up of numer-
        11




                     ous combinations, is only the beginning of creation, even, as we
                     should say, preliminary to it...Invention is discernment, choice.
                     “To Invent Is to Choose. This very remarkable conclusion appears
                     the more striking if we compare it with what Paul Valéry writes
                     in the Nouvelle Revue Française: “It takes two to invent any-
                     thing. The one makes up combinations; the other one chooses,
                     recognizes what he wishes and what is important to him in the
                     mass of the things which the former has imparted to him.”
                     “What we call genius is much less the work of the first one than
                     the readiness of the second one to grasp the value of what has
                     been laid before him and to choose it.” 9
                 Although Valéry describes two persons, this is clearly William
               James’ temporal sequence of random chance (“free”) followed by
               a determining choice (“will”). For James, chance and choice are
               part of a single mind.
               Arthur Holly Compton (1931, 1955)
                 In 1931, Nobel prize-winning physicist Compton championed
               the idea of human freedom based on quantum uncertainty and
               invented the notion of amplification of microscopic quantum
               events to bring chance into the macroscopic world. In his rather
                 9       Hadamard (1945) p. 30.
                               Two-Stage Models of Free Will                167

bizarre mechanism, he imagined sticks of dynamite attached to
his amplifier, anticipating the Schrödinger’s Cat paradox.
   Years later, Compton clarified the two-stage nature of his idea
in an Atlantic Monthly article in 1955.
      “A set of known physical conditions is not adequate to specify
    precisely what a forthcoming event will be. These conditions,
    insofar as they can be known, define instead a range of possible
    events from among which some particular event will occur.
    When one exercises freedom, by his act of choice he is himself
    adding a factor not supplied by the physical conditions and is
    thus himself determining what will occur. That he does so is
    known only to the person himself. From the outside one can see




                                                                                      11
                                                                              Chapter 12
    in his act only the working of physical law. It is the inner knowl-
    edge that he is in fact doing what he intends to do that tells the
    actor himself that he is free.” 10

Mortimer Adler (1961)
   In the second volume of his massive book The Idea of Freedom,
Adler revisits the idea of a natural freedom of self-determination,
which explicitly includes alternative possibilities and the self as
a cause so our actions are “up to us.” Note that the uncaused self
decides from prior alternative possibilities.
   “We have employed the following descriptive formula to sum-
marize the understanding of self-determination.” It is “only when
at least two of the three following points are affirmed:
       “(i) that the decision is intrinsically unpredictable, i.e., given
perfect knowledge of all relevant causes, the decision cannot be
foreseen or predicted with certitude;
        “(ii) that the decision is not necessitated, i.e., the decision
is always one of a number of alternative possible decisions any
one of which it was simultaneously within the power of the self
to cause, no matter what other antecedent or concurrent factors
exercise a causal influence on the making of the decision;
        “(iii) that the decision flows from the causal initiative of the
self, i.e., on the plane of natural or finite causes, the self is the un-
caused cause of the decision it makes.” 11
  10    Compton (1967)
  11    Adler (1961) p. 225.
         168     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Karl Popper (1965, 1977)
                  Compton’s work was no doubt closely read by philosopher
               Karl Popper, especially when Popper was selected to give the
               first Arthur Holly Compton Memorial Lecture in 1965.
                  At first Popper dismissed quantum mechanics as being no help
               with free will, but later he describes a two-stage model that par-
               allels Darwinian evolution, with genetic mutations being proba-
               bilistic and involving quantum uncertainty. In his Compton lec-
               tures, he criticizes Compton’s amplifier idea
                  “The idea that the only alternative to determinism is just sheer
Chapter 12




                  chance was taken over by Schlick, together with many of his
                  views on the subject, from Hume, who asserted that
                         ‘the removal’ of what he called ‘physical necessity’ must
        11




                     always result in ‘the same thing with chance. As objects must
                     either be conjoin’d or not, . . . ‘tis impossible to admit of any
                     medium betwixt chance and an absolute necessity’.
                  “I shall later argue against this important doctrine according to
                  which the alternative to determinism is sheer chance. Yet I must
                  admit that the doctrine seems to hold good for the quantum-
                  theoretical models which have been designed to explain, or at
                  least to illustrate, the possibility of human freedom. This seems
                  to be the reason why these models are so very unsatisfactory.
                  “Compton himself designed such a model, though he did not
                  particularly like it. It uses quantum indeterminacy, and the
                  unpredictability of a quantum jump, as a model of a human
                  decision of great moment. It consists of an amplifier which
                  amplifies the effect of a single quantum jump in such a way that
                  it may either cause an explosion or destroy the relay necessary
                  for bringing the explosion about. In this way one single quan-
                  tum jump may be equivalent to a major decision. But in my
                  opinion the model has no similarity to any rational decision,
                  being probabilistic and involving quantum uncertainty.
                  “Hume’s and Schlick’s ontological thesis that there cannot exist
                  anything intermediate between chance and determinism seems
                  to me not only highly dogmatic (not to say doctrinaire) but
                  clearly absurd; and it is understandable only on the assumption
                                  Two-Stage Models of Free Will         169

   that they believed in a complete determinism in which chance
   has no status except as a symptom of our ignorance.” 12
  Popper called for a combination of randomness and control to
explain freedom, though not yet explicitly in two stages with ran-
dom chance before the controlled decision.
   “freedom is not just chance but, rather, the result of a subtle
   interplay between something almost random or haphazard, and
   something like a restrictive or selective control.” 13
  In his 1977 book with John Eccles, The Self and its Brain, Pop-
per finally formulates the two-stage model in a temporal sequence,
and makes the comparison with evolution and natural selection,




                                                                                  11
                                                                          Chapter 12
   “New ideas have a striking similarity to genetic mutations. Now,
   let us look for a moment at genetic mutations. Mutations are,
   it seems, brought about by quantum theoretical indeterminacy
   (including radiation effects). Accordingly, they are also probabi-
   listic and not in themselves originally selected or adequate, but
   on them there subsequently operates natural selection which
   eliminates inappropriate mutations. Now we could conceive of
   a similar process with respect to new ideas and to free-will deci-
   sions, and similar things.
   “That is to say, a range of possibilities is brought about by a
   probabilistic and quantum mechanically characterized set of
   proposals, as it were - of possibilities brought forward by the
   brain. On these there then operates a kind of selective proce-
   dure which eliminates those proposals and those possibilities
   which are not acceptable to the mind.”
   In 1977 Popper gave the first Darwin Lecture, at Darwin Col-
lege, Cambridge. He called it Natural Selection and the Emergence
of Mind. In it he said he had changed his mind (a rare admission
by a philosopher) about two things. First he now thought that nat-
ural selection was not a “tautology” that made it an unfalsifiable
theory. Second, he had come to accept the random variation and
selection of ideas as a model of free will.
   “The selection of a kind of behavior out of a randomly offered
   repertoire may be an act of choice, even an act of free will. I am
  12   Popper (1972) p. 227ff..
  13   ibid.
         170     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  an indeterminist; and in discussing indeterminism I have often
                  regretfully pointed out that quantum indeterminacy does not
                  seem to help us;1 for the amplification of something like, say,
                  radioactive disintegration processes would not lead to human
                  action or even animal action, but only to random movements.
                  “I have changed my mind on this issue.2 A choice process may
                  be a selection process, and the selection may be from some
                  repertoire of random events, without being random in its turn.
                  This seems to me to offer a promising solution to one of our
                  most vexing problems, and one by downward causation.”
                      1. Cf. my Objective Knowledge, chapter 6, pp. 226-29.
Chapter 12




                      2. See p. 540 of J. C. Eccles and K. R. Popper, The Self and Its Brain.

               Henry Margenau (1968, 1982)
                  In 1968, physicist Margenau was invited to give the Wimmer
        11




               Lecture at St. Vincent College in Pennsylvania. His topic was Sci-
               entific Indeterminism and Human Freedom. Margenau embraced
               indeterminism as the first step toward a solution of the problem
               of human freedom.
                  Then in 1982, with co-author Lawrence LeShan, Margenau
               called his model of free will a “solution” to what had heretofore
               had been seen as mere “paradox and illusion.” He very neatly sep-
               arates “free” and “will” in a temporal sequence, as William James
               had done, naming them simply “chance” followed by “choice.”
                  “Our thesis is that quantum mechanics leaves our body, our
                  brain, at any moment in a state with numerous (because of its
                  complexity we might say innumerable) possible futures, each
                  with a predetermined probability. Freedom involves two com-
                  ponents: chance (existence of a genuine set of alternatives) and
                  choice. Quantum mechanics provides the chance, and we shall
                  argue that only the mind can make the choice by selecting (not
                  energetically enforcing) among the possible future courses.” 14

               Daniel Dennett (1978)
                  While he is a confirmed compatibilist, in “On Giving Liber-
               tarians What They Say They Want,” chapter 15 of his 1978 book
                 14   Margenau and Leshan (1982) p. 240.
                               Two-Stage Models of Free Will             171

Brainstorms, Tufts philosopher Daniel Dennett articulated the
case for a two-stage model of free will better than any libertarian.
  Dennett named his model of decision-making “Valerian” after
the poet Paul Valéry, who took part in a 1936 conference in Paris
with Jacques Hadamard. He quotes Valéry,
      “It takes two to invent anything. The one makes up combina-
   tions; the other one chooses.” 15
   Dennett makes his version of a two-stage model very clear. And
he defends it with six excellent reasons. His arguments are more
persuasive than any other philosopher or scientist, including Wil-
liam James himself. Ironically, Dennett remains a firm believer in




                                                                                   11
                                                                           Chapter 12
determinism and calls himself a compatibilist.
      “The model of decision making I am proposing has the fol-
   lowing feature: when we are faced with an important decision,
   a consideration-generator whose output is to some degree
   undetermined produces a series of considerations, some of
   which may of course be immediately rejected as irrelevant by
   the agent (consciously or unconsciously). Those considerations
   that are selected by the agent as having a more than negligi-
   ble bearing on the decision then figure in a reasoning process,
   and if the agent is in the main reasonable, those considerations
   ultimately serve as predictors and explicators of the agent’s final
   decision.”16
  Dennett gives strong reasons why this is the kind of free will
that libertarians say they want.
       1. “First...The intelligent selection, rejection, and weighing
   of the considerations that do occur to the subject is a matter of
   intelligence making the difference.”
     2. “Second, I think it installs indeterminism in the right place
   for the libertarian, if there is a right place at all.”
      3. “Third...from the point of view of biological engineering, it
   is just more efficient and in the end more rational that decision
   making should occur in this way.”
  15   Dennett (1978) p. 293
  16   Dennett (1978) p. 295
         172     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     4. “A fourth observation in favor of the model is that it per-
                  mits moral education to make a difference, without making all
                  of the difference.”
                    5. “Fifth - and I think this is perhaps the most important thing
                  to be said in favor of this model - it provides some account of
                  our important intuition that we are the authors of our moral
                  decisions.”
                     6. “Finally, the model I propose points to the multiplicity of
                  decisions that encircle our moral decisions and suggests that in
                  many cases our ultimate decision as to which way to act is less
                  important phenomenologically as a contributor to our sense of
Chapter 12




                  free will than the prior decisions affecting our deliberation pro-
                  cess itself: the decision, for instance, not to consider any further,
                  to terminate deliberation; or the decision to ignore certain lines
                  of inquiry.
        11




                     “These prior and subsidiary decisions contribute, I think, to
                  our sense of ourselves as responsible free agents, roughly in the
                  following way: I am faced with an important decision to make,
                  and after a certain amount of deliberation, I say to myself:
                  “That’s enough. I’ve considered this matter enough and now I’m
                  going to act,” in the full knowledge that I could have considered
                  further, in the full knowledge that the eventualities may prove
                  that I decided in error, but with the acceptance of responsibility
                  in any case.” 17

               Robert Kane (1985)
                  In his 1985 book Free Will and Values Kane carefully consid-
               ered the work of Compton, Popper, Eccles, and Dennett. He says
               he developed his own two-stage model before Dennett, but in the
               end he did not publish it or endorse Dennett because the two-
               stage model “did not go far enough.”
                  Kane was actually quite bleak about the possibilities for a
               satisfactory libertarian model. He felt,
                  “that any construction which escaped confusion and emptiness
                  was likely to fall short of some libertarian aspirations - aspira-
                  tions that I believe cannot ultimately be fulfilled.” 18
                 17   Dennett (1978) p. 295-7.
                 18   Kane (1985) p. 165.
                             Two-Stage Models of Free Will                173

  His first model was a choice between “relativistic alternatives.”
The choice was in part rational and in part indeterministic. It
could be explained by the agent giving his reasons. Even if the
choice is by chance,
    “the agent has agreed beforehand to accept the chance selected
    outcome and to endorse reasons for it in a special way. That
    is, the selection is going to be ‘willed to be so’ on a provisional
    basis by the agent, whichever way it goes.” 19
   Kane hoped to combine some rationality with some freedom in
this model, so both determinists and libertarians would be happy.
Unfortunately, neither was happy.




                                                                                    11
                                                                            Chapter 12
   Although the two-stage model of earlier thinkers is an “essen-
tial and important part” of any adequate libertarian conception
of free will, it does not go far enough for Kane because it does
not fully capture the notion of ultimate responsibility (UR) during
“self-forming actions” (SFAs) which depend on the agent’s efforts.
He has said that the two-stage model was merely a “significant
piece in the overall puzzle of a libertarian freedom.” 20
    “The reason is that the chance (“free”) part is not in the con-
    trol of the agent and the “will” part is fully determined by a
    combination of the chance part and other determining fac-
    tors, so the final choice is determined by factors, none of which
    the agent has control over at the time of choice. If all of our
    choices are determined at the time of choice that would not
    be libertarian freedom even if some chance events in the past
    were responsible for forming some of the determining factors
    that now determine our choice because however the determin-
    ing factors were formed in the past, all of our choices would be
    determined when they are made.” 21
   Kane agrees that these choices would not have been pre-
determined from before the chance events in the past (the gen-
eration of possibilities in the first stage), so are libertarian free.
   Kane had previously accepted that the two-stage model could
provide enough freedom for everyday practical decisions (vanilla
or chocolate), but did not play a role in moral or prudential “torn”
  19    Kane (1985) p. 96.
  20    Kane (1985) p. 104.
  21    Personal communication.
         174     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               decisions between what the agent believes ought to be done and
               what the agent wants or desires to do.
                  Today Kane sees that two-stage models may generate the
               alternatives of his SFAs, based on character and motives. So they
               may explain the agent’s conflicting motives in moral and pruden-
               tial choices. and they even explain the (reasons for the) agent’s
               efforts. Kane now agrees that the agent has libertarian freedom
               even when the two-stage model produces just one option and the
               agent can be described as “self-determined.”
                  But when the two-stage model does not narrow down the alter-
               natives to a single act of self-determination, and when the choice
Chapter 12




               is moral or prudential, Kane says that his introduction of indeter-
               minism into the decision itself provides “something more” than
               the two-stage model, and I now agree with him.
        11




                  “Now I believe these undetermined self-forming actions or
                  SFAs occur at those difficult times of life when we are torn
                  between competing visions of what we should do or become.
                  Perhaps we are torn between doing the moral thing or acting
                  from ambition, or between powerful present desires and long-
                  term goals, or we are faced with difficult tasks for which we have
                  aversions.” 22
                  “In all such cases, we are faced with competing motivations and
                  have to make an effort to overcome temptation to do something
                  else we also strongly want. There is tension and uncertainty
                  in our minds about what to do at such times, I suggest, that
                  is reflected in appropriate regions of our brains by movement
                  away from thermodynamic equilibrium — in short, a kind of
                  “stirring up of chaos” in the brain that makes it sensitive to
                  micro-indeterminacies at the neuronal level. The uncertainty
                  and inner tension we feel at such soul-searching moments of
                  self-formation is thus reflected in the indeterminacy of our
                  neural processes themselves. What we experience internally
                  as uncertainty about what to do on such occasions would then
                  correspond physically to the opening of a window of oppor-
                  tunity that temporarily screens off complete determination by
                  influences of the past. 23
                 22   “Libertarianism,” in Fischer (2007) p. 26.
                 23   ibid. p. 26.
                               Two-Stage Models of Free Will             175

  Kane agrees that the ever-present noise in the brain is enough
to provide the indeterminism. But he emphasizes that the
agent’s efforts are more the cause of the final decision than the
indeterminism involved.
   “If indeterminism is involved in a process so that its outcome
   is undetermined, one might argue that the outcome must
   merely happen and therefore cannot be somebody’s choice. But
   there is no reason to assume such a claim is true. A choice is
   the formation of an intention or purpose to do something. It
   resolves uncertainty and indecision in the mind about what
   to do. Nothing in such a description implies that there could
   not be some indeterminism in the deliberation and neural




                                                                                   11
                                                                           Chapter 12
   processes of an agent preceding choice corresponding to the
   agent’s prior uncertainty about what to do. Recall from the pre-
   ceding arguments that the presence of indeterminism does not
   mean the outcome happened merely by chance and not by the
   agent’s effort. Self-forming choices are undetermined, but not
   uncaused. They are caused by the agent’s efforts. 24
   To Kane’s critics, the SFA’s indeterminism raises the objection
of loss of control, but Kane says the agent can decide to assume
responsibility whichever way she chooses.
     “Suppose we were to say to such persons: ‘But look, you didn’t
   have sufficient or conclusive prior reasons for choosing as you
   did since you also had viable reasons for choosing the other
   way.’ They might reply. ‘True enough. But I did have good rea-
   sons for choosing as I did, which I’m willing to stand by and
   take responsibility for. If these reasons were not sufficient or
   conclusive reasons, that’s because, like the heroine of the novel,
   I was not a fully formed person before I chose (and still am not,
   for that matter). Like the author of the novel, I am in the process
   of writing an unfinished story and forming an unfinished char-
   acter who, in my case, is myself.’” 25

Anthony Long and David Sedley (1987)
  Anthony Long and David Sedley speculated in their master-
work The Hellenistic Philosophers that Epicurus’ swerve of the
  24   “Libertarianism,” in Fischer (2007) p. 33
  25   ibid, pp. 41-2.
         176     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               atoms might be limited to providing undetermined alternative
               possibilities for action, from which the mind’s power of volition
               could choose in a way that reflects character and values, desires
               and feelings.
                  “Here at last a significant role for the swerve leaps to the eye.
                  For it is to answer just this question, according to Cicero, that
                  the swerve was introduced. The evident power of the self and
                  its volitions to intervene in the physical processes of soul and
                  body would be inexplicable if physical laws alone were suffi-
                  cient to determine the precise trajectory of every atom. There-
                  fore physical laws are not sufficient to determine the precise
                  trajectory of every atom. There is a minimal degree of physical
Chapter 12




                  indeterminism — the swerve. An unimpeded atom may at any
                  given moment continue its present trajectory, but equally may
                  `swerve’ into one of the adjacent parallel trajectories. 26
        11




                  Long and Sedley assume a non-physical (metaphysical) ability
               of the volition to affect the atoms, which is implausible. But the
               idea that a physical volition chooses - (consistent with and ad-
               equately determined by its character and values and its desires and
               feelings) from among alternative possibilities provided randomly
               by the atoms - is quite plausible.
                  “It does so, we may speculate, not by overriding the laws of
                  physics, but by choosing between the alternative possibilities
                  which the laws of physics leave open. In this way a large group of
                  soul atoms might simultaneously be diverted into a new pattern
                  of motion, and thus radically redirect the motion of the body.
                  Such an event, requiring as it does the coincidence of numer-
                  ous swerves, would be statistically most improbable according
                  to the laws of physics alone. But it is still, on the swerve theory,
                  an intrinsically possible one, which volition might therefore
                  be held to bring about..(It may be objected that swerves are
                  meant to be entirely uncaused; but...that was only an inference
                  by Epicurus’ critics, made plausible by concentrating on the
                  swerve’s cosmogonic function...for there it must indeed occur
                  at random and without the intervention of volition.)” 27


                 26   Long and Sedley (1987) p. 110.
                 27   Long and Sedley (1987) p. 110.
                                 Two-Stage Models of Free Will              177


Roger Penrose (1989)
   In his 1989 book The Emperor’s New Mind, Penrose suggests
a two-stage process but is skeptical of the value of randomness in
the first step. His thinking follows that of Jacques Hadamard
and Henri Poincaré, who he has discussed in the previous pages.
    “In relation to this, the question of what constitutes genuine
    originality should be raised. It seems to me that there are two
    factors involved, namely a ‘putting-up’ and a ‘shooting-down’
    process. I imagine that the putting-up could be largely uncon-
    scious and the shooting-down largely conscious. Without an
    effective putting-up process, one would have no new ideas at




                                                                                      11
                                                                              Chapter 12
    all. But, just by itself, this procedure would have little value. One
    needs an effective procedure for forming judgements, so that
    only those ideas with a reasonable chance of success will sur-
    vive. In dreams, for example, unusual ideas may easily come to
    mind, but only very rarely do they survive the critical judge-
    ments of the wakeful consciousness. In my opinion, it is the
    conscious shooting-down (judgement) process that is central to
    the issue of originality, rather than the unconscious putting-up
    process; but I am aware that many others might hold to a con-
    trary view.” 28

Julia Annas (1992)
   In her 1992 book, The Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind, Annas
finds it hard to see how random swerves can help to explain free
action. But she sees clearly that randomness can provide alterna-
tive possibilities for the will to choose from. She says, “there would
be no point in having free will if there were no genuinely open
possibilities between which to select,” anticipating the two-stage
model of free will.
   Perhaps influenced by her classicist colleagues Sedley and Long,
or maybe just coming to the same conclusions from reading the
ancients, especially Epicurus and his swerve, Annas says.
    “...since swerves are random, it is hard to see how they help to
    explain free action. We can scarcely expect there to be a random
    swerve before every free action...random swerves would seem

  28    Penrose (1989) p. 422.
         178     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  to produce, if anything, random actions; we still lack any clue as
                  to how they could produce actions which are free.
                  “An influential modern line of thought avoids these problems
                  by arguing that our evidence does not demand that there be a
                  swerve for each free action [Furley]. Rather, swerves explain the
                  fact that people have characters capable of change and reaction
                  that goes beyond mechanical response to stimuli. We act freely
                  because we have characters that are flexible and spontaneous,
                  and this is because we are composed of atoms which swerve
                  occasionally. On this account, swerves do not have to be fre-
                  quent, since they are not part of any mechanism of action; one
                  swerve in your soul is enough for the kind of character flex-
Chapter 12




                  ibility that is required. Such an account avoids the problems
                  attaching to any account that brings swerves into free action,
                  but at the cost of not answering very closely to the evidence; the
        11




                  Lucretius passage certainly suggests that swerves are in some
                  way relevant at the point of action.
                  “Another kind of suggestion is that swerves are not the causes of
                  free actions at all. Rather, they come into the process whereby
                  free actions are brought about. Swerves are supposed to explain
                  something about the nature of free agency and how it works,
                  but they do not cause free actions (by cutting across causal
                  chains, for example). This suggestion can be developed in sev-
                  eral ways...
                  “The role of swerves is to provide alternative possibilities for
                  volitions to choose between, for there would be no point in hav-
                  ing free will if there were no genuinely open possibilities be-
                  tween which to select.” 29

               Albert Mele (1995)
                  In 1995 Alfred Mele, clearly influenced by Daniel Dennett and
               Robert Kane, proposed his “Modest Libertarianism,” a two-stage
               process that combines an incompatibilist early phase followed by
               a compatibilist control phase.
                  “it might be worth exploring the possibility of combining a
                  compatibilist conception of the later parts of a process issuing
                  in full blown, deliberative, intentional action with an incom-
                 29   The Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind, pp. 184-88
                             Two-Stage Models of Free Will              179

   patibilist conception of the earlier parts. For example, it might
   be possible to gain “ultimate control” while preserving a consid-
   erable measure of nonultimate agential control by treating the
   process from proximal decisive better judgment through overt
   action in a compatibilist way and finding a theoretically useful
   place for indeterminacy in processes leading to proximal deci-
   sive better judgments.” 30
  Mele sees that chance need not be the direct cause of action.
   “That a consideration is indeterministically caused to come to
   mind does not entail that the agent has no control over how he
   responds to it.” 31




                                                                                  11
                                                                          Chapter 12
   Mele is very concerned about the location of any indetermin-
ism, the problem of where and when indeterminism could occur
in a way that helps and does not harm agent control.
The Problem of Luck
   Mele has written extensively about the question whether chance
events in our causal history mean that many of our actions are a
matter of luck. Since chance is very real, many things are the result
of good or bad luck. This is a not a problem for free will, but it is
one for moral responsibility.
John Martin Fischer (1995)
   Also in 1995, John Martin Fischer argued for a model based
on Daniel Dennett’s 1978 work. Fischer is best known for the
idea of semicompatibilism, the idea that moral responsibility is
compatible with determinism. Fischer is agnostic on whether free
will itself is compatible or incompatible with determinism.
   Fischer is most concerned to establish the control needed for
responsibility, especially given Frankfurt-style examples challeng-
ing control. In any case, Fischer uses the Dennett idea - that the
indeterminism comes at an early stage of the overall deliberation-
decision process - to locate a Frankfurt-style “prior sign” needed
by the hypothetical intervener at a place deterministically linked
to the decision and subsequent action.

  30   Mele (1995) p. 212.
  31   Mele (2006) p. 10..
         180     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Fischer’s main criticism of alternative possibilities for action is
               that it is implausible to suppose that one’s moral responsibility is
               grounded on the possibility of forming a certain sort of judgment
               about what is best: a judgment on behalf of doing something there
               are no good reasons to do. The responsibility for doing good is
               not grounded in the possibility of doing bad. Note that free will
               is completely independent of, and merely a prerequisite to, moral
               responsibility. Otherwise it would be an ethical fallacy.
                  Fischer hopes to develop “another sort of libertarianism.” He
               says he does not have the space to lay out his “second family of
               libertarian accounts,” and gives us very little on how it differs from
Chapter 12




               Dennett. He says “Dennett argues that it is the only sort of lib-
               ertarianism that is plausible, and I believe that it is at least min-
               imally plausible. I also believe that it is libertarianism.” Fischer
        11




               may be simply constructing a libertarianism with a built-in place
               for the Frankfurt intervener, in order to support the absence of
               alternative possibilities and his own semicompatibilism. Here is
               Fischer’s sketch of his main idea.
                   “I wish to develop (in an extremely sketchy way) another sort
                   of libertarianism; on this kind of approach, the relationship
                   between the relevant “sign” or “signal” and the subsequent
                   choice is causally deterministic, but there is nevertheless a lack
                   of causal determination along the sequence that issues in the
                   decision (and action). And I shall point out that this approach
                   also seems to lead to the view that an agent can be morally
                   responsible for making a choice even though he could not have
                   (at any relevant time) made a different choice.
                   “I do not have the space here to lay out this second family of
                   libertarian accounts fully or carefully. But I shall simply sketch
                   the main ideas and hope that enough of the content of the
                   approach will emerge to convince the reader that this family
                   of views constitutes a minimally plausible, serious libertarian
                   approach - worth further elaboration and evaluation in the
                   context of the issues under discussion here. In his article, “On
                   Giving Libertarians What They Say They Want,” Daniel Dennett
                   has presented this family of approaches; he does not necessarily
                               Two-Stage Models of Free Will             181

   endorse the view, but presents it as the most plausible and ap-
   pealing version of libertarianism.
   “What is crucial to Dennett’s view is that indeterminacy be
   installed at the appropriate place, and Dennett argues that this
   is not between the judgment that a particular act is the best
   among one’s alternatives and the subsequent choice. He says,
   “Clearly, what the libertarian has in mind is indeterminism at
   some earlier point, prior to the ultimate decision or formation
   of intention....” Rather, Dennett argues that there can be lack
   of causal determinism (of a certain sort) within the process of
   deliberation that leads to the agent’s judgment as to what is the
   best option (under the circumstances).




                                                                                   11
                                                                           Chapter 12
   “So Dennett’s picture suggested on behalf of the libertarian
   involves some lack of causal determination in the process of
   deliberation, but no such lack in the link between the judgment
   as to what is best and the formation of an intention (or the mak-
   ing of a decision). Let me emphasize that I am not in a position
   here fully to lay out this view (or set of views) or to defend it.
   Dennett argues that it is the only sort of libertarianism that is
   plausible, and I believe that it is at least minimally plausible. I
   also believe that it is libertarianism.” 32

Benjamin Libet and Stephen Kosslyn (2004)
   In 2004, Stephen Kosslyn wrote a foreword to Benjamin
Libet’s book Mind Time. The book summarized Libet’s famous
experiments, in which he claimed a Readiness Potential (RP)
initiates an action well before the conscious will is aware of the
decision to act. See Chapter 17 for the details. At one point in
the book, Libet suggests the RP might include multiple initiatives,
implying multiple possible alternative actions. 33
   In a few brief paragraphs of the foreword, Kosslyn proposed a
two-stage model of alternative choices that are constructed in part
chaotically by nondeterministic processes, followed by decisions
that are based on our character and values - “what one is.” He sees
a role for a causa sui.
  32   Fischer (1995) p. 125
  33   Libet (2004), p. 148.
         182     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  “The rationales and anticipated consequences — and even,
                  depending on the situation, the alternative courses of action
                  — are not simply “looked up” in memory, having been stashed
                  away like notes in a file after previous encounters.
                  Here Kosslyn considers a first stage of free creation of alterna-
               tive courses of action,
                  “Rather, one constructs rationales and anticipated consequenc-
                  es, as appropriate for the specific situation at hand. This con-
                  struction process may rely in part on chaotic processes. Such
                  processes are not entirely determined by one’s learning history
                  (even as filtered by one’s genes)... Depending on what one was
Chapter 12




                  just thinking about, the brain is in a different “start state” (i.e.,
                  different information is partially activated, different associa-
                  tions are primed) when one constructs rationales and anticipat-
                  ed consequences — which will affect how one decides. (Note
        11




                  that this idea does not simply move the problem back a step:
                  What one was just thinking itself was in part a result of nonde-
                  terministic processes.) Our thoughts, feelings and behavior are
                  not determined; we can have novel insights as well as “second
                  thoughts.”
                  “Given the choices, rationales, and anticipated consequences,
                  one decides what do on the basis of “what one is” (mentally
                  speaking, to use [Galen] Strawson’s term, which includes one’s
                  knowledge, goals, values, and beliefs).” 34
                 Here Kosslyn considers a second stage of willed decisions that
               are determined by our goals, values, and beliefs -
                  “What one is” consists in part of information in memory, which
                  plays a key role in the processes that construct the alternatives,
                  rationales, and anticipated consequences. In addition, “what
                  one is” governs how one actually makes the decisions. And
                  making that decision and experiencing the actual consequences
                  in turn modifies “what one is,” which then affects both how one
                  constructs alternatives, rationales and anticipated consequenc-
                  es and how one makes decisions in the future. Thus, with time
                  one’s decisions construct what one is.

                 34   Kosslyn, in Libet (2005) p. xii-xii.
                                Two-Stage Models of Free Will          183

   “We are not simply accumulators of environmental events, fil-
   tered by our genetic make-ups. We bring something novel and
   unique to each situation — ourselves. Nietzsche (1886, as quot-
   ed in Strawson, 1994, p. 15) commented, “The causa sui is the
   best self-contradiction that has been conceived so far.” Maybe
   not.” 35

John Searle (2007)
   John Searle has written extensively on the problem of con-
sciousness and almost always reflects on the problem of free will.
His position rarely changed over the decades, but in his recent
short book Freedom and Neurobiology he has tackled the problem




                                                                                 11
                                                                         Chapter 12
more directly and for the first time embraced indeterminism as a
positive factor. Indeed, he goes as far as to say that quantum inde-
terminism is a requirement for consciousness.
   In a breakthrough of sorts, Searle admits that he could never
see, until now, the point of introducing quantum mechanics into
discussions of consciousness and free will. Now he says we know
two things, which correspond to the two requirements for free
will:
     First we know that our experiences of free action contain both
   indeterminism and rationality...Second we know that quantum
   indeterminacy is the only form of indeterminism that is indis-
   putably established as a fact of nature...it follows that quantum
   mechanics must enter into the explanation of consciousness.” 36
  Searle describes “open” alternative courses of action. It is very
important to place the “gap” or causa sui before or during the
generation of these alternative possibilities for deliberation to
be followed by willed action. The result is a two-stage, temporal-
sequence model.
  Then in a 2007 lecture at Google (available on YouTube), Searle
describes his “Hypothesis 2” for free will.
  He says three things are necessary:
  35   ibid., p. xiii-xiv.
  36   Searle (2007) p. 74-75
         184     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                    1. some quantum indeterminism must be involved, but at “a
                  lower level,”
                      2. a quantum explanation of consciousness is needed,
                   3. the higher-level of consciousness must inherit the indeter-
                  minism, but without inheriting the randomness.
                 Compare Karl Popper above,
                  “A choice process may be a selection process, and the selection
                  may be from some repertoire of random events, without being
                  random in its turn.” [Popper’s italics]
Chapter 12




               Martin Heisenberg (2009)
                  The most recent thinker to describe a two-stage model is
               Martin Heisenberg (son of physicist Werner), chair of the
        11




               University of Würzburg’s BioZentrum genetics and neurobiology
               section.
                  Since the indeterminacy principle was his father’s work,
               Heisenberg’s position that the physical universe is no longer de-
               termined and that nature is inherently unpredictable comes as
               no surprise. What is unusual is that Heisenberg finds evidence of
               free behavior in animals, including some very simple ones such as
               Drosophila, on which he is a world expert. Heisenberg argues for
               some randomness even in unicellular bacteria, followed by more
               lawful behaviors such as moving toward food.
                  “Evidence of randomly generated action — action that is dis-
                  tinct from reaction because it does not depend upon external
                  stimuli — can be found in unicellular organisms. Take the way
                  the bacterium Escherichia coli moves. It has a flagellum that
                  can rotate around its longitudinal axis in either direction: one
                  way drives the bacterium forward, the other causes it to tumble
                  at random so that it ends up facing in a new direction ready for
                  the next phase of forward motion. This ‘random walk’ can be
                  modulated by sensory receptors, enabling the bacterium to find
                  food and the right temperature.” 37
                 37     Heisenberg (2009) p. 164
                              Two-Stage Models of Free Will            185

   In higher organisms, the brain still may include elements that
do a random walk creating options for action. The capability to
generate new and unpredictable behaviors would have great sur-
vival value, and would likely be incorporated in higher organisms.
   “the activation of behavioural modules is based on the inter-
   play between chance and lawfulness in the brain. Insufficiently
   equipped, insufficiently informed and short of time, animals
   have to find a module that is adaptive. Their brains, in a kind
   of random walk, continuously preactivate, discard and recon-
   figure their options, and evaluate their possible short-term and
   long-term consequences.




                                                                                 11
                                                                         Chapter 12
      “The physiology of how this happens has been little investi-
   gated. But there is plenty of evidence that an animal’s behaviour
   cannot be reduced to responses. For example, my lab has dem-
   onstrated that fruit flies, in situations they have never encoun-
   tered, can modify their expectations about the consequences of
   their actions. They can solve problems that no individual fly in
   the evolutionary history of the species has solved before. Our
   experiments show that they actively initiate behaviour.” 38
  Heisenberg’s combination of some randomness followed by
some “lawful” behavior looks very much like William James’
two-stage model, but now we have evidence for it in many animals.
James would have been pleased.

   In the next chapter, I will explain how my Cogito two-stage
model solves some of the problems that have been raised about
earlier two-stage models of free will.
   I also show how the model can be extended to include
undetermined liberties and the Self-Forming Actions of the
libertarian Robert Kane.



  38   Heisenberg (2009) p. 165.
         186      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                 m i n is       m
                                          Dete r

                                                         a t i b i lism
                                                  C  omp              m
                                                                   rmin     is
                                   m                           t e
                  D    ete  rminis                 So   ft D e
             Hard                                                                lism
                                                                   o m p atibi
                                                             oft C
Chapter 13




                              i b ilism
                                          o  d      e  l   S

    r d I nco         m p a t
                                 gi to M                                                Inc
H a
                            e Co                    bilism
                  Th                        p a t i
                                       icom      Sem
            n     ism
    Illusio                                                                ism
                                                           m p a tibil
                                                   w Inc o
                                           Narro
                    ilism
     Im      possib                                                        ism
                                                          c o m p atibil
                                                 Soft I n
                                                                                         yI
                         del                                                     Leewa t
                   an Mo
             Valeri                                      p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                          a
                                          r c e I ncom nce)
                                      Sou          l S eque
                                        (Act   u a
                                                                                ited      D
                                                                      ith L i m
                                                  o d e lw
                                 t        a  ge M
                           Two-S                      This chapter on the web
                                   informationphilosopher.com/freedom/cogito
                           m inis          m
                  de t e r                                     The Cogito Model             187
              In
              The Cogito Model
                           anism      a        ri
                               Libert
               The Cogito Model of human freedom locates randomness
            (either ancient chance or modern quantum indeterminacy)
                                                                               - C  a  u sal
            in the mind, in a way that breaks the causalAchain        gentof physical
            determinism, while doing nolharm to responsibility.
                                    t - C     usa indeterminacy - first microscop-
                                           acombines
               The CogitoeModel n
                        Ev randomness and unpredictability, then “adequate”
            ic quantum
            determinism and macroscopic predictability, in a temporal
                                                                                n  - C  a usal
            sequence that creates new information.                        No
               Important elements of the F           A have been proposed by many




                                                                                                 Chapter 13
                                                   model
                            m                    S
      a t i b i lis
            philosophers since Aristotle, the first indeterminist.

c omp          The insoluble problem for early attempts to incorporate
            terminism has been to explain howS            ao     C
                                                            random  a u sality inde-
                                                              ft event in the brain
            can be timed and located - perfectly synchronized! - so as to be
                   m          bilismdecision. The answer is that it cannot be, for
            relevantptoaatispecific
                                                                                          nism
       d  I n c osimple reason that quantum events are totally unpredictable. r t a r i a
  Broa Early attempts could not locate the randomness
            the                                                         ibe
                                                               Soft L so as to make free

                                r i a  n i sm Robert Kane puts it.
            will “intelligible,” as libertarian
                                                                                               a tion
                    i b
               Two-stagee r t amodels        do not involve single random    events,   r
                                                                                    e to m
                                                                                        onei n
            st Ldecision,                                             elf-D     etlead
   Modeper                     but many random events in theSbrain
            alternative possibilities for the adequately determined will to
                                                                             that

            evaluate and decide between.     C  ogito
       p a tibAsiliswemsaw in the last chapter, a number of modern philosophers
Inco m                                                                                        m
                  ces) starting with William James, have proposed two-
            andnscientists,
             e                                                                i n is
      e q u
tive S stage                                                        det e r m
                    models of free will. So how is the Cogito model different?

                                           i t e d In
            The Cogito model is the first to specify how it is that quantum

                                    nd Lim
            indeterminacy creates the alternative possibilities.
                                 a
     r m i n ism
               I shall argue that noise generates new possibilities based on

Dete
            random variations of old experiences and knowledge.
               The source of the randomness is the ever-present noise, both
            quantum and thermal noise, that is inherent in any information
            storage and communication system.
         188     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  The mind, like all biological systems, has evolved in the pres-
               ence of constant noise and is able to ignore that noise, unless the
               noise provides a significant competitive advantage, which it clearly
               can do as the basis for freedom and creativity.
                  Let’s first see how randomness in the Cogito Model is never the
               direct cause of our decisions. Decisions themselves are normally
               adequately determined.
                  We assume that there are always many contributing causes for
               any event, and in particular for a mental decision. All the events
               in the past “light-cone” of special relativity can contribute causes.
                  In the Allan Newell - Herbert Simon “Blackboard” model
               and in Bernard Baars’ “Theater of Consciousness” and “Global
Chapter 13




               Workspace” models, there are many competing possibilities for
               our next thought or action.
                  Each of these possibilities is the result of a sequence of events
               that goes back in an assumed causal chain until its beginning in
               an uncaused event. Aristotle called this original event an archē
               (ἀρχῆ), one whose major contributing cause (or causes) was itself
               uncaused. In modern terms, it involved quantum indeterminacy.
                  In Figure 13-1, we show many contributing causes as causal
               chains going back in time, in principle to the origin of the uni-
               verse. None of them is completely controlling, but all make
               contributions to the decision process.
                  On the left, Bernard Baars’ players in the Theater of Con-
               sciousness, or Daniel Dennett’s functional homunculi, have
               causal chains that go back to Nature and Nurture – hereditary,
               environmental, and educational causes - and in principle beyond.
                  In the middle, the causes have chains that go back to Robert
               Kane’s character development by Self-Forming Actions (SFAs).
                  On the right, my causes are brand new possibilities generated
               randomly immediately after being confronted by the circumstanc-
               es from the “Fixed Past” and the “Laws of Nature.” After evalua-
               tion of the alternatives, the new decision might be one of Kane’s
               SFAs, contributing to our developing character.
                                The Cogito Model of Free Will           189




                                                                          Chapter 13
  Figure 13-1. Decisions have many contributing causes
   Consider contributing causes of a decision on the left of the fig-
ure that go back before the birth of an agent, hereditary causes for
example. To the extent that such causes adequately determine an
action, we can understand why hard determinists think that the
agent has no control over such actions.
   But as long as we can opt out of those ancient causal chains
at the last moment (Roderick Chisholm points out that saying
“no” is always an alternative possibility), and follow one of the new
possibilities generated on the right, we retain enough control, and
can properly take responsibility for our decisions.
   Other contributing causes may be traceable back to environ-
mental and developmental events, perhaps education, perhaps
simply life experiences that were “character-forming” events.
These and hereditary causes would be present in the mind of the
agent as fixed habits, with a very high probability of “adequately
determining” the agent’s actions in many commonplace situations.
         190     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  But other contributing causes of a specific action may have
               been undetermined up to the very near past, even fractions of a
               second before an important decision. The causal chains for these
               contributing causes originate in the noisy brain. They include the
               free generation of new alternative possibilities for thought or ac-
               tion during the agent’s deliberations. They fit Aristotle’s criteria
               for causes that “depend on us” (ἐφ’ ἡμῖν) and originate “within us”
               (ἐv ἡμῖν).
                  Causes with these most recent starting points are the funda-
               mental reason why an agent can do otherwise in what are essen-
               tially (up to that starting point) the same circumstances. These
               alternatives are likely generated from our internal knowledge of
Chapter 13




               practical possibilities based on our past experience.
                  Note that those possibilities that are handed up for consider-
               ation to Baars’ “executive function” may be filtered to some extent
               by unconscious processes to be “within reason.” They likely con-
               sist of random variations of past actions we have willed many
               times in the past.
                  Note that the evaluation and selection of one of these possibili-
               ties by the will is as deterministic and causal a process as anything
               that a determinist or compatibilist could ask for, consistent with
               our current knowledge of the physical world.
                  But instead of strict causal determinism, evaluation and selec-
               tion involve only adequate determinism, and the indeterministic
               origins of alternative possibilities provides libertarian freedom of
               thought and action.
               The Micro Mind
                  Imagine a Micro Mind with a randomly assembled “agenda” of
               possible things to say or to do. These are drawn from our memory
               of past thoughts and actions, but randomly varied by unpredict-
               able negations, associations of a part of one idea with a part or all
               of another, and by substitutions of words, images, feelings, and
               actions drawn from our experience. In information communica-
               tion terms, there is cross-talk and noise in our neural circuitry.
                            The Cogito Model of Free Will                191

   In a “content-addressable” information model, memories are
stored based on their content - typically bundles of simultaneous
images, sounds, smells, feelings, etc. So a new experience is like-
ly to be stored in neural pathways alongside closely related past
experiences. And a fresh experience, or active thinking about an
experience that presents a decision problem, is likely to activate
nearby brain circuits, ones that have strong associations with our
current circumstances. These are likely to begin firing randomly,
to provide unpredictable raw material for actionable possibilities.
   The strong feeling that sometimes “we don’t know what we
think until we hear what we say” reflects our capability for origi-
nal and creative thoughts, different from anything we have con-




                                                                           Chapter 13
sciously learned. Something as simple as substituting a synony-
mous word, or more complex replacements with associated words
(metonyms) or wild leaps of fancy (metaphor) are examples of
building unpredictable thoughts. Picturing ourselves doing some-
thing we have seen others do, from “monkey see, monkey do”
childhood mimicry to adult imitations, is a source for action items
on the agenda, with the random element as simple as if and when
we choose to do them.
   The etymology of cogito is Latin co-agitare, to shake togeth-
er. Why do we need quantum uncertainty involved in the shak-
ing together of our agenda items? Will neuroscientists ever find
information structures in the brain to generate our random
agenda, structures small enough to be susceptible to microscopic
quantum phenomena?
   Speculations include the microtubules of the cellular cytoskele-
ton, tiny (25nm) structures that Roger Penrose and Stuart Ham-
eroff believe may mediate consciousness. But will neuroscientists
be able to distinguish random from non-random processes?
   It is most unlikely that physically localized visually distinguish-
able random processes will be found. In the Cogito model, the
randomness of the Micro Mind is simply the result of ever-present
noise, both thermal and quantum noise, that is inherent in any
information storage and communication system.
         192     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Constant, ever-present noise removes an important techni-
               cal objection. Critics of the Epicurean swerve of the atoms asked
               when and where and how would a random event occur? The Cogi-
               to model randomly generates contextually appropriate alternative
               possibilities at all times.
                  The Cogito model is not a mechanism. It is a process, and infor-
               mation philosophy is a process philosophy.
                  Quantum uncertainty adds a “causa sui,” an uncaused or self-
               caused cause, in the causal chain. But it need not directly deter-
               mine the decision of the macroscopic will or the fully determined
               resulting action which is consistent with character and values.
                  Some argue that brain structures are too large to be affected
Chapter 13




               at all by quantum events. But there is little doubt that the brain
               has evolved to the point where it can access quantum phenomena.
               The evolutionary advantage for the mind is freedom and creativ-
               ity. Biophysics tells us that the eye can detect a single quantum of
               light (photon), and the nose can smell a single molecule.
               The Macro Mind
                   If the Micro Mind is a random generator of frequently outland-
               ish and absurd possibilities, the complementary Macro Mind is a
               macroscopic structure so large that quantum effects are negligible.
               It is the critical apparatus that makes decisions based on our char-
               acter and values.
                   Information about our character and values is stored in the
               same noise-susceptible neural circuits of our brain, in our mem-
               ory. So Macro Mind and Micro Mind are not necessarily in dif-
               ferent locations in the brain. Instead, they are the consequence of
               different information processing methods.
                   The Macro Mind must suppress quantum noise when it makes
               an adequately determined decision.
                   The Macro Mind has very likely evolved to add enough redun-
               dancy, perhaps even the kind of error detection and correction we
               have in computers, to reduce the noise to levels required for an
               adequate determinism.
                           The Cogito Model of Free Will              193

   Our decisions are then in principle predictable, by a super-
psychiatrist who was given knowledge of all our past experiences
and given the randomly generated possibilities in the instant
before a decision. However, only we know the contents of our
minds. They exist only within our minds. Thus we can feel fully
responsible for our choices, morally and legally.
   The Cogito model accounts not just for freedom but for creativ-
ity, for original thoughts and ideas never before expressed. Unique
and new information comes into the world with each new thought
and action.
   Biologists will note that the Micro Mind corresponds to random
variation in the gene pool (often the direct result of quantum




                                                                        Chapter 13
accidents). The Macro Mind corresponds to natural selection
by highly determined organisms. See the biology discussion in
Chapter 16 for other examples of random generation followed
by adequately determined selection, like the immune system and
protein/enzyme factories.
   Psychologists will see the resemblance of Micro Mind and
Macro Mind to the Freudian id and the super-ego (das Ess und
das Über-ich).
   The model accounts quantitatively for the concept of wisdom.
The greater the amount of knowledge and experience, the more
likely that the random agenda will contain more useful and “intel-
ligent” thoughts and actions as alternative possibilities.
   It also implies degrees of freedom. An educated mind is “more
free” because it can generate a wider agenda and options for
action. It suggests that “narrow” and “closed” minds may simply
be lacking the capabilities of the Micro Mind. And if the Macro
Mind were weak, it might point to the high correlation between
creativity and madness suggested by a Micro Mind out of control.
   Philosophers of Mind, whether hard determinist or compatibil-
ist, should recognize this Macro Mind as everything they say is
needed to make a carefully reasoned free choice.
   But now choices include self-generated random possibilities for
thought and action that no external agent can predict. Thus the
         194     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               choice of the will and the resulting willed action are unpredict-
               able. The origin of the chosen causal chain is entirely within the
               agent, a condition noted first by Aristotle for voluntary action,
               his ἐν ἡμῖν (“in us”).
                  The combination of microscopic randomness and macroscopic
               determinism in our Cogito model for human freedom means it is
               both unpredictable and yet fully responsible for its willed actions.
               Chance in the first stage never leads directly to - never directly
               “causes” - an action.
                  Chance in the first stage provides the variety of alternative
               possibilities, each the possible start of a new causal chain, from
               which the deterministic judgment can choose an alternative that
Chapter 13




               is consistent with its character and values. Our will is adequately
               determined and in control of our actions.
                  Note that the second stage may sometimes result in a willed
               decision to “flip a coin” and choose at random from the given
               alternatives. This is the ancient “liberty of indifference.”
                   While it is chance that “determines” our action in this case,
               we are prepared to take responsibility, because we are choosing
               between alternatives that have all been adequately determined
               by good reasons. I call these “undetermined liberties.” Robert
               Kane’s Self-Forming Actions are a subset of undetermined
               liberties.

                  On the opposite page, I distinguish six increasingly sophisticated
               aspects on the role of chance and indeterminism in any libertar-
               ian model of free will.
                  Many libertarians have accepted the first two. Determinist and
               compatibilist critics of free will make the third their central attack
               on chance. It is the randomness objection.
                  But very few thinkers appear to have considered the last three
               essential requirements for chance to contribute to any model of
               libertarian free will, and especially the last two - that chance
               must be ever present, throughout the brain - but that it is always
               suppressible at will.
                     The Cogito Model of Free Will      195



Six Critical Aspects of Chance
  1. Chance exists in the universe. Quantum
  mechanics is correct. Indeterminism is true.
  2. Chance is important for free will. It breaks the
  causal chain of determinism.
  3. Chance cannot directly cause our actions.
  We cannot be responsible for random actions,
  unless we “deliberately” choose at random an




                                                          Chapter 13
  undetermined liberty.
  4. Chance can only generate random (unpre-
  dictable) alternative possibilities for action or
  thought. The choice or selection of one action
  must be adequately determined, so that we
  can take responsibility. And once we choose,
  the connection between mind/brain and motor
  control must be adequately determined to see
  that “our will be done.”
  5. Chance, in the form of noise, both quantum
  and thermal, must be ever present. The naive
  model of a single random microscopic event,
  amplified to affect the macroscopic brain, never
  made any sense. Under what ad hoc circum-
  stances, at what time, at what place in the brain,
  would it occur to affect a decision?
  6. Chance must be overcome or suppressed by
  the adequately determined will when it decides
  to act, de-liberating the prior free options that
  “one could otherwise have done.”
         196     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  In our Cogito model, “Free Will” combines two distinct
               concepts. “Free” is the chance and randomness of the Micro Mind.
               “Will” is the adequately determined choice of the Macro Mind.
               And these occur in a temporal sequence.


                     Compatibilists and Determinists were right about Will,
                         but wrong about Freedom.
                     Libertarians were right about Freedom,
                         but wrong about Will.
Chapter 13




               The Temporal Sequence of Free and Will
                   Free Will is best understood as a complex idea combining two
               antagonistic concepts - freedom and determination.
                   Many philosophers have called free will “unintelligible” because
               of this internal contradiction and the presumed simultaneity and
               identity of free and will.
                   Specifically, they mistakenly have assumed that “free” is a time-
               independent adjective modifying “will.” And they have often
               taken “free” pejoratively to mean “random.”
                   A careful examination of ordinary language usage shows that
               free will is actually a temporal sequence of two opposing concepts
               - first “free” and then “will.”
                   First comes the consideration of alternative possibilities, which
               are generated unpredictably by acausal events (simply noise in
               neural network communications). This free creation of possible
               thoughts and actions allows one to feel “I can do otherwise.”
                   Next comes de-liberation and determination by the will, the
               un-freeing of possibilities into actuality, the decision that directs
               the tongue or body to speak or act.
                   After the deliberation of the will, the true sentence “I can do
               otherwise” can be changed to the past tense and remain true as
               a “hard fact” in the “fixed past,” and written “I could have done
               otherwise.”
                              The Cogito Model of Free Will              197

   Thus we have the temporal sequence which William James saw
so clearly over a century ago, with chance in a present time of ran-
dom alternatives, leading to a choice which grants consent to one
possibility and transforms an equivocal future into an unalterable
and simple past.
   Since the chance suggestions for alternative possibilities appear
first in the theater of consciousness (though they are largely
unconscious and competing for attention), the delay before a
conscious choice could easily account for the results of Benjamin
Libet’s experiments. See the explanation of Libet’s experiments as
a predictable consequence of the two-stage model in Chapter 17
on neuroscience.




                                                                           Chapter 13
   As John Locke knew more than three hundred years ago, “free”
is an adjective that describes not the will, but the human mind.
   Just as “free” needs to be separated from “will,” we think “mor-
al” should be separated from “responsibility.” Furthermore “free
will” should be separated from “moral responsibility” and “moral
responsibility” should be separated from “retributive punish-
ment” and vengeance. See Chapter 20 for more on the notion of
separating these core concepts in the free will debates.
A Mind Model
   Given the “laws of nature” and the “fixed past” just before a
decision, philosophers wonder how a free agent can have any pos-
sible alternatives. This is partly because they imagine a timeline for
the decision that shrinks the decision process to a single moment.




  Figure 13-2. Decision as a single moment in time.
   Collapsing the decision to a single moment between the
closed fixed past and the open ambiguous future makes
it difficult to see how free thoughts of the mind are fol-
lowed by the willed and adequately determined action of
the body in a temporal sequence, as shown in Figure 13-3.
         198     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


                                                                       Decision

                Fixed Past             Generate            Evaluate                Future
                                      Possibilities       Alternatives

                 Figure 13-3. Decision as a two-stage temporal process
                  But the Cogito Mind Model is not limited to a single step of
               generating alternative possibilities followed by a single step of
               determination by the will. It is better understood as a continu-
               ous process of possibilities generation by the Micro Mind (parts
               of the brain that leave themselves open to noise) and adequately
               determined choices made from time to time by the Macro Mind
               (the same brain parts, perhaps, but now averaging over and filter-
Chapter 13




               ing out the noise that might otherwise make the determination
               random).
               Second Thoughts
                 In particular, note that a special kind of decision might occur
               when the Macro Mind finds that none of the current options are good
               enough for the agent’s character and values to approve. The Macro
               Mind then might figuratively say to the Micro Mind, “Think again!”
                                                                          Decision

                Fixed Past              Generate              Evaluate                 Future
                                       Possibilities         Alternatives

                                                        Think again!

                 Figure 13-4. Decisions are not determined as soon as alternatives are generated.
                  Critics of two-stage models often say that once the alternative
               possibilities are generated, the agent is “determined“ to choose the
               best alternative, and thus they are not truly free.
                  First, we can see in Figure 13-4 that the agent is free to go back,
               time permitting, and generate more possibilities, until a really
               good alternative appears.
                               The Cogito Model of Free Will          199

   Second, because some of the alternatives generated may be
truly new information that presented itself at random, there is
no way that the agent’s action was pre-determined by the laws
of nature and the fixed past before the generation of alternative
possibilities began. This is the core freedom of the Cogito model,
even when the decision is adequately determined.
Doing Otherwise in the Same Circumstances
   Many philosophers of mind and action have puzzled how an
agent could do otherwise in exactly the same circumstances.
Of course, since humans are intelligent organisms with memo-
ries, and given the myriad of possible circumstances, it is simply




                                                                        Chapter 13
impossible that an agent is ever in exactly the same circumstances.
The agent’s memory (stored information) of earlier similar cir-
cumstances guarantees that.
   So how can an agent do otherwise in exactly the same circum-
stances? First, we need to postulate that the agent can be in the
very same circumstances. There are two ways we can do this.
   One way is to imagine that the universe can be put back into
the same circumstances, as William James first suggested,1 and
as Peter van Inwagen imagined God could do with his “instant
replays.” 2
   The second way is to relax the exactness required to merely very
similar circumstances. It is enough that the agent simply believes
the circumstances are the same, perhaps because they resemble
a situation seen so many times before that the memory of earlier
occasions is blurred.
   The Cogito model can then explain how an agent can do
otherwise in the same circumstances, given the “fixed past” and
the “laws of nature,” where the circumstances are defined as the
moment before alternative possibilities begin to be generated. See
figure 13-5 for the line that defines the moment of the starting
circumstances that invoke possibilities generation. In our hori-
zontal timeline view, we then have the following situation.

  1    James (1956) p. 155.
  2    Van Inwagen (2004) p. 227.
         200     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                 Figure 13-5. Doing otherwise in the same circumstances.
                  This view still makes an artificial separation between Micro
               Mind creative randomness and Macro Mind deliberative evalu-
               ation. These two capabilities of the mind can be going on at the
               same time. That can be visualized by the occasional decision to
               go back and think again, when the available alternatives are not
               good enough to satisfy the demands of the agent’s character and
               values, or by noticing that the Micro Mind may still be generating
Chapter 13




               possibilities while the Macro Mind is in the midst of evaluations.
                  Finally, not all decisions in the Cogito model end with an
               adequately determined de-liberation or self-determination.
               Many times the evaluation of the possibilities produces two or
               more alternatives that seem more or less of equal value.
               Undetermined Liberties
                  In these cases, the agent may choose randomly among the
               alternatives, and yet have good reasons to take responsibility for
               whichever one is chosen. This is the liberty of indifference.
                  I call these undetermined liberties, because they remain
               undetermined until the moment of the decision. The choice is not
               completely determined by the deliberations, although we can still
               say that the agent “deliberately” chooses at random.
                                                                                Undetermined
                                                                Decision          Liberties
                                  Generate           Evaluate
               Fixed Past        Possibilities      Alternatives
                                                                                     Future
                                                                                 De-liberated
                                                 Think Again!
                                                                              Self-Determination
                 Figure 13-6. Undetermined Liberties and Self-Determination
                 The choice between undetermined liberties results in a kind of
               arbitrary self-determination that resembles the ancient liberum
               arbitrium notion of free will.
                            The Cogito Model of Free Will               201


  Free Thoughts, Willed Actions
   Our thoughts are free and often appear simply to “come to us.”
Our actions are adequately determined for moral responsibility
and appear, especially to others, to “come from us.” They are “up
to us” (Aristotle’s ἐφ’ ἡμῖν), our self-determination.
   What then are the sources of alternative possibilities? To what
extent are they our creations? We can distinguish three important
sources, all of them capable of producing indeterministic options
for thoughts and actions.
   The first source is the external world that arrives through our
perceptions. It is perhaps the major driving force in our lives, con-
stantly requiring our conscious attention. Indeed, consciousness




                                                                          Chapter 13
can be understood in large part as the exchange of actionable
information between organism and environment. Although the
indeterministic origin of such ideas is outside us, we can take full
responsibility for them if they inspire our adequately determined
willed actions.
   The second source of options is other persons. The unique
human ability to communicate information verbally means that
alternative possibilities for our actions are being generated by
our conversations, by reactions to the random thoughts of other
minds. Peter Strawson’s reactive attitudes come to mind.
   Finally, and most importantly, our Micro Mind generates
possibilities internally. These are the possibilities that truly
originate within us (Aristotle’s ἐν ἡμῖν).
   Note that the sources of random options not only need not be
internal, even internal random thoughts need not be contempo-
raneous with the current decision, as long as they “come to mind”
as alternatives. They may have been originally generated at much
earlier times in the agent’s life, and only now get reconsidered and
perhaps now get acted upon.
         202     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               The Cogito Model Compared to Other Models
                  The Cogito Model can be seen as providing a purely physical
               explanation for agent-causal libertarianism.
                  “Agent-causal or “non-causal” views are thought to involve a
               form of “substance dualism” that makes the mind a different sub-
               stance from the body, exempt from ordinary causality.
                  There is a sense in which the Cogito model shares aspects with
               the metaphysical idea of an immaterial substance dualism.
                  In so far as pure information is non-material, neither matter
               nor energy, more akin to spirit, genuinely new information enter-
               ing the universe through the mind is a kind of “agent causality.”
Chapter 13




                  But the Cogito Model is primarily an “event-causal” view that
               locates breaks in the deterministic causal chain “in us,” in our
               deliberations. These include the internal uncaused generation of
               new possibilities.
                  Indeterminism also arises from random sensory inputs from
               the environment and from communication with other persons.
                  And the Cogito Model now includes indeterminism in the final
               moment of choice, for those cases where the second stage has not
               narrowed down options to a single self-determined choice.
                  The Cogito Model is very similar to the two-stage models of
               Daniel Dennett and Alfred Mele. But unlike Dennett, the
               model needs quantum randomness and not simply computational
               “pseudo-randomness” to generate alternative possibilities. And
               unlike Mele, I believe that science has shown indeterminism to be
               the case and determinism to be “false.” Mele remains an agnostic
               on these important questions, given the modern focus on moral
               responsibility.
                  Even if determinism were true, Mele says, we could neverthe-
               less have moral responsibility. I agree that since we do have it, then
               if determinism were true, we would still have it.
                  Again, beyond the Dennett and Mele models, the Cogito Model
               proposes a specific process that avoids the single “quantum event
               in the brain” that gets amplified perfectly in time with our thought
                            The Cogito Model of Free Will               203

processes to help with free will. There are billions of quantum
events in the brain every second. The miracle of the mind is that it
can manage the resulting noise, averaging over these events when
it needs to, yet utilizing them when it wants to.
   Because the agent is actively controlling the process of
deliberation up to the instant of the determining decision at the
‘moment of choice,’ the Cogito Model shares much with agent-
causal views, without being metaphysical.
   The “free” stage of the Cogito Model depends on thermal and
quantal noise in the neural circuitry of the brain. This noise intro-
duces errors in the storage and retrieval of information, noise that
may be helpful in generating alternative possibilities for action.




                                                                          Chapter 13
   The “will” stage of the Cogito Model suppresses this noise for
the adequately determined process of evaluation and decision
that normally terminates in an act of self-determination.
   But there are times when more than one option remains at the
end of the second stage. These undetermined liberties are then
resolved in the moment of choice in an undetermined fashion,
where the cause of the choice is attributed to the efforts of the
agent, as described by Robert Kane in his “self-forming actions.”
   The Cogito Model is compatible with both indeterminism
suitably located and determinism appropriately limited.
   It is thus “doubly compatible” with a limited indeterminism and
a limited but “adequate” determinism. This suggests what we call
a “comprehensive compatibilism,” one that might appeal to the
many philosophers who prefer compatibilism to libertarianism.
   The Cogito Model is also the only free-will model that is com-
patible with biological evolution. Chapter 16 will show how it
evolved from “behavioral freedom” in lower animals.
   This triply-compatible “comprehensive compatibilism” is
developed in Chapter 28.
   Next we turn to several objections that have been raised over
the years against two-stage models.
         204      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m   is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati    bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
Chapter 14




                 com  patibil
                              ism
                                   o n s  t o                                          Inc
 Hard I
        n
                         j e c t i                  e  illiss
                      Ob gSeemM          od      t i b      m
                                           p a
                                      icom
                     m o-Sta
     Illus i o n i
                   Tw
                   s
                                         m p a t i b ilism
                                                 w   Inco
                     lism                  Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                       a tibil  ism
                                                         o m p
                                               So ft Inc
                                                                                       yI
                         M  odel                                               Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism           (Altern
                                                                                        a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                         i m i t e d
                                                     e lw          ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                   This chapter on the web
                    informationphilosopher.com/freedom/cogito/#objections
                      m i n i s m
                deter
                                                                Objections           205
            In
            Objections to Two-Stage
                            nism    Models
                                    ar      ia
                             Libert
               The earliest objections were the concerns of some of the
           inventors of two-stage models themselves. Mostly they could
           not see how to reconcile the randomness of indeterminismawith
                                                                          t - C     usal
           the determinism required for responsibility. They            n
                                                                Agealso tended to
           be metaphysical dualists, so they did not have a purely physical
           model for free will.-Causa
                                                 l
               Arthur         ent Compton adhered to a view that human
                        EvHolly
           freedom might only be visible from the inside (subjectively), that
                                                                             n  - C  a usal
           from the outside a person would be seen (objectively)       No as deter-
           ministic. This was a variation on Bohr’s dualist complementarity
                                              SF   A
               i l i s m
           principle, which was popular          among physicists at the time.




                                                                                       Chapter 14
         t i b
co   mpa   John Eccles, wanted the will to involvefta C         a  usalityinterac-
               Karl Popper, in his collaborations with the neurobiologist
                                                              metaphysical
                                                         o body. This was another
           tion between the mind (or soul) and         Sthe
           form of dualism.           m (1977), Popper endorsed the idea of a
                           tibilisLater
         I n  c o  m
           two-stage   p a
                         model with quantum indeterminacy in the rfirst      t a r i a nism
                                                                                  stage,
  Broad followed by a lawful determined selection          S       Libesimilar to
                                                             oftprocess
           Darwinian evolution.
                                  i a n    m with his mentor Ernst Cassirer’s tion
                                        iswrestled
                          r t
               Henry Margenau a r
                      bedeterminism                                                 r mina
            s t  L  i                                                        e t e
   Modeer also had strong Kantian dualism tendencies,
           views     on                     and  indeterminism  in
                                                                      lf-Din the end
                                                                    physics.
                                                                Sebut
                                                                                Cassir-

           he insisted that only determinism
                                          C  ogito could provide the causality
      p a t i b ilism
           needed     as a basis for science. Margenau nevertheless, and some-
Incom uexplanation
           what
                  c      )
                   reluctantly,
                    e  s                                                   is
                                    accepted indeterminism as the “first step” in an
                                                                         n            m
      eq e     n
                                                                   r m i
                                                              dete
                             of human freedom and possibly providing insight
tive S into ethical problems.                        In
                                      im   i t e d
         The Strongest Motive
                           a n d    L   Objection
              i n i s m
      term
            However    many alternative possibilities are generated in the
De       first stage of the model, some philosophers have argued that the
             agent has no really free choice, since he must always select the best
             option, the one with the strongest reasons or motives.
         206     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  The ancients argued that to do anything other than the stron-
               gest option was evidence of weakness of will (akrasia). This is a
               form of ethical restrictivism, the idea that only moral choices can
               be considered free choices.
                  Apart from the obvious ability of the agent to be contrary and
               act in a surprising, even irrational way occasionally, we must say
               the agents can choose to be irresponsible, or even act deliber-
               ately against community values. As the 19th-century philosopher
               Shadsworth Hodgson said,
                     “A power to choose only the good is a contradiction in terms;
                     and were such a power (per impossibile) to be attained, it would
                     be at once the highest perfection of the character, and the
                     euthanasia of Free-will.” 1
Chapter 14




               Daniel Dennett’s Objections
                  In 1978, Daniel Dennett proposed a two-stage model that
               would “give the libertarians what they want.” But he had serious
               reservations about his “Valerian” model, most important that he
               could find no place in it for quantum indeterminism.
                  Dennett’s model for decision making started with elements
               from Henri Poincaré random combinations model (via Jacques
               Hadamard and the poet Paul Valéry, at the 1936 Synthése con-
               ference in Paris exploring creativity). Dennett mentioned the
               amplification of a quantum event in the brain, which was first
               suggested by Arthur Holly Compton in 1931. Dennett had also
               read Karl Popper, who had criticized Compton’s “massive switch
               amplifier.” He knew Popper’s analogy of free will with natural
               selection as a two-stage process. Dennett’s decision-making model
               was a variation of computer scientist Herbert Simon’s “generate
               and test” two-stage model for computer problem solving. Dennett
               made an excellent case for his model as something that libertar-
               ians should want. Sadly, no libertarian saw the power in Dennett’s
               two-stage model. 2
                  Because Dennett saw clearly what was good about the model
               for Libertarians, he also could see what they might not accept.
                 1       Hodgson (1891) p. 180.
                 2       See Chapter 27 for what might have been if Kane accepted Dennett’s model
                       Objections to Two-Stage Models                  207

   Dennett knew that some libertarians insisted on indeterminis-
tic quantum events in the brain, but he could not understand the
place for a quantum event, how exactly and when and where a
quantum event in the brain could be amplified to help with deci-
sion making and not harm our control and responsibility for our
actions.
   As a determinist, Dennett said that a model with pseudo-
random number generation in the first stage would be all that is
needed. He found no value in adding true quantum randomness.
I discuss my exchanges with Dennett in Chapter 25.
Robert Kane’s Objections
   Robert Kane independently developed the two-stage model




                                                                         Chapter 14
before Dennett published Brainstorms. He had read the same
sources (Compton and Popper), but he thought that “something
more” was needed.
   Basically, Kane felt that at the completion of the first stage in
the model, when all the random considerations have been gener-
ated, there is a finite time, however small, during which the model
assumes that the willed decision, the choice between alternative
possibilities, is determined.
   This is the most common objection to the two-stage model.
But as we saw in Figure 13-6, the choice is not pre-determined
from the time before deliberations began moments earlier. When
viewed as an overall process, the self-determination of the two-
stage model allows the agent to make a choice that is free from
any deterministic chain of causation presumed to go back to the
beginning of time.
   Kane agrees that the decisions made in the two-stage model
are not pre-determined. But his Self-Forming Actions require
that the decision also not be determined by the agent’s desires
and beliefs, motives and feelings. These are just among the many
causes that contribute to a decision. Kane says we should regard
the agent’s motives and desires as causes, but not determining
causes, of the final decision.
         208     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                    And Kane has always wanted some decisions to remain unde-
               termined up to and including the moment of choice. These must
               only be determined by the choice, Kane has said, and this is the case
               for his Self-forming Actions (SFAs), as we shall see.
                   Kane notes, as do Mele, Clarke, and other objectors, that the
               agent does not have complete control over the random consider-
               ations that get generated. Of course, complete control over ran-
               domness is an impossibility, but the agent can decide to stop gen-
               erating new possibilities. Moreover, at any point that evaluation
               finds none satisfactory, the agent can go back and generate more.
                   But, says Kane, after the last new random option is generated,
               and during that time, however small, before the decision is made,
               Kane is concerned that the choice not be already determined by
Chapter 14




               the agent’s character, reasons, motives, and deliberations. When it
               is “adequately” determined, I say we should regard this as an act of
               de-liberated self-determination.
                   In my Cogito model, the decision could be reliably (though not
               perfectly) predicted by a super-psychiatrist who knew everything
               about the agent and was aware of all the alternative possibilities
               that were generated at any moment. This is because the second
               (“will”) stage evaluation and decision process is indeed adequately
               determined by the deliberations and evaluations.
                   I agree with Kane that the second stage is determined, in this
               limited sense, but emphasize that it is in no way pre-determined.
                   And Kane agrees that, before the first stage of my two stage
               model, the decision is not determined. He agrees that it is at that
               time undetermined.
                   Kane says that he now endorses the two-stage model for practi-
               cal deliberations, but still feels that “something more” is needed
               for prudential and moral decisions. Furthermore, he finds now
               that the two-stage model describes the deliberative processes that
               lead to the two or more conflicting choices that are involved in his
               Self-Forming Actions.
                   It is those cases where the two-stage model does not lead to
               self-determination narrowed down to a single choice that puts the
               agent in those situations that Kane describes as “torn” decisions.
                        Objections to Two-Stage Models                   209

   Kane finds that in these cases, the agent’s decision may not be
determined by anything other than the agent’s final choice, which
can be rational (made for properly evaluated reasons), but never-
theless might (indeterministically) have been otherwise and yet
be equally rational and voluntary.
   He originally called this “dual (or plural) rational control.”
Today he calls it plural voluntary control.
   I think that Kane’s idea is an acceptable extension of my Cogito
model, in that is does provide additional libertarian freedom.
Let’s see how it works.
   Not all the second-stage decisions are adequately determined.
Many times we do not have enough information to decide
between the available options. To contrast them with self-deter-




                                                                           Chapter 14
minations, I describe these cases as undetermined liberties. It is
a subset of these undetermined liberties that Kane describes as his
Self-Forming Actions.
   In moral and prudential “torn” decisions, it is the agent’s efforts
that are the primary cause of the final choice of a Self-Forming
Action. Indeterminism plays a secondary role in tipping the
choice away from the options that fail, but the main cause of the
option that succeeds is the efforts of the agent.
   Kane thus deftly sidesteps the charge of critics who claim that
an agent cannot be responsible for any decision involving indeter-
minism. In Kane’s model, the agent can properly claim ultimate
responsibility (UR), for good reasons, however the “torn” decision
is made.
  Richard Double’s Objections                        to     Kane’s
“Dual (or plural) rational control.”
   Kane’s position has not been without its critics. Richard
Double is one such critic. He finds many of Kane’s views attrac-
tive, but has nonetheless developed objections that are mostly
directed at Kane’s efforts to establish moral responsibility for
decisions that are indeterministic. Double develops challenges to
three of Kane’s requirements: the ability to have chosen otherwise,
agent control, and rationality.
         210     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Double noted that Dennett’s Valerian models introduce inde-
               terminism in the early stages of deliberation, before the decision
               itself. He therefore calls Kane’s views “Non-Valerian.” These allow
               indeterminism in the decision process itself, which means that
               chance might be regarded as the direct cause of actions. Double
               argues (and this is the standard randomness objection) that
               Kane’s approach jeopardizes agent control.
                  Double also develops his own theory, which he calls “Delay
               Libertarianism.” The main idea is to recognize that free will is a
               process that takes place over a period of time, which is correct, of
               course. This gives Double the opportunity to locate the indeter-
               minism in a delay between deliberations and resultant decisions.
                  Double notes that the deliberations “set the stage” for whatever
Chapter 14




               decision will be made - if any decision is made. But he does not
               obviously show how delayed indeterminism can resolve the ran-
               domness objection.
                  Double recognizes that the act of the will might be simply to
               avoid a decision, and send the problem back for more delibera-
               tions, which could involve generating more alternative possibili-
               ties, as in our Cogito Model.
                  But in the end, says Double, delay libertarianism also fails, for
               the same reason - Kane’s dual rational control condition.
                  Dual rational control is Kane’s claim that the agent can do
               otherwise (indeterministically) with the alternative (dual) action
               just as rational and demonstrating just as much control as the
               original action. Double rejects this view, and winds up rejecting
               all libertarianism in his book The Non-Reality of Free Will.3
               Alfred Mele’s Doubts about His Own
               “Modest Libertarianism.”
                 Mele’s “Modest Libertarianism” is essentially the same as
               Dennett’s “Valerian” model. But it has been attacked, by Mele.
                     “Now, even if garden-variety compatibilists can be led to see
                     that the problem of luck is surmountable by a libertarian, how
                 3       Double (1991)
                           Objections to Two-Stage Models                211

    are theorists of other kinds likely to respond to the libertar-
    ian position that I have been sketching? There are, of course,
    philosophers who contend that moral responsibility and free-
    dom are illusions and that we lack these properties whether
    our universe is deterministic or indeterministic — for example,
    Richard Double and Galen Strawson.
    “Modest libertarians can also anticipate trouble from tradition-
    al libertarians, who want more than the modest indeterminism
    that I have described can offer. Clarke, who has done as much
    as anyone to develop an agent-causal libertarian view, criticizes
    event-causal libertarianism on the grounds that it adds no “pos-
    itive” power of control to compatibilist control but simply plac-
    es compatibilist control in an indeterministic setting. Of course,
    given that combining compatibilist control with indeterminism




                                                                           Chapter 14
    in a certain psychological sphere was my explicit strategy in
    constructing a modest libertarian position, I do not see this as
    an objection. In any case, traditional libertarians need to show
    that what they want is coherent.” 4
   Mele is probably right that his model will not satisfy Liber-
tarians wanting more, whether “agent-causal” libertarians like
Timothy O’Connor or “event-causal” libertarians like Robert
Kane who wants indeterminism in the decisions.
Randolph Clarke’s Objections to Dennett, Mele,
Ekstrom, and Kane.
   In his book Libertarian Accounts of Free Will, Clarke defines
new technical terms for Double’s “Valerian” and “Non-Valerian.”
    He calls Dennett’s model “deliberative,” since randomness
internal to the mind is limited to the deliberations. And he calls
Kane’s model “centered,” by which he means that Kane’s (quan-
tum) randomness is in the center of the decision itself.
   Clarke accepts the Kane and Ekstrom views that if the agent’s
decision simply results from indeterministic events in the
4       Mele (2005) p. 9
         212     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               deliberation phase that that could not be what he calls “directly
               free.” Clarke thus calls this deliberative freedom “indirect.”
                  “Indirectly free” is a reasonable description for our Cogito
               model, which limits indeterminism to the “free” deliberation stage
               and has a limited but “adequate” determinism in the “will” stage.
                  Although Clarke says that a “centered event-causal libertarian
               view provides a conceptually adequate account of free will,” he
               doubts that it can provide for moral responsibility. He says that
                     “An event-causal libertarian view secures ultimate control,
                     which no compatibilist account provides. But the secured
                     ultimacy is wholly negative: it is just (on a centered view) a mat-
                     ter of the absence of any determining cause of a directly free
                     action. The active control that is exercised on such a view is just
Chapter 14




                     the same as that exercised on an event-causal compatibilist ac-
                     count.” 5
                 It is a bit puzzling to see how the active control of a libertarian
               decision based on quantum randomness is “just the same as that
               exercised” on a compatibilist account, unless it means, as Double
               argued, no control at all. So it may be worth quoting Clarke at
               some length.
                     “Dennett requires only that the coming to mind of certain be-
                     liefs be undetermined; Mele maintains that (in combination
                     with the satisfaction of compatibilist requirements) this would
                     suffice, as would the undetermined coming to mind of certain
                     desires.
                     “[A] regress would result if Dennett or Mele required that the
                     undetermined comings-to-mind, attendings, or makings of
                     judgments that figure in their accounts had to either be or result
                     from free actions.
                     “Thus, given the basic features of these views, [they] must allow
                     that an action can be free even if it is causally determined and
                     none of its causes, direct or indirect, is a free action by that
                     agent. Setting aside the authors currently under discussion, it
                     appears that all libertarians disallow such a thing. What might
                     be the basis for this virtual unanimity?

                 5       Clarke (2003) p. 220.
                                 Objections to Two-Stage Models             213

      “When an agent acts with direct freedom — freedom that is not
      derived from the freedom of any earlier action— she is able to
      do other than what she, in fact, does. Incompatibilists (libertar-
      ians included) maintain that, if events prior to one’s birth (indi-
      rectly) causally determine all of one’s actions, then one is never
      able to do other than perform the actions that one actually per-
      forms, for one is never able to prevent either those earlier events
      or the obtaining of the laws of nature.” 6
   Clarke claims, as does Kane, that prior events thought up free-
ly by the agent during deliberations will “determine” the agent’s
decision. This is roughly what the Cogito Model claims. After
indeterminism in the “free” deliberation stage, we need “adequate”
determinism in the “will” stage to insure that our actions are con-




                                                                              Chapter 14
sistent with our character and values (including Kane’s SFAs,
which are a subset of our undetermined liberties), with our hab-
its and (Ekstrom’s) preferences, and with our current feelings and
desires.
   Clarke oddly attempts to equate events prior to our births with
events that we indeterministically invent during our deliberations,
claiming that they are equally deterministic.
   Clarke thus says that a “deliberative” two-stage model, like my
Cogito model, does not provide his “direct freedom.”
      “If this is correct, then a time-indexed version of the same claim
      is correct, too. If events that have occurred by time t causally
      determine some subsequent action, then the agent is not able at
      t to do other than perform that action, for one is not able at t to
      prevent either events that have occurred by t or the obtaining of
      the laws of nature. An incompatibilist will judge, then, that, on
      Dennett’s and Mele’s views, it is allowed that once the agent has
      made an evaluative judgment, she is not able to do other than
      make the decision that she will, in fact, make...
      “If direct freedom requires that, until an action is performed,
      the agent be able to do otherwise, then these views do not secure
      the direct freedom of such decisions.” 7
   The inadequacy that Clarke sees is that in the moment of choice
things are becoming determined.
  6       Clarke (2003) p. 62.
  7       ibid. p. 63.
         214     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     “in acting freely, agents make a difference, by exercises of active
                     control, to how things go. The difference is made, on this com-
                     mon conception, in the performance of a directly free action
                     itself, not in the occurrence of some event prior to the action,
                     even if that prior event is an agent-involving occurrence cau-
                     sation of the action by which importantly connects the agent,
                     as a person, to her action. On a libertarian understanding of
                     this difference-making, some things that happen had a chance
                     of not happening, and some things that do not happen had a
                     chance of happening, and in performing directly free actions,
                     agents make the difference. If an agent is, in the very perfor-
                     mance of a free action, to make a difference in this libertarian
                     way, then that action itself must not be causally determined by
                     its immediate antecedents. In order to secure this libertarian
Chapter 14




                     variety of difference-making, an account must locate openness
                     and freedom-level active control in the same event — the free
                     action itself — rather separate these two as do deliberative lib-
                     ertarian views.
                     “On the views of Dennett, Ekstrom, and Mele, agents might
                     be said to make a difference between what happens but might
                     not have and what does not happen but might have, but such
                     a difference is made in the occurrence of something nonactive
                     or unfree prior to the action that is said to be free, not in the
                     performance of the allegedly free action itself. Failure to secure
                     for directly free actions this libertarian variety of difference-
                     making constitutes a fundamental inadequacy of deliberative
                     libertarian accounts of free action. 8
                  Clarke is simply wrong in making the instant of the decision
               that he calls “t” one that still requires indeterminism, unless the
               agent must choose among multiple remaining options. These are
               my “undetermined liberties,” a superset of Kane’s SFAs, when the
               two-stage model has not narrowed options to one .
                  To see that the Cogito model allows the agent to make a real
               difference, we need only extend Clarke’s instant “t” to include
               the process of decision from the start of free deliberations to the
               moment of willed choice, as in Figure 13-4. In many cases, this
               will be just the blink of an eye.

                 8         Clarke (2003) pp. 63-4
                              Objections to Two-Stage Models               215

   The agent will then be justified saying “I could have done oth-
erwise,” “This action was up to me,” and “I am the originator of my
actions and the author of my life.”
  Clarke goes on to consider the “centered” event-causal view,
and initially claims that it provides an adequate account of free
will, but his “adequate” is damning with faint praise.
      “If merely narrow incompatibilism is correct, then an
      unadorned, centered event-causal libertarian view provides a
      conceptually adequate account of free will. Such a view provides
      adequately for fully rational free action and for the rational
      explanation — simple, as well as contrastive — of free action.
      The indeterminism required by such a view does not dimin-
      ish the active control that is exercised when one acts. Given




                                                                             Chapter 14
      incompatibilism of this variety, a libertarian account of this
      type secures both the openness of alternatives and the exercise
      of active control that are required for free will.” 9
   Robert Kane has shown that “torn” decisions made indetermin-
istically are under the voluntary control of the agent, because it
is the agent’s effort that is the main cause of such decisions. Kane
says the agent has developed good reasons for going “either way,”
which is why such decisions should be considered Self-Forming
Actions (SFAs) conferring ultimate responsibility (UR).
   Having accepted such decisions with randomness “centered” in
the decision, Clarke thinks random alternative possibilities are
no longer needed. He then eliminates indeterminism in the prior
“deliberative” stage, which is a great mistake
      “It is thus unnecessary to restrict indeterminism, as delibera-
      tive accounts do, to locations earlier in the processes leading
      to free actions. Indeed, so restricting indeterminism under-
      mines the adequacy of an event-causal view. Any adequate lib-
      ertarian account must locate the openness of alternatives and
      freedom-level active control in the same event — in a directly
      free action itself. For this reason, an adequate event-causal view
      must require that a directly free action be nondeterministically
      caused by its immediate causal antecedents.
      “If, on the other hand, broad incompatibilism is correct, then no
      event-causal account is adequate. An event-causal libertarian
  9       Clarke (2003) p. 103.
         216     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   view secures ultimate control, which no compatibilist account
                   provides. But the secured ultimacy is wholly negative: it is just
                   (on a centered view) a matter of the absence of any determin-
                   ing cause of a directly free action. The active control that is
                   exercised on such a view is just the same as that exercised on an
                   event-causal compatibilist account.” 10
                   “This sort of libertarian view fails to secure the agent’s exercise
                   of any further positive powers to causally influence which of the
                   alternative courses of events that are open will become actual.
                   For this reason, if moral responsibility is precluded by deter-
                   minism, the freedom required for responsibility is not secured
                   by any event-causal libertarian account. 11
                  So for Clarke, all libertarian accounts fail if broad incompatibil-
Chapter 14




               ism is true, i.e., if determinism is incompatible with moral respon-
               sibility. And his conclusion is that Kane’s ultimate responsibility
               (UR) is empty, the absence of any determining cause for a free
               action. This, he says, offers no more control than compatibilism
               offers (viz., no control?).
               The Luck Objections of Thomas Nagel,
               Bernard Williams, and Alfred Mele
                  In my view, luck is only a problem for moral responsibility.
               Some critics have mistakenly made it an objection to libertarian
               free will.
                  Since the world contains irreducible chance, it is a simple fact
               that many unintended consequences of our actions are out of our
               control.
                  Unfortunately, much of what happens in the real world con-
               tains a good deal of luck. Luck gives rise to many of the moral
               dilemmas that lead to moral skepticism.
                  Whether determinist, compatibilist, semicompatibilist, or
               libertarian, it seems unreasonable to hold persons responsible for
                 10    Clarke (2003) p. 105.
                 11    Clarke (2003) pp. 219-20.
                         Objections to Two-Stage Models                   217

the unintended and unforeseeable consequences of their actions,
good or bad. In many moral and legal systems, it’s the person’s
intentions that matter first and foremost.
   Nevertheless, we are often held responsible for actions that
were intended as good, but that had bad consequences. Similarly,
we occasionally are praised for actions that were either neutral or
possibly blameworthy, but which had good consequences.
   Some thinkers are critical of any free will model that involves
chance, because the apparent randomness of decisions would
make such free will unintelligible. They say our actions would be
a matter of luck.
   This is the Luck Objection to free will, but it is properly only the
problem of assigning moral responsibility when luck is involved.




                                                                            Chapter 14
   Our three writers are concerned that if randomness is involved
in a free decision, then perforce luck is involved, and this threat-
ens moral responsibility.
Thomas Nagel
   In his 1979 essay “Moral Luck,” Nagel is pessimistic about
finding morally responsible agents in a world that views agents
externally, reducing them to happenings, to sequences of events,
following natural laws, whether deterministic or indeterministic.
Free will and moral responsibility seem to be mere illusions.
    “Moral judgment of a person is judgment not of what happens
    to him, but of him. It does not say merely that a certain event
    or state of affairs is fortunate or unfortunate or even terrible.
    It is not an evaluation of a state of the world, or of an individ-
    ual as part of the world. We are not thinking just that it would
    be better if he were different, or did not exist, or had not done
    some of the things he has done. We are judging him, rather than
    his existence or characteristics. The effect of concentrating on
    the influence of what is not under his control is to make this
    responsible self seem to disappear, swallowed up by the order
    of mere events.” 12
  This is truly the core of our scandal in philosophy. Peter F.
Strawson said it arises when we treat human beings as objects
  12    Nagel (1979)
         218          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               governed by natural laws. This is the Naturalism view discussed in
               Chapter 21 Nagel says that our “selves” are disappearing.
                  “We cannot simply take an external evaluative view of ourselves -
                  of what we most essentially are and what we do. And this remains
                  true even when we have seen that we are not responsible for our
                  own existence, or our nature, or the choices we have to make, or
                  the circumstances that give our acts the consequences they have.
                  Those acts remain ours and we remain ourselves, despite the per-
                  suasiveness of the reasons that seem to argue us out of existence.”13
                  Nagel can see no account of moral agency, nor an idea of how hu-
               mans can be in control of their actions. He is a victim of the scandal
               in philosophy. The two-stage free will model of information phi-
               losophy restores human beings as authors of their lives and as co-
Chapter 14




               creators of our world.
               Bernard Williams
                  “I entirely agree with [Nagel] that the involvement of morality
                  with luck is not something that can simply be accepted without
                  calling our moral conceptions into question. That was part of my
                  original point; I have tried to state it more directly in the present
                  version of this paper. A difference between Nagel and myself is
                  that I am more sceptical about our moral conceptions than he is.
                  “Scepticism about the freedom of morality from luck cannot leave
                  the concept of morality where it was, any more than it can remain
                  undisturbed by scepticism about the very closely related image
                  we have of there being a moral order, within which our actions
                  have a significance which may not be accorded to them by mere
                  social recognition. These forms of scepticism will leave us with a
                  concept of morality.” 14
                 Information philosophy has discovered an objective measure of
               value that is outside “mere social recognition.” However, it offers no
               hope at all for eliminating the moral dilemmas that Williams says
               appear when luck is involved.

                 13     Moral Luck, reprinted in Nagel (1979) p. 37-38
                 14     Williams (1981)
                         Objections to Two-Stage Models                     219


Alfred Mele
  Mele says there is a problem about luck for Libertarians.
    “Agents’ control is the yardstick by which the bearing of luck on
    their freedom and moral responsibility is measured. When luck
    (good or bad) is problematic, that is because it seems significantly
    to impede agents’ control over themselves or to highlight impor-
    tant gaps or shortcomings in such control. It may seem that to
    the extent that it is causally open whether or not, for example, an
    agent intends in accordance with his considered judgment about
    what it is best to do, he lacks some control over what he intends,
    and it may be claimed that a positive deterministic connection
    between considered best judgment and intention would be more
    conducive to freedom and moral responsibility.




                                                                              Chapter 14
   Robust free will, with an intelligible explanation of the meaning
of “could have done otherwise,” is a prerequisite for responsibility.
   Whether such free will exists is a scientific question. In particular,
I try to show that science does not put any restrictions on human
freedom, as most philosophers appear to believe. Whether a free
action involves moral responsibility, however, is a question for the
ethicists, not for science.
   In any case, to the extent that luck is involved in an agent’s
free actions, that can and often does present problems for moral
responsibility. But I believe that we can separate those consequen-
tial problems from the problem of free will. See Chapter 20 on the
separability of free will from moral responsibility.
         220       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               How the Cogito Model Meets the Objections
                  Since William James first suggested the two-stage model, a
               number of elements have been added to get to the current Cogito
               model. In the table at right, I try to identify the elements and give
               credit to those who saw the need for them.
                  Some philosophers and scientists may have thought of these
               details, but not made them explicit in their publications. Those
               fields are left blank.
                  All models use chance in the first stage. Some explicitly say the
               chance is quantum indeterminacy. Dennett alone denies this.
                  Doing otherwise means in exactly the same circumstances that
               obtain before the alternative possibilities are generated
Chapter 14




                  Some models amplify a single quantum event to affect the
               decision. The idea of one quantum event per decision is called the
               Massive Switch Amplifier, or MSA.
                  Adequate determinism in the second stage is called various
               things, lawful, control etc. In the Cogito model it is explicitly only
               the statistical determinism consistent with quantum mechanics.
                  Three philosophers have written explicitly that random events in
               the first stage do not make the actions themselves random.
                  Second thoughts is the recognition that the decision process takes
               time, and, time permitting, the agent can go back and generate more
               alternative possibilities.
                  The analogy of free will to Darwin evolution was pointed out by
               James, the earliest thinker. It has appeared in a few later writers.
                  Undetermined liberties are cases where the agent in the second
               stage decides to choose an option at random, and is willing to take
               responsibility however and whatever is chosen.
                  Critics of Epicurus said that his choices were all undetermined.
               Robert Kane’s SFAs were among the earliest examples of defending
               this view by selecting from options all of which have good reasons.
               Kane should note that this small number of options (dual or plural)
               is as a group as adequately determined as when there is only one
               option with good reasons. But his SFAs offer extra freedom.
              Quantum    Can Do      Adequate   Undetermined MSA Second Actions not   Darwin
               Chance   Otherwise   Determinism   Liberties      thoughts random      Analogy

James                      Yes         Yes                                              Yes
Poincaré                   Yes
Compton         Yes                                          Yes
Hadamard                   Yes
Adler                      Yes
Popper          Yes        Yes         Yes                   Yes             Yes        Yes
Margenau        Yes        Yes         Yes
Dennett         No         No          Yes                   Yes    Yes                 Yes
Kane            Yes        Yes                     SFAs      No     Yes      Yes        Yes
Long/Sedley                Yes         Yes
Penrose         Yes        Yes         Yes
Annas                      Yes         Yes
Mele            Yes        Yes         Yes
Kosslyn         Yes        Yes         Yes
Searle          Yes        Yes         Yes                                   Yes
                Yes        Yes         Yes
                                                                                                How the Cogito Model Meets the Objections




Heisenberg
Cogito          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes      No     Yes      Yes        Yes
                                                                                                  221




                                                  Chapter 14
         222      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                              ism
                      patibil          s
                                     c
Chapter 15




 Hard I
        n        com
                             P h s i
                                y patibilism                                            Inc
                           e
                       Th eSeemW  icoimll
           i o n i s m  o f Fr
     Illus                                                              ism
                                                         m p a tibil
                                                 wI  nco
                     lism                  Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                               So  ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                                 informationphilosopher.com/freedom/physics
                       m i n i s m
                 deter
                                                                              The Physics   223
             In
             The Physics of Free Will
                              nism     ar           ia
                                Libert
                Does physics, or more generally as philosophers describe the
            problem, do the causal “laws of nature” put limits on human free-
            dom? The goal of information philosophy and informationa
                                                                              t - C     usal
                                                                                      phys-
            ics is to provide you with the current state of physical        n
                                                                     Age knowledge,
            to help you decide for yourself whether there are any such limits.
                                        - C a u sal the classical problem of recon-
                For information
                             venwith  t   philosophy,
            ciling freeEwill              physical determinism (this reconciliation is
            accepted by all compatibilists) is now seen to have been the easier
                                                                                 n  - C  a usal
            half of the free will problem. The more difficult half N          o
                                                                           is reconciling
            free will with the physical indeterminism in the first stage of a
                       m                         SFA
         t i b i l i s
            two-stage model.

     mpa




                                                                                              Chapter 15
                Modern physics sees the physical world as fundamentally      lityremains un-
co          determined. The universe began in a state           tC
                                                           Sof(as
                                                                  of a u s
                                                                     chaos
                                                                           aand
            chaotic and random at the atomic scale                 well as some macro-
            scopic regions            s  m
                             tibofilithe cosmos). So the challenge presented by phys-
            n  c o    m  p awill
                                                                                   a r i a n ism
          I ics  for   free        is - how can anything at all be adequately
                                                                            er   t   deter-
  Broad mined with all this microscopic chaos andSindeterminism?  oft Lib
                We now know that even for very large objects, the laws of phys-
                                    i a      m We have known this since Ludwig tion
                                         nislaws.
                               a r
            ics are onlyrtstatistical
                        be work in 1877. Statistical physics was brilliantly            r mina
             s t   L  i                                                          e t e
   Modefirmed at the level of atomic collisions by MaxSBorn
            Boltzmann’s
                                                                       elf-inD1926, andcon-

            by Werner Heisenbergo
                                            C      ito with his quantum mechanical
                                                ing1927,

         a t i b i l ism principle. Unfortunately, “antipathy to chance”1 has
            uncertainty
       p
Incom uled           c e s )
                 many prominent            physicists, then and even some now, to deny
                                                                                     n is    m
              e n
       eq indeterminism                                                        r m i
                                                                          dete
                                 and cling to a necessitarian deterministic physics.
tive S                                              In
                                            i t e d
                Biologists knew about chance even earlier, from Charles

                                     nd Lim
            Darwin’s work in 1859. Chance is the driver for evolution and

             ism                 a
            so chance must be a real part of the universe. Indeed, it is known

     r m i nthat quantum collisions of high-energy cosmic rays with macro-
Dete        molecules carrying genetic information create the mutations that
            produce variation in the gene pool.

             1        William James’ characterization. James (1884) p. 153.
         224     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Charles Sanders Peirce, strongly influenced by Darwin, was
               the greatest philosopher to embrace chance, and he convinced his
               friend William James of it. James described the role of chance in
               free will in his essay, The Dilemma of Determinism.
                  Information philosophy has identified the cosmic creative pro-
               cesses (I call them “ergodic”) that can overcome the chaotic ten-
               dency of indeterministic atomic collisions and create macroscop-
               ic, information-rich, structures. When these emergent structures
               are large enough, like the sun and planets, their motions become
               very well ordered and incredibly stable over time.
                  Even small macromolecular systems can have incredible sta-
               bility, thanks to quantum mechanics. DNA has maintained its
               informational stability for nearly four billion years by adding er-
               ror detection and correction processes (“proof reading” when rep-
Chapter 15




               licating).
                  Early Greeks like Anaximander saw the universe as a “cos-
               mos” and imagined laws of nature that would explain the cosmos.
               Later the Stoic physicists identified these laws of nature with laws
               of God, proclaimed nature to be God, and said both were com-
               pletely determined.
                  For the Greeks, the heavens became the paradigm of perfection
               and orderly repetitive motions without change. The sublunary
               world was the realm of change and decay. When, two thousand
               years later, Isaac Newton discovered dynamical laws of motion
               for the planets that appeared to be perfectly accurate theories, he
               seemed to confirm a deterministic universe. But as Newton knew,
               and as Peirce and later Karl Popper were to argue, we never have
               observational evidence to support the presumed perfection. The
               physical laws had become a dogma of determinism.
                  This is epitomized in the super-intelligence of Laplace’s de-
               mon, for whom the complete past and future are implicit in the
               current universe.
                  For most scientists, this determinism of classical physics has
               been invalidated by quantum mechanics. Statistical laws give us
               only adequate determinism. But some determinist philosophers
                                            The Physics of Free Will                 225

doubt that current quantum theory is the last word. And others
look to special relativitistic physics (also a classical theory) to
prove determinism, as we will see below.
Quantum Physics
   There is little doubt that there will be improvements in quantum
theory in the future. Quantum mechanics has been made consis-
tent with special relativity, but not yet with gravity and general
relativity. The grand unification of the forces of nature may change
something about the way we do quantum mechanics. But only if
the predictions of the improved theory are as good or better than
the current quantum theory, which is at this time the most accu-
rate theory of physics, good to 15 significant figures or one part
in 1015.




                                                                                       Chapter 15
   The essential difference between classical physics and quantum
physics is unlikely to change. Paul Dirac2 identified the essen-
tial properties of quantum mechanics as indeterminacy and the
superposition of quantum states.3 The interference of probability-
amplitude wave functions (shown in the two-slit experiment) is
impossible for classical systems. Predictions of experimental out-
comes are at best probabilistic and confirmable only statistically.
   The decay of a radioactive particle is a good example. In a sam-
ple of radioactive material, it is impossible to predict when an
electron will be ejected as one of the nuclei decay, but it is highly
likely that after the “half-life” of the material, half of the radioac-
tive nuclei will have decayed. In the language of the Cogito model
of free will, the time to the next decay is indeterminate, but the
number decayed after the half-life is adequately determined.
Special Relativity and the Block Universe
   Einstein might have been surprised to find that several phi-
losophers use his theory of special relativity to prove determin-
ism, but he would not have been surprised to learn that they fail.
2          Dirac (2001), ch. 1.
3          See informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/dirac_3-polarizers
for a discussion.
         226       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Einstein was as strong a believer in determinism as any scientist.
               If he thought his special theory of relativity could be used to prove
               determinism, he surely would have done so.
                  Since the 1960’s, several philosophers have thought that they
               could prove that determinism is true because of the special theory
               of relativity. They include J. J. C. Smart, C.W. Rietdijk, Hilary
               Putnam, Roger Penrose, Michael Lockwood, and Michael
               Levin. 4
                  The basic idea behind using the special theory of relativity to
               prove determinism is that time can be treated mathematically as a
               fourth dimension. This gives us excellent results for experiments
               on moving objects. It predicts the strange Lorentz contraction of
               objects in space and dilations of clock speeds for observers in fast
               moving frames of reference (coordinate systems).
Chapter 15




                  In Figure 15-1, observers A and B are moving toward one an-
               other at high speed. At the current time, they are at events A0 and
               B0. B1 is an event that is in B’s future. It is in a timelike separation
               from B0 . Special relativity says that A sees the event B1 as happen-
               ing “now” in A’s fast-moving frame of reference. A0 and B1 are hap-
               pening at the same time. But notice that, like the current events
               A0 and B0, the two events that A thinks are happening “now” are
               in a spacelike separation. There can be no causal connection from
               A0 to B1.
                  Similarly, B sees the event A1 as synchronous with the event B0
               by his clocks. But any “influence” of B0 on A1 would have to move
               faster than the speed of light, which is impossible.
                  These philosophers jump to the unacceptable conclusion that
               the time dimension is like space and so the “future is already out
               there.” Any event that is going to happen has already happened,.
                  This is a special relativistic version of Diodorus Cronus’ an-
               cient notion of actualism, only what actually will happen could
               ever happen.



               4       See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/special_relativity.html
                                                    The Physics of Free Will                     227


                                                    C
                     A’s Future                         B’                     B’s Future
                Timelike Separations                      sl
                                                                          Timelike Separations




                                              e
                                                            ig




                                                n
                                                               ht




                                             co
                                                                  co




                                          ht
                                                                     n




                                         ig
                                                                      e
                    A1                                                              B1




                                         sl
                                       A’
                    A0                           A and B                            B0
                                                  are in a
                                           Spacelike Separation
                                          No Causal Connections
                                               Are Possible




                       A’s Past                                                  B’s Past
                Timelike Separations                                      Timelike Separations

   Figure 15-1. Space-time diagram for observers fast approaching one another.




                                                                                                   Chapter 15
   But just because an event is placed on a space-time diagram, it
is not made actual. It is still in the future.
   Quantum mechanics has eliminated the kind of physical deter-
minism that Laplace’s demon might have used to connect present
events causally with events in the future.
   But despite quantum mechanics, Albert Einstein remained
a confirmed determinist. He might have been surprised to learn
that so many philosophers have used his theory of special relativ-
ity in an attempt to prove determinism.
   Einstein believed in determinism as much any scientist. He
very likely did not develop this argument from his special theory
of relativity because he knew it is absurd and knew it would fail.
  But Einstein’s special relativity has one more role to play
in the free will problem. Nonlocality and entanglement are
apparent violations of Einstein’s limit on things traveling fast-
er than the speed of light. Some philosophers and scientists
think that the mysteries of nonlocality and entanglement can
help solve the mysteries of consciousness and free will.5

   5       E.g., Roger Penrose, John Conway, Simon Kocher, Nicolas Gisin, Antoine Su-
arez. See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/nonlocality.html
         228      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Nonlocality and Entanglement
                  Albert Einstein never liked Werner Heisenberg’s inde-
               terminacy principle in quantum mechanics, although it was the
               direct result of his own early confirmation of Max Planck’s idea
               that nature is discrete and quantized.
                  Einstein also did not like the apparent fact that when the prob-
               ability-amplitude wave function collapses, the values of the wave
               function change instantly over large distances, suggesting that the
               probability is traveling faster than the speed of light.6 This violated
               Einstein’s sense of “local” reality. He said that nature seemed to
               have non-local behaviors.
                  It is not clear which was worse for Einstein, the quantum inde-
               terminacy that made physics indeterministic, or the faster-than-
Chapter 15




               light implications of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiment
               and Bell’s Theorem.
                  Einstein disliked indeterminism, famously saying that “The
               Lord God does not play dice.” But he was also opposed to what he
               called the “spooky action at a distance” implied by the “nonlocal
               reality” of quantum mechanics.
                  Nonlocality shows up best in two-particle experiments like that
               proposed by Einstein and his Princeton colleagues, where mea-
               surements that detect a particle in one place instantly determine
               the properties (position, momentum, spin, etc.) of another “en-
               tangled” particle that can be at a very great distance from the first.7
                  Einstein might have been pleased to learn that many physicists
               and philosophers are still trying to confirm his notion of “local”
               reality. They use “hidden variable” theories to explain how a par-
               ticle at point A can determine the properties of another particle
               far away at point B.
                  John Bell’s famous theorem, if confirmed experimentally, could
               prove Einstein to be correct, restoring both determinism and local
               reality. Unfortunately, three decades of experiments continue to
                  6       See informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/wave-function_col-
               lapse for an animated visualization
                  7       See informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/EPR for an explana-
               tion and visualization of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiment.
                                             The Physics of Free Will      229

show that Bell’s theorem is violated and the nonlocality of quan-
tum physics has been confirmed.
   Information philosophy and physics can explain the mystery
of “faster than light” effects in nonlocality and entanglement.
The proper explanation is that only abstract information appears
instantly over vast distances.
   Information is neither matter nor energy. It needs matter for its
embodiment and energy for its communication, but in its abstract
form it can appear to travel at supraluminal speeds, even in non-
quantum events. Consider a horse race.




                                                                             Chapter 15
  Figure 15-2. Information about probabilities is instantaneous,
   Moments before the winning horse’s nose triggers the photo
finish, there is still some probability that horses far behind might
win the race. The other horses might collapse.
   But at the instant the lead horse wins, the probability of hors-
es at the rear winning falls to zero, faster than the speed of light.
No signal travels faster than light. We can now see how this also
explains nonlocality in the EPR experiment.
   In figure 15-3, two electrons are entangled in the center with to-
tal spin equal zero. One electron must have spin up and the other
spin down. But electrons are identical interchangeable particles.
We cannot know which has which spin until we measure them.
And until we measure them, we cannot label them either.

        A                                                              B


  Figure 15-3. Electrons prepared with total spin = 0 at the center.
   Let’s now say that an observer A makes a measurement and
finds an electron with spin up. We can now label that electron
1, and instantly we know that the other electron, now called 2,
is an equal but opposite distance from the center and has been
determined by A’s measurement to have spin down.
         230     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  But note that this was not pre-determined before A’s measure-
               ment. This is the logical and physical mistake that you will find
               in most accounts of nonlocality. In the horse race, the horses are
               already numbered. But with quantum particles, we don’t know
               their identity until we find them.
                  Note that because B and A have a spacelike separation, we know
               from the special relativity analysis above that observer B might
               have measured “first” at t0 in his own frame of reference,
                  In the case of a single particle wave-function collapse, all the
               probability appears instantly at one point. In the two-particle
               case, the abstract probability information collapses instantly to
               two points, one for each particle. Those points are located so as to
               conserve the momentum, energy, and angular momentum (spin).
Chapter 15




                  Despite exaggerated claims that nonlocality and entanglement
               introduce new quantum mysteries, there is actually nothing new
               beyond the fundamental mystery of wave-function collapses,
               except that we now have two particles.
                  These exaggerations have misled philosophers to make claims
               that nonlocality and entanglement can explain free will.
               The Free Will Theorem
                 The mathematician John Conway (well-known for his cellular
               automata and the Game of Life) and his Princeton colleague Simon
               Kochen use the EPR experiment8 and tests of Bell’s Inequality to
               show what some science writers have argued is “free will” for el-
               ementary particles.
                 Conway and Kochen’s argument is that if
                     “experimenters have sufficient free will to choose the settings of
                     their apparatus in a way that is not determined by past history,
                     then the particles’ responses are also not determined by past
                     history...
                     “Since this property for experimenters is an instance of what is
                     usually called “free will,” we find it appropriate to use the same
                     term also for particles.” 9
                 8       See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_will_theorem.html
                 9       Foundations of Physics 36 (10): 1441
                                       The Physics of Free Will         231

   What Conway and Kochen are really describing is the indeter-
minism that quantum mechanics has introduced into the world.
While my two-stage model makes indeterminism a necessary
precondition for human freedom, it is insufficient by itself to pro-
vide free will.
   Another way of looking at their work is to say that if determin-
ism is true, then all the experimental tests might have been pre-
determined (e.g., by a deceiving God) to convince us that quan-
tum mechanics is correct and that indeterminism exists, but that
the real underlying nature of the universe is deterministic. Even
Einstein could not go this far.
The Free Will Axiom
   Philosophers and scientists from René Descartes to those




                                                                          Chapter 15
who today are leaders in experimental tests of Bell’s Theorem have
all assumed that free will is necessarily axiomatic.10
   Descartes wrote in 1644, “The freedom of the will is self-evi-
dent.” In his 1874 book Principles of Science, the great logician and
economist William Stanley Jevons is unequivocal that scien-
tists have a freedom to hypothesize. In a section entitled Freedom
of Theorizing, he declares,
   “The truest theories involve suppositions which are most incon-
   ceivable, and no limit can really be placed to the freedom of
   framing hypotheses.”
  In 1880, the founder of two-stage models credited Jevons with
explaining the creativity of the genius as dependent on random
hypotheses. James said,
       “To Professor Jevons is due the great credit of having em-
   phatically pointed out how the genius of discovery depends al-
   together on the number of these random notions and guesses
   which visit the investigator’s mind. To be fertile in hypotheses
   is the first requisite, and to be willing to throw them away the
   moment experience contradicts them is the next.” 11

  10   See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_will_axiom.html
  11   James (2007)
         232     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 John Searle said in 2005 that
                  “The special problem of free will is that we cannot get on with
                  our lives without presupposing free will. Whenever we are in a
                  decision-making situation, or indeed, in any situation that calls
                  for voluntary action, we have to presuppose our own freedom.”12
                 The Swiss scientist Nicolas Gisin, winner of the first John
               Stewart Bell prize, who recently confirmed the violations of
               Bell’s Inequality over a distance of 19km in Geneva, says:
                     “I know that I enjoy free will much more than I know any-
                  thing about physics. Hence, physics will never be able to con-
                  vince me that free will is an illusion. Quite the contrary, any
                  physical hypothesis incompatible with free will is falsified by
                  the most profound experience I have about free will.” 13
Chapter 15




               The Contribution of Quantum Mechanics
                 Why is quantum indeterminacy involved in the shaking to-
               gether (co-agitare) of our agenda items, the real alternative
               possibilities for thought or action that allow us to say we “could
               have done otherwise?” There are three important reasons:
                      • Before quantum indeterminacy, many philosophers,
                   mathematicians, and statistical scientists argued that chance
                   was just a name for our ignorance of underlying deterministic
                   processes. They denied the existence of real, objective chance
                   in the universe. They thought that chance was epistemic and
                   subjective, a result of the ignorance of finite minds.
                      • As soon as quantum mechanics was established in the
                   1920’s, first scientists and then philosophers began claiming
                   that quantum indeterminism could explain free will. Chapter
                   12 looked at some of their ideas. After a few years thought,
                   most scientists qualified their enthusiasm or reported admis-
                   sions of failure. Only a few libertarian philosophers, mostly
                   those following Robert Kane, have been reluctant to give
                   up on quantum indeterminism. Among determinists, Ted
                 12   Searle (2007) p.11.
                 13   Gisin (2010) p.
                                       The Physics of Free Will           233

    Honderich has taken it very seriously, but Daniel Dennett
    has denied its significance, as we shall see. 14
        • Quantum uncertainty remains the best explanation for
    breaks in the causal chain of strict determinism. But attempts
    to use the strange non-intuitive aspects of quantum mechanics
    - such as unpredictable quantum jumps between energy lev-
    els, “collapse” of the wave function in physical measurements,
    non-local behavior of particles that have become “entangled,”
    spontaneous decay of “metastable” states, etc. - as models for
    the decision process have been hopeless failures.
   The Cogito model of Chapter 13 identified the critical aspect
of quantum mechanical indeterminacy that makes an “intelligi-
ble” contribution to human freedom, while preserving adequate
determinism and moral responsibility. It is simply noise.




                                                                            Chapter 15
   As we will see in the next chapter, molecular biologists have
doubted we could ever locate a randomness generator in the brain.
Such a generator would need to be small enough to be susceptible
to microscopic quantum phenomena, yet large enough to affect
macromolecular structures like neurons, which may contain as
many as 1020 atoms.
   Proposed amplifier mechanisms have been bizarre failures.15
   The Cogito model simply identifies the source of randomness as
the inevitable noise, both thermal noise and quantum noise, that
affects both proper storage of information and accurate retrieval
of that information at later times.
   These read/write errors are an appropriately random source of
unpredictable new ideas and thoughts that provide alternative
possibilities for action. Noise is ever present, yet suppressible by
the macroscopic brain.
   We need not look for tiny random-noise generators and ampli-
fiers located in specific parts of the brain. They are no more neces-
sary than the Cartesian Theater homunculi sometimes evoked by
philosophers to parody a tiny internal free agent inside the mind.

  14   Honderich in Chapter 23, Kane in 24, and Dennett in 25.
  15   See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_will_mechanisms.html
         234      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                              ism
                 com  patibil
                                i o l o  g  y                                           Inc
Chapter 16




        n
 Hard I                       B
                           e
                        Th eSeemW      icoimll
                                             p a t i b ilism

               on i s m  o f Fr
     Illusi                                                             ism
                                                         m p a tibil
                                                 wI  nco
                     lism                  Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                               So  ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                    This chapter on the web
                                informationphilosopher.com/freedom/biology
                        m i n i s m
                  deter
                                                                  The Biology             235
              In
              The Biology of Free
                              nismWillar        ia
                               Libert
                Perhaps physics now puts no limits on human freedom, but
            what about biology? Each of us gets a significant amount of genetic
            information from our parents, which at least predisposesausus                     toal
                                                                              n  t - C
                                                                          ge reproductive
            certain behaviors that have evolved to improve             Aour
            success, sexual behavior, for example.
                                      - C  a  u  sal
                           vent and the social nurture of our environmental
                Are we completely             “determined”     by a combination of our
            biologicalEnature
            conditioning? Is biology itself all a causal process that is simply
                                                                                    n  - C  a  usal
            unfolding from a distant past that contained all theNinformation     o
            about the one possible biological future?
                                                    FA
                Information biology saysSno. While the stability of biological
         t i b i l i s m
co   mpa    systems is extraordinary, and while their error-free performance
                                                                       a  u s a lity their




                                                                                               Chapter 16
            of vital functions over many-year lifetimes
            dependence on randomness is clear.S
                                                               oft C  is astonishing,
                                                              Biological laws, like physical
            laws, are only
                        p a      ilism determined, statistical laws.
                            tibadequately                                                       ism
          I n  c o  m                                                               t a r i a n
  Broad stochastic, depending on thermal and quantal                        iber
                At   the  atomic      and    molecular     level, biological processes       are
                                                                  Soft Lnoise to deliver
            the “just-in-time” parts needed by assembly lines for the basic
                                   i a n      msuch as the amino acids needed by the tion
                                          islife,
                           r t
            structural elementsa r
                       befactories
                                        of
                                                                                           r mina
             s t  L  i                                                              e t e
   Mode So our question is how the typical structuresSofelthe
            ribosome                   to  assemble     proteins.            f-D
                                                                                 brain have
                                            Co
            evolved to deal with microscopic,       i t o
                                                  g atomic level, noise. Do they sim-
           tply
             i b ili s
                 ignorem  it because     they   are adequately determined large objects,
       p a
Incom uoremight    c  e   ) have remained sensitive to the noise because it pro-
                        sthey
                                                                              n is          m
                 n
       eq vides some benefits?                                          r m i
tive S
                                              e d In               dete
                We can expect that if quantum noise, or even ordinary ther-
                                          i t
                                   nd Lim
            mal noise, offered benefits that contribute to reproductive success,

             ism                a
            there would have been evolutionary pressure to take advantage of
     r m i n
Dete
            the noise.
                Many biologists argue that quantum-level processes are just too
            small to be important, too small for the relatively macroscopic
            biological apparatus to even notice. But consider this evidence to
            the contrary.
         236     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Proof that our sensory organs have evolved until they are work-
               ing at or near quantum limits is evidenced by the eye’s ability to
               detect a single photon (a quantum of light energy), and the nose’s
               ability to smell a single molecule.
                  Biology provides many examples of ergodic creative processes
               following a trial-and-error model. They harness chance as a pos-
               sibility generator, followed by an adequately determined selection
               mechanism with implicit information-value criteria.
                  Darwinian evolution was the first and greatest example of a
               two-stage creative process, random variation followed by critical
               selection. Darwin’s example inspired William James to propose
               the original two-stage model of free will.
                  Here I will briefly consider some other such processes that are
               analogous to the two-stage Cogito model for the human mind.
Chapter 16




               Creativity in the Immune System
                  Consider the great problem faced by the immune system. It
               stands ready to develop antibodies to attack an invading antigen at
               any moment, with no advance knowledge of what the antigen may
               be. In information terms, it needs to discover some part of the an-
               tigen that is unique. Its method is not unlike Poincaré’s two-stage
               method of solving a mathematical problem. First put together lots
               of random combinations, then subject them to tests.
                  Biological information is stored in the “genetic code,” the
               sequence of genes along a chromosome in our DNA. “Sequencing”
               the DNA establishes the exact arrangement of nucleotides that
               code for specific proteins/enzymes. All the advances in molecular
               genetics are based on this sequencing ability.
                  The white blood cells have evolved a powerful strategy to dis-
               cover unique information in the antigen. What they have done is
               evolve a “re-sequencing” capability. Using the same gene splicing
               techniques that biologists have now developed to insert character-
               istics from one organism into another, the white blood cells have
               a very-high-speed process that shuffles genes around at random.
               They cut genes out of one location and splice them in at random in
                                         The Biology of Free Will      237

other locations. This combinatorial diversity provides a variation
in the gene pool very much like the Darwinian mutations that
drive species evolution.
   But the marvelous immune system gets even more random. It
has a lower-level diversity generator that randomly scrambles the
individual nucleotides at the junctions between genes. The splic-
ing of genes is randomly done with errors that add or subtract
nucleotides, creating what is called junctional diversity.
Bacterial Chemotaxis
   Some of the smallest organisms are equipped with sensors and
motion capability that let them make two-stage decisions about
which way to go. They must move in the direction of nutrients and
away from toxic chemicals. Some bacteria do this with tiny flagella
that rotate in two directions. Flagella rotating clockwise cause the




                                                                         Chapter 16
bacterium to tumble and face random new directions. Rotation
of the flagella counter-clockwise drives the bacterium straight
ahead. As the bacterium moves, receptors on the bacterium sur-
face detect gradients of chemicals. When the gradient indicates
“food ahead” or “toxic behind,” the bacterium keeps going. If the
gradients are not promising, the bacterium reverses the flagella
rotation direction, which makes it tumble again.
   In Nature Magazine,1 the German neurogeneticist Martin
Heisenberg challenged the idea, popular in the recent psychol-
ogy and philosophy literature,2 that human free will is an illusion.
Heisenberg suggested that a lot could be learned by looking at
lower animals. We can see that they do not merely respond to
stimuli mechanically, but originate actions. He said,
    “when it comes to understanding how we initiate behaviour,
    we can learn a lot by looking at animals. Although we do not
    credit animals with anything like the consciousness in hu-
    mans, researchers have found that animal behaviour is not as
    involuntary as it may appear. The idea that animals act only in
    response to external stimuli has long been abandoned, and it is
1       Nature, vol. 459, 2009, p. 164
2       Cf. especially Wegner (2002)
         238     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     well established that they initiate behaviour on the basis of their
                     internal states, as we do.”
                 One of Heisenberg’s examples was bacterial chemotaxis.
                     “Evidence of randomly generated action — action that is dis-
                     tinct from reaction because it does not depend upon external
                     stimuli — can be found in unicellular organisms. Take the way
                     the bacterium Escherichia coli moves. It has a flagellum that
                     can rotate around its longitudinal axis in either direction: one
                     way drives the bacterium forward, the other causes it to tumble
                     at random so that it ends up facing in a new direction ready for
                     the next phase of forward motion. This ‘random walk’ can be
                     modulated by sensory receptors, enabling the bacterium to find
                     food and the right temperature.” 3

               An Error Detection and Correction System?
Chapter 16




                  Errors in protein synthesis are arguably quantal. If errors pre-
               vent proper folding, the chaperone functions as an information
               error detection and correction system. If it succeeds in helping the
               protein to fold, the protein is released, otherwise the chaperone
               will digest and destroy the malformed protein.
                  Here the quantal noise will destroy the protein if the error
               cannot be corrected. It is of course not as if a new protein is be-
               ing generated analogous to the accidental variations that genetic
               mutations introduce to the gene pool.
                  But it is instructive as an example of a two-stage process none-
               theless, in that microscopic indeterministic errors are repaired by
               macroscopic, adequately determined, systems
               Neurotransmitter Release as a Noise Source
                  Since information flows across the synapses, randomness of
               release times for transmitter quanta may be a source of infor-
               mation noise in memory storage and recall. Neurotransmitter
               “quanta” are of course huge compared to atomic-level quantum
               processes - containing thousands of molecules.

                 3       Nature, vol. 459, 2009, p. 165
                                      The Biology of Free Will                  239

  John Eccles thought this to be a meaningful source of noise,
that it could help the brain make undetermined decisions, but
he did not have a coherent idea of the process, like the two-stage
model of free will.
Four Levels of Selection
   I propose that there have been four levels in the evolutionary
development of free will. In all four levels, the source of the
random generation of alternative possibilities in the first stage
of my two-stage model is the same. It is the essential chaos and
noise that is characteristic of information processes at the lower
levels of any organism.
   But in the second stage, I argue that new methods of selection
of the best alternative possibility get added at the upper levels.




                                                                                  Chapter 16
Instinctive Selection
  At the lowest level, selection is instinctive. The selection criteria
are transmitted genetically, shaped only by ancestral experiences.
Learned Selection
  At the second level are animals whose past experiences guide
their current choices. Selection criteria are acquired through
experience, including instruction by parents and peers.
Predictive Selection
   Third-level animals use their imagination and foresight to
estimate the future consequences of their choices.
Reflective (Normative) Selection
   At the highest level, selection is reflective and normative.4
Conscious deliberation about community values influences the
choice of behaviors.




  4     Compare Christine Korsgaard’s theory of normativity. Korsgaard (1996)
         240       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                 m inis        m
                                        De t e r

                                                          a t i b i lism
                                                 C    omp      r min   m  is
                                 i n ism                 e t e
                    De   t e r m                  Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                          So
                        patibil
                                ism
                                    c i e n     c   e
 H a r d I ncom
                           e u ro s                                                     Inc
Chapter 17




                       he N FreSeemW    illa t i b ilism
                     T             icom  p

     Ill u s i o n ism   of                       lism
                                                       c o mp  atibi
                                               row I n
                                           Nar
               o s s i b ilism
      Im     p                                                          ism
                                                            m p a tibil
                                                   ft Inc o
                                                 So                                     yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                      This chapter on the web
                            informationphilosopher.com/freedom/neuroscience
                         m i n i s m
                   deter
                                                           The Neuroscience 241
            In
            The Neuroscience
                           nisof
                              m Free Will
                                      ar    ia
                               Libert
            Molecular biologists have assured neuroscientists for years that
         the molecular structures involved in neurons are too large to be
         affected significantly by quantum randomness.
                                                                      n  t - C  ausal
            Nevertheless, some neurobiologists looked for          e
                                                               Agstructures      small
         enough to be affected. John Eccles
                                      a u s a l identified what he called “crit-
                       vent-C
         ically poised neurons,      ” whose synapses might discharge their vesi-
         cles with Ethousands       of neurotransmitters as a result of “downward
         causation” from the mind. Roger Penrose and Stuart Hameroff
                                                                            n  - C  a  usal
         see the microtubules in the cellular cytoskeleton as N          o enough
                                                                     small
         to produce quantum coherence, perhaps some nonlocal entangle-
                       m                   SFA
         ment.
         t i b i l i s
co   mpa    As small as these structures are, they still contain many
         sands of quantum level objects (atoms and
                                                      o ft C   a u s a
                                                            molecules).
                                                                            y thou-
                                                                        litHow      can
                                                    S




                                                                                       Chapter 17
         any single quantum event in the brain get amplified to become
         macroscopically         sm
                        tibiliimportant?     This is the question that has faced
       I n c  o m
         everyone  p a
                     who     wants     quantum  randomness to be thertbasis  a  r i a nism
                                                                                     for
  Broad human freedom.                                   Soft L
                                                                   ibe
            Will neuroscientists ever be able to look at a neuron and see
                          a  r i a n ism Maybe not, but some have thought ation
         exactly what
              L i       t
                  beuser brain activity measurements to prove that
                          it  is  thinking?
                                                                              t e  r min
          s t                                                               e
   Modedoes not exist.                                         Self-D
         they  can                                                           free   will


             Libet’s         C
                     Experimentogi          to
           t i b  m
                 ilis
       p a
Incom uregarded      esas) having
                Benjamin
                   c
                            Libet’s famous neuroscience experiments are widely
                                                                                 n ism
     S e q    e n
                                                                        r  m
                                                                    te below)  i
                                   established that conscious will is an illusion,
tive
                                                  d In
           starting with Libet’s own claim (mistaken, we shall
                                                e             deargue
                                            i t
                                     nd Lim
             that the readiness potential (RP) that he observed a few hundred

             ism                 a
             milliseconds before the awareness of conscious will and the con-

     r m i n sequent muscle motion, “initiates” and is the cause of both the
Dete         will and the action. 1
               As Alfred Mele has shown, the experimental data do not sup-
             port a causal relationship. We can see this by interpreting the rise
               1     Libet (2004) p. 136.
         242     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               in the RP as the early stage in the two-stage model. The brain may
               only be considering its alternative possibilities!
Chapter 17




                 Figure 17-1. Early brain activity may only be considering possibilities.
                  Note that Libet proposed that the will could nevertheless be
               free, if there was time for it to “veto” its own prior decision, which
               had been caused by the early rise of the RP. But his main mistake
               was to conclude that the first sign of activity was causative, rather
               than merely enabling the later decision.
                  Although the abrupt and rapid decisions to flex a finger mea-
               sured by Libet bear little resemblance to the kinds of two-stage
               deliberate decisions needed for responsibility, it seems reasonable
               to assume that neuronal activity might arise as the mind considers
               whether to flex or not to flex, when it forms the intention to flex.
               Roderick Chisholm argued that at least one alternative possibil-
               ity always exists, we can always say no. So Libet’s “veto” is already
               in the running as a possibility, and Libet need not have worried
               that there is too little time for it be effective, as his critics have
               maintained.
                  Libet, Patrick Haggard, Daniel Wegner, and the others
               who say the conscious will is not the cause of the action, because
               your neurons have already made the decision, cannot prove a
               causal relation between RP and action.
                                 The Neuroscience of Free Will             243

   They are in fact begging the question of free will by assuming
that a deterministic relation already exists between the early stage
RP and the, action simply because it shows up earlier than the
action (post hoc, propter hoc).
   What if the early RP is just the first stage of developing options,
followed by evaluating them, then deciding? In such an arbitrary
choice - to flex or not flex, we should expect to see the readiness
potential occasionally rise up, but then not be followed by the W
point, and of course no muscle motion. The fact that Libet reports
none of these may appear to lend weight to the idea that RP and
muscle motion are indeed causally related. But this is a mistake, as
pointed out by Alfred Mele.2
   All the Libet experiments work by permanently storing the last
few seconds of data that have been collected, when triggered by
detecting the wrist flex itself. If there is no wrist flex, there is no




                                                                             Chapter 17
data collected. The equally likely (in my view) cases of a rise in RP
followed by no wrist flex would have been systematically ignored
by Libet’s method of data collection.
   Should new versions of the Libet experiments find this missing
data, it would establish that there is no causal connection between
RP and action, only between RP and considering alternative pos-
sibilities, to flex or not to flex, in the two-stage model of free will.
Libet and the Two-Stage Model
  In his late work Mind Time, Libet surprisingly describes more
than one “initiative,” disconnecting the RP from the action.
      “We may view the unconscious initiatives for voluntary actions
      as “burbling up” unconsciously in the brain. The conscious will
      then selects which of these initiatives may go forward to an
      action, or which ones to veto and abort, so no action occurs.” 3
   These initiatives are alternative possibilities, “burbling up”
suggests they “present themselves” randomly, as William James
says, and selection is clearly the adequately determined second
stage of our two-stage model.


  2       Mele (2010) p. 53.
  3       Libet (2004) p. 148.
         244   Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                     s n e s s
                    Con        sciou
Chapter 18




                                               This chapter on the web
                    informationphilosopher.com/problems/consciousness
                                                Consciousness            245


Consciousness
   Consciousness can be defined in information terms as an entity
(usually a living thing, but we can also include artificially con-
scious machines or computers) that reacts to the information (and
particularly to changes in the information) in its environment.
   In the context of information philosophy, we can define this as
information consciousness.
   Thus an animal in a deep sleep is not conscious because it
ignores changes in its environment. And robots may be conscious
in our sense. Even the lowliest control system using negative feed-
back (a thermostat, for example) is in a minimal sense conscious
of changes in its environment.
The Experience Recorder Reproducer (ERR)
   This definition of consciousness fits with our model of the mind




                                                                           Chapter 18
as an experience recorder and reproducer (ERR). The ERR model
stands in contrast to the popular cognitive science or “computa-
tional” model of a mind as a digital computer. No algorithms or
stored programs are needed for the ERR model.
   The physical metaphor is a non-linear random-access data
recorder, where data is stored using content-addressable memory
(the memory address is the data content itself). Simpler than a
computer with stored algorithms, a better technological metaphor
might be a video and sound recorder, enhanced with the ability
to record smells, tastes, touches, and critically essential, feelings.
   The biological model is neurons that wire together during an
organism’s experiences, in multiple sensory and limbic systems,
such that later firing of even a part of the wired neurons can stim-
ulate firing of all or part of the original complex.
   Neuroscientists are investigating how diverse signals from mul-
tiple pathways can be unified in the brain. We offer no specific
insight into these “binding” problems. Nor can we shed much light
on the question of philosophical “meaning” of any given informa-
tion structure, beyond the obvious relevance (survival value) for
the organism of remembering past experiences.
         246     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  A conscious being is constantly recording information about its
               perceptions of the external world, and most importantly for ERR,
               it is simultaneously recording its feelings. Sensory data such as
               sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and tactile sensations are recorded in
               a sequence along with pleasure and pain states, fear and comfort
               levels, etc.
                  All these experiential and emotional data are recorded in
               association with one another. This means that when the experi-
               ences are reproduced (played back in a temporal sequence), the
               accompanying emotions are once again felt, in synchronization.
                  The capability of reproducing experiences is critical to learning
               from past experiences, so as to make them guides for action in
               future experiences. The ERR model is the minimal mind model
               that provides for such learning by living organisms.
                  The ERR model does not need computer-like decision algo-
               rithms to reproduce past experiences. All that is required is that
Chapter 18




               past experiences “play back” whenever they are stimulated by
               present experiences that resemble the past experiences in one or
               more ways. When the organism recreates experiences by acting
               them out, they can become “habitual” and “subconscious” infor-
               mation structures.
                  It is critical that the original emotions play back, along with
               any variations in current emotions. ERR might then become an
               explanatory basis for conditioning experiments, classical Pavlov-
               ian and operant, and in general a model for associative learning.
                  Bernard Baars’ Global Workspace Theory uses the metaphor
               of a “Theater of Consciousness,” in which there is an audience
               of purposeful agents calling for the attention of the executive on
               stage.
                  In the ERR model, vast numbers of past experiences clamor for
               the attention of the central executive at all times, whenever any-
               thing in current experience has some resemblance.
                  If we define “current experience” as all afferent perceptions and
               the current contents of consciousness itself, we get a dynamic self-
                                            Consciousness            247

referential system with plenty of opportunities for negative and
positive feedback.
   William James’ description of a “stream of consciousness”
together with a “blooming, buzzing confusion” of the unconscious
appear to describe the ERR model very well.
   In the “blackboard” model of Allan Newell and Herbert Simon,
concepts written on the blackboard call up similar concepts by as-
sociation from deep memory structures. The ERR model supports
this view, and explains the mechanism by which concepts (past
experiences) come to the blackboard.
   In Daniel Dennett’s consciousness model, the mind is made
up of innumerable functional homunculi, each with its own goals
and purposes.
   Some of these homunculi are information structures formed
genetically, which transmit “learning” or “knowledge” from gen-
eration to generation. Others are environmentally and socially




                                                                       Chapter 18
conditioned, or consciously learned.
Four “Levels” of Consciousness
        Instinctive Consciousness - by animals with little or no
learning capability. Automatic reactions to environmental condi-
tions are transmitted genetically. Information about past experi-
ences (by prior generations of the organism) is only present im-
plicitly in the inherited reactions
       Learned Consciousness - for animals whose past experi-
ences guide current choices. Conscious, but mostly habitual, reac-
tions are developed through experience, including instruction by
parents and peers.
      Predictive Consciousness - The Sequencer in the ERR sys-
tem can play back beyond the current situation, allowing the or-
ganism to use imagination and foresight to evaluate the future
consequences of its choices.
      Reflective (Normative) Consciousness– in which conscious
deliberation about values influences the choice of behaviors.
         248        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                 m inis        m
                                        De t e r

                                                         a t i b i lism
                                                C    omp       r min  m    is
                                  i n ism                e t e
                     De   t e r m                 Soft D
              Hard
                                                                       pati     bilism
                                                              ft C o m

                         patibil
                                 ism
                                                     b i l
                                                          So
                                                           i t y
  H          ard In
                    com
                          R e s p               onsi            m
                                                                                         Inc
                     oral                 m p a tibilis
                                        o
                M                 Semic
Chapter 19




     Illus      ionism
                                                              a tibil    ism
                                                      nco m p
                                                  wI
                        lism                Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                         a tibil ism
                                                           o m p
                                                So  ft Inc
                                                                                         yI
                          M  odel                                                Leewa t
                     an
              Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                          a
                                                        m
                                       o u r c e Inco uence)
                                     S               l Seq
                                        (A   c t u a
                                                                           i m i t e d
                                                      e lw           ith L
                                                  o d
                                 - S t      age M
                            Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                 informationphilosopher.com/freedom/moral_responsibility.html
                            m i n i s m
                      deter
                                                                 Moral Responsibility 249
               In
               Moral Responsibility
                              nism          ar           ia
                                     Libert
                  Some philosophers deflect direct discussion of free will,
               primarily, no doubt, because of the scandal that the problem has
               resisted progress for so long. They study free will indirectly
                                                                         - C a   sal
                                                                               uand
                                                              Age    n t
               only as the “control condition” for moral responsibility.

                                      a u s   l of articles on free will, John
                  In his four-volume collection
                                            a
               Martin Fischertmade
                               ven-C this observation.
                      “SomeEphilosophers do not distinguish between freedom and
                                                                                       -
                      moral responsibility. Put a bit more carefully, they tend to begin
                                                                                     n   C a usal
                      with the notion of moral responsibility, and “work N        o to a
                                                                              back”
                      notion of freedom; this notion of freedom is not given inde-
                                                   FA the analysis of moral respon-
                      pendent content (separateSfrom
          t i b i l i s m
      mpa
                      sibility). For such philosophers, “freedom” refers to whatever
                                                                                     y as
                                                                                laitway
co                    conditions are involved in choosing or acting a
                      to be morally responsible.1         Soft C
                                                                            s a
                                                                        inusuch


                         ibilismagrees:
                  Manuel Vargas
                      mispnotatclear that there is any single thing that people have              ism




                                                                                                       Chapter 19
          I n  c o                                                                  r t a r i a n
  Broad                                                                ft Libecharac-
                  “It                                                                   had
                  in mind by the term “free will.” PerhapsS       theodominant
                  terization in the history of philosophy is that it is something like
                                  a i a
                  the freedomrcondition n ismon moral responsibility. Roughly, the                    a tion
                           e  r t
                   Libis that to be morally responsible for something,                  ter    m  i n
     o d e  st idea                                                        e l f - D eprior
                                                                                   you  had
   M              to   have   some   amount   of  freedom,  at some     S
                                                                      suitable  time

                                               ogititoamounts to — is what we mean
                  to the action or outcome for which you are responsible. That
                                            C
                  sense of freedom — whatever
       p a t i b itolisgetmat by the phrase “free will.” ... Although I think much of
Incom uenwhat        c esI )will say can be applied to other aspects of thinking about inism
tive S
       eq it, I will be primarily concerned with free will in its connection
                                                          In             d         erm
                                                                            etappropri-
                                                  i t e d
                  to moral responsibility, the sense in which people are

                                           nd Lim
                      ately praised or blamed.2

             ism                       a
                  In the next chapter, I present arguments for separating free will
     r m i n
Dete
               from moral responsibility, just as my two-stage model of free will
               separates the “free” stage from the “will” stage.

                  1       Fischer (2005) v.I, p. xxiii
                  2       Fischer (2007) p. 128.
         250     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Indeed, I will go further and recommend that we separate
               “moral” from “responsibility.” The latter is a scientific empirical
               problem. The former is an ethical problem to be settled by moral
               philosophers and social scientists in a cultural context.
                 The focus on moral responsibility had a very specific start-
               ing point in the history of the free will problem, as we noted in
               Chapter 7 (see p. 115).
               Peter Strawson Changed the Subject
                  Peter Strawson argued in 1962 that whatever the deep meta-
               physical truth on the issues of determinism and free will, people
               would not give up talking about and feeling moral responsibility
               - praise and blame, guilt and pride, crime and punishment, grati-
               tude, resentment, and forgiveness.
                  These “reactive attitudes” were for Strawson more real than
               whether they could be explained by fruitless disputes about free
               will, compatibilism, and determinism. They were natural “facts”
Chapter 19




               of our human commitment to ordinary inter-personal attitudes.
               He said it was “a pity that talk of the moral sentiments has fallen
               out of favour,” since such talk was “the only possibility of reconcil-
               ing these disputants to each other and the facts.”
                  Strawson himself was optimistic that compatibilism could rec-
               oncile determinism with moral obligation and responsibility. He
               accepted the facts of determinism. He felt that determinism was
               true. But he was concerned to salvage the reality of our attitudes
               even for libertarians, whom he described as pessimists about de-
               terminism.
                   “What I have called the participant reactive attitudes are essen-
                   tially natural human reactions to the good or ill will or indif-
                   ference of others towards us, as displayed in their attitudes and
                   actions. The question we have to ask is: What effect would, or
                   should, the acceptance of the truth of a general thesis of deter-
                   minism have upon these reactive attitudes? More specifically,
                   would, or should, the acceptance of the truth of the thesis lead
                   to the decay or the repudiation of all such attitudes? Would, or
                   should, it mean the end of gratitude, resentment, and forgive-
                            Moral Responsibility and Free Will             251

      ness; of all reciprocated adult loves; of all the essentially per-
      sonal antagonisms?” 3
   Of course, from the earliest beginnings, the problem of “free
will” has been intimately connected with the question of moral
responsibility. Most of the ancient thinkers on the problem were
trying to show that we humans have control over our decisions,
that our actions “depend on us”, and that they are not pre-deter-
mined by fate, by arbitrary gods, by logical necessity, or by a natu-
ral causal determinism.
   But to say that today “free will is understood as the control con-
dition for moral responsibility” is to make a serious blunder in
conceptual analysis and clear thinking. Free will is clearly a pre-
requisite for responsibility. Whether the responsibility is a moral
responsibility depends on our ideas of morality.
Are only Moral Decisions Free?
   To say that a decision cannot be free unless it is a moral deci-




                                                                             Chapter 19
sion, I regard as an ethical fallacy, but it has a long tradition in the
history of philosophy.
   Some ancients and medieval thinkers argued that freedom
could be equated with morality. Men were free to do good. If they
did evil, it was the influence of some nefarious power preventing
them from doing good.
   Aristotle, Immanuel Kant, and others often describe
humans as free when we do good, otherwise as slaves to our igno-
rance. Aristotle’s equation of “virtue as knowledge” claims that we
do wrong only because we do not know the right.
   Starting with his 1985 book, Free Will and Values, Robert Kane
argued that important free choices (his Self-Forming Actions or
SFAs) are those moral and prudential decisions that have not yet
been narrowed down to an act of self-determination. He says that
the agent does not have “all-things-considered” reasons to choose
one rather than another.
   But freedom is a physical question, insofar as it is based on
arguments about determinism versus indeterminism. To be sure,
the will is in part also a psychological/physiological question.
  3       Strawson (1962) p. 10.
         252     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Responsibility is a causality question. Is the agent properly in
               the causal chain? Moral questions are not physical questions. To
               confound them is to connect ought with is.
                  Moral responsibility is a major field of ethics that can stand on
               its own without sophisticated attempts to deny the existence of
               free will. e.g., the sophistry of Frankfurt-type examples claiming
               to deny alternative possibilities and the ability to do otherwise.
               Naturalism and Moral Responsibility
                  For some Naturalists, the equation of free will and moral re-
               sponsibility is driven by their goal to eliminate what they see as
               unjust punishment, the result of a “culture of vengeance.” Their
               specious reasoning goes something like this - “If free will is re-
               quired for moral responsibility, we can deny moral responsibility
               by denying free will.”
                  Equating free will with moral responsibility, then to use spuri-
               ous arguments to deny free will, and thus to deny moral respon-
Chapter 19




               sibility - in order to oppose punishment - is fine humanism but
               poor philosophy, and terrible science.
                  Naturalists seem to naively accept the ancient religious argu-
               ments that free will is an exclusive property of humans (some
               religions limit it to males, for example). One strand in the natu-
               ralist argument then is to say that humans are animals and so we
               lack free will.
                  It will be interesting to see naturalists react to the establishment
               of a biophysical basis for behavioral freedom in lower animals.
               This behavioral freedom is conserved and shows up in higher ani-
               mals and humans as freedom of their wills, as we saw in Chapter
               16.
                  So a refined view of naturalism would be to extend behavioral
               freedom to all animals. We no longer need defend an exceptional
               human nature.
                          Moral Responsibility and Free Will             253


Even If Determinism Were True
   Alfred Mele tells me that he and John Martin Fischer have
agreed on the view that even if determinism were true, we would
still have free will.4
   This can be so for philosophers who have redefined free will
as the control condition for moral responsibility. If the world is
perfectly pre-determined, we might have no way to prove it, but
we know that moral responsibility is a natural fact of life.
   This hypothesis is just to agree with P. F. Strawson that even if
determinism were true we would not give up the reactive attitudes
of moral responsibility, so we can call it the Strawson/Fischer/
Mele hypothesis.
   In the next chapter, I argue strongly for the need to separate the
free will problem from moral responsibility, in order to analyze it
and understand it.
The Acquired Freedom of Self-Perfection




                                                                           Chapter 19
   Mortimer Adler, in two-volume work, The Idea of Freedom, de-
scribed three freedoms.5
   One was his Circumstantial Freedom of Self-Realization.
   This is voluntariness, Hobbes-Hume compatibilist freedom of
action, Berlin’s negative liberty.
   Another was the Natural Freedom of Self-Determination.
   This is Aristotle’s “up to us,” origination, alternative possibili-
ties, the libertarian freedom of the will explained by my Cogito
model.
   The third was an Acquired Freedom of Self-Perfection.
   This is becoming morally responsible. the acquired or learned
knowledge needed to distinguish right from wrong, good from
evil, true from false, etc.
   This is the answer to Manuel Vargas’ question “When do
children acquire free will? See page 259 in the next chapter.

  4     Personal communication
  5     Adler (1958) pp. 127-135, and (1961) p. 225.
         254       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                         a t i b i lism
                                                C    omp      r min   m  is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati    bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                        patibil
                                ism
                                               l  t  y    o
                                                 i ibililsm       f
 H a r d I ncom
                                   ra
                                a emicM  b   i              ta
                                                                                       Inc
                      e S e p          Sd
                                                    mo par
               T  h          i l l a  n           o
Chapter 20




               o n ism
                    re e W                 i b   i l i t y
     Ill u s i
                F          s p  o  n   s                      b i lism
                       R e
                         ilism
                                     r r o w
                                           Na
                                             I ncom   p a t i

             p o s s i b
      Im                                                       a tibil  ism
                                                         o m p
                                                Soft Inc
                                                                                       yI
                         M  odel                                               Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism           (Altern
                                                                                        a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                         i m i t e d
                                                     e lw          ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                        informationphilosopher.com/freedom/separability.html
                        m i n i s m
                  deter
                                                                             Separability      255
           In
           The Separabilitynofi s Free Will
                                  m
                     rtar i a
                 LibeResponsibility
           and Moral
              I propose four degrees of separation:
                                                                 n  t - C ausal
              1. Separation of “Free” from “Will”        Age
                              - C a    sal from “Moral Responsibility”
              2. Separation of “Responsibility”
                                    u
                        venoft “Free Will” from “Moral Responsibility”
              3. Separation
                     E
              4. Separation of “Free Will and Moral Responsibility” from
           “Punishment” - both Retributive and Consequentialist n-Caus
                                                                                al
                                                                 No
              The fundamental assumption of two-stage models for free
                                          FAconcept “free” from the concept
           will is that we can separateSthe
        t i b i l i s m
           of “will” in order to better understand “free will,” as John Locke

co  mpa    recommended we do to avoid verbal confusion. u        ality
                                                            Hessaid,
                                                                   Ca
                                                         oft the will be free, but
                  “I think the question is not proper, S
                                                       whether

                           tibi
                  whether a man lisbemfree.”
                                             1



           n c o mpa                                                               a r ian  ism
         I                                                                       t




                                                                                                     Chapter 20
 Bro  ad                                                                 Lib e r
                                                                Soft
                              arian     ism                                                     ation
                  L i b e r t                                                         e r m i n
            st                                                                     et
    Mode                                                               Self-D
                                            Cogito
       p a t i b ilism
Incom uences)                                                                      n is         m
       eq                                                                    r m i
tive S
                                               e d  In                  dete
                                           i t
                                      im responsibility” from ordinary
              Figure 20-1. Separating Free Will from Moral Responsibility.
                                   L
                     ma     n  d
            We must also separate  “moral

       r     i n i s
         “responsibility”
         m
                          or simple accountability. If our intentions and

D  ete   decisions  caused an action, we are responsible for it, but moral
           responsibility requires that the action has moral consequences.
           Immanuel Kant thought that only moral decisions can be free
              1       Locke (1959) s. 21.
         256     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               decisions. Mortimer Adler’s acquired freedom of self-perfection
               is the idea from Plato to Kant that we are only free when our deci-
               sions are for reasons and we are not slaves to our passions (making
               moral choices rather than satisfying desires).2 We think that is an
               “ethical fallacy.”
                   We must go even further and clarify the relationship between
               free will and moral responsibility. Some philosophers (e.g., John
               Martin Fischer, Derk Pereboom, and Manuel Vargas)
               deflect direct discussion of free will and study it only as the “con-
               trol condition for moral responsibility.”
                   Finally, we should explore the connection between mor-
               al responsibility and punishment, both backward-looking
               retributive punishment (revenge or restitution) and forward-
               looking consequentialism (re-education and rehabilitation).
               The Separation of “Free” from “Will”
                  “Free Will” - in scare quotes - refers to the common but mis-
Chapter 20




               taken notion that the adjective “free” modifies the concept “will.”
               In particular, it indicates that the element of chance, one of the
               two requirements for free will is present in the determination of
               the will itself.
                  Critics of “libertarian free will” usually adopt this meaning in
               order to attack the idea of randomness in our decisions, which
               they think could not help to make us morally responsible.
                  But some indeterminism, centered in “torn” decisions between
               moral and self-interested choices, can be seen as an act “of one’s
               own free will,. Indeterminism helps with a difficult decision, and
               the agent can take responsibility either way. This is the case of
               Robert Kane’s Self-Forming Actions.
                  Despite the claim of some professional philosophers that they
               are better equipped than scientists to make conceptual distinc-
               tions and evaluate the cogency of arguments, in my view they
               have mistakenly conflated the concepts of “free” and “will.” They
               (con)fuse them with the muddled term “free will,” despite clear
               warnings from John Locke that this would lead to confusion.
                 2    Adler (1961) p. 225.
              Separability of Free Will and Responsibility                    257

  Locke said very clearly, as had ancients like Lucretius, it is not
the will that is free (in the sense of undetermined), it is the mind.
  Locke strongly endorsed the ideas of Freedom and Liberty, but
he thought it was inappropriate to describe the Will itself as Free.
The Will is a Determination. It is the Man who is Free. “I think
the question is not proper, whether the will be free, but whether
a man be free.” “This way of talking, nevertheless, has prevailed,
and, as I guess, produced great confusion,” he said. It has and still
does produce confusion
  In chapter XXI, “Of Power,” in his Essay Concerning Human
Understanding, Locke calls the question of Freedom of the Will
unintelligible. But for Locke, it is only because the adjective “free”
applies to the agent, not to the will, which is determined by the
mind, and determines the action.
      “Concerning a man’s liberty, there yet, therefore, is raised this
      further question, Whether a man be free to will? which I think
      is what is meant, when it is disputed whether the will be free.” 3




                                                                                Chapter 20
      “This, then, is evident, That a man is not at liberty to will, or not
      to will, anything in his power.” 4
   Freedom of the will requires the randomness of absolute chance
to break the causal chain of determinism, yet the conscious knowl-
edge that we are adequately determined to be responsible for our
choices.
   Freedom requires some events that are not causally determined
by immediately preceding events, events that are unpredictable by
any agency, events involving quantum uncertainty. These random
events create alternative possibilities for action.
     Randomness is the “free” in free will.
   In short, there must be a Randomness Requirement, unpredict-
able chance events that break the causal chain of determinism.
Without this chance, our actions are simply the consequences of
events in the remote past. This randomness must be located in a
place and time that enhances free will, one that does not reduce
our will and our actions to pure chance.
  3       Locke (1959) s. 22.
  4       Locke (1959) s. 24.
         258     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  (Determinists do not like this requirement.)
                  Freedom also requires an adequately determined will that
               chooses or selects from those alternative possibilities. There is
               effectively nothing uncertain about this choice.
                    Adequate determinism is the “will” in free will.
                  So there is also a Determinism Requirement - that our actions be
               adequately determined by our character and values. This requires
               that any randomness not be the direct cause of our actions.
                  (Libertarians do not like this requirement.)
                  Adequate determinism means that randomness in our thoughts
               about alternative possibilities does not directly cause our actions.
                  A random thought can lead to an adequately determined action,
               for which we can take full responsibility.
                  We must separate the “free” thoughts from the “willed” actions.

                 Our thoughts come to us freely.
                 Our actions come from us willfully.
Chapter 20




               The Separation of “Moral” from “Responsibility”
                   Responsibility for a willed action can be ascribed to an agent
               because the “adequately” determined will has started a new causal
               chain that includes the action and its foreseeable consequences.
                   But responsibility is not exactly the same as moral responsibility.
               It is merely a prerequisite for moral responsibility.
                   Responsibility is similar to accountability. Just as an action can
               said to be a cause of its consequences, so the agent can be held
               accountable for the action.
                   Different moral codes, which are the business of ethicists, may
               have different degrees of moral responsibility for the same actions
               and its consequences.
                 We must separate “moral” from “responsibility.”
              Separability of Free Will and Responsibility                         259


The Separation of “Free Will” from
“Moral Responsibility”
   From the earliest beginnings, the problem of “free will” has
been intimately connected with the question of moral responsi-
bility. Most of the ancient thinkers on the problem were trying to
show that we humans have control over our decisions, that our
actions “depend on us”, and that they are not pre-determined by
fate, by arbitrary gods,5 by logical necessity, or by a natural causal
determinism.
   John Martin Fischer says that some philosophers want to
relate these two very strongly:
      “Some philosophers do not distinguish between freedom and
      moral responsibility. Put a bit more carefully, they tend to begin
      with the notion of moral responsibility, and “work back” to a
      notion of freedom; this notion of freedom is not given indepen-
      dent content (separate from the analysis of moral responsibil-




                                                                                     Chapter 20
      ity). For such philosophers, ‘freedom’ refers to whatever condi-
      tions are involved in choosing or acting in such a way as to be
      morally responsible.” 6
   The question of the existence of “free will” is an empirical and
factual question about the nature of the mind. It does not depend
in any way on the existence of “moral responsibility,” which is a
question for ethics.
Manuel Vargas’ Question
   Here is an example of the kind of problems caused by conflating
free will with moral responsibility. Manuel Vargas follows John
Martin Fischer in connecting free will to moral responsibility,
then he wonders how and when children can suddenly acquire
free will at a certain age. Vargas says:
      “Consider the question of how we go from being unfree agents
      to free agents. This is a puzzle faced by all accounts of respon-
      sibility, but there is something pressing about it in the case of
  5       This was Democritus’ reason for inventing determinism. See Chapter. 7.
  6       Fischer (2005) p. xxiii
         260     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     libertarianism. As children we either had the indeterministic
                     structures favored by your favorite version of libertarianism or
                     we lacked them. If we lacked them as children, we might won-
                     der how we came to get those structures. We might also wonder
                     what the evidence is for thinking that we do develop said struc-
                     tures. Suppose the libertarian offers us an answer to these ques-
                     tions, and the other empirical challenges I raised in the prior
                     section. We would still face another puzzle. What, exactly, does
                     the indeterminism add? What follows in this section is not so
                     much a metaphysical concern as it is a normative concern. It is
                     a concern about what work the indeterminism does in liber-
                     tarianism, apart from providing a way to preserve our default
                     self-image as deliberators with genuine, metaphysically robust
                     alternative possibilities.” 7
                 Children have free will from birth. It is part of their biological
               makeup. It is moral responsibility that they “come to get” at some
               age in their moral development as adults. 8
                 We must separate “free will” from “moral responsibility.”
Chapter 20




               The Separation of both “Free Will and Moral
               Responsibility” from Retributive Punishment
               and Consequentialist Punishment
                  Liberal humanitarian thinkers who see that retributive punish-
               ment is sometimes cruel and unproductive should not argue that
               punishment is not “deserved” because free will does not exist.
                  There are excellent stand-alone reasons for preferring rehabili-
               tation and education to retributive vengeance.
                  Some philosophers and many scientists argue that humans are
               just a form of animal. They decry human exceptionalism.
                  They say that humans lack free will because animals lack it. The
               idea of no free will in animals, that they are completely deter-
               mined, was the old religious argument that God had given man
               the special gift of free will.
                 7       Fischer (2007) p. 148.
                 8       See Chapter 19.
              Separability of Free Will and Responsibility            261

   Some philosophers say that animals lack moral responsibility,
but humans have it. This is now being questioned in many socio-
biological studies of animal morality.
   Whether man - and higher animals too - have free will is an
empirical scientific question.9 Whether they have moral responsi-
bility is a social and cultural question.
   The scientific question is being answered in the affirmative.
Even the lowest forms of animal now are known to have behavioral
freedom. That is to say, their actions are not pre-determined, not
even determined reactions to external stimuli. They are stochastic
beings that originate actions, as shown by Martin Heisenberg.
10

   The social and cultural questions should not make free will
depend on sensible arguments against vengeance and retributive
punishment. This is to get the cart before the horse.
   Equating free will with moral responsibility, then to use spuri-
ous arguments to deny free will, and thus to deny moral respon-
sibility - in order to oppose punishment - is fine humanism but




                                                                        Chapter 20
poor philosophy, and terrible science.
   We must separate “free will and moral responsibility” from
punishment, whether retributive or consequentialist.
   Philosophers who call themselves “naturalist” especially like to
make the argument that because humans are animals, and because
animals are regarded as having no free will, that humans have no
moral responsibility.
   Naturalists do not separate free will and moral responsibility.
Let’s consider naturalism in the next chapter.




     9    Balaguer (2009)
     10   Heisenberg (2009) See Chapter 16.
         262      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                              ism
                      patibil
 Hard I
        n        com
                                    ra l i s m                                          Inc
                             N at u         com p a t i bilism
                                               Semi
Chapter 21




             n    ism
     Illusio                                                            ism
                                                         m p a tibil
                                                 wI  nco
                     lism                  Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                               So  ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                      This chapter on the web
                         informationphilosopher.com/freedom/naturalism.html
                       m i n i s m
                 deter
                                                                 Naturalism           263
             In
             Naturalism                        n ism
                                       a r i a
               Naturalism inL ibert as it is in science, is the search for
                              philosophy,
             explanations that involve only Nature, ones that in particular do
             not involve supernatural ideas.
                                                                          n t - C  ausal
                Metaphysical or ontological naturalism is the          e that there is
                                                                  Agidea
             nothing in the world but Nature.
                                          a u s a l This leads to difficulties as to the
             existential status tof-C ideas, abstract concepts like justice, and enti-
                        Even or a geometric circle.
             ties like numbers
                Methodological naturalism accepts as explanations only C
                                                                               n  -    a
                                                                                     argu-usal
             ments based on natural phenomena. If and when abstract     No ideas
             are properly understood, it will be because they have natural
                       m                       SFA
         t i   i l i s
             explanations.
             b
co   mpa        Ethical naturalism moves the question of values and
                                                                  a u  s a     y ori-
                                                                           littheir
                                                       S ft C
             gin outward from early humanist views,ofirst       to biological explana-
             tions (the evolution of ethics in higher organisms), but ultimately
                          a
             to the universe
                       p         lisamwhole. Moral skeptics from Thomas Hobbes sm
                            tibias
        d  I      o m
             tocFriedrich
             n                Nietzsche see ethics as invented for reasonse  r t a    ani
                                                                                  ofriself-
  Bro a                                                                ib
                                                            Soft L



                                                                                          Chapter 21
             interest in a social contract.
                Natural religion is anm     attempt to explain religious beliefs about
                                r i
                             ofathe a   i s
                                     universe in wholly natural terms. Though someination
                                      n
                   L    e
             the creation  r t
                     ibas a conflicted and futile attempt to naturalize-Dsupernatu-
                                                                                 t erm
          e   s t                                                       f      e
   Mod ralism, the philosophy of religion began in earnest        Sel with David
             see  this

             Hume’s Dialogues Concerning  C        o
                                             ogitNatural   Religion and The Natural
            tibili
             Historys mof Religion.
    o m p a
Inc            e     es) has a long history in the free will debates, begin-
                Naturalism
                 n c                                                    i n is         m
           u                                                        r m
       eq ning with Hume’s arguments in the Treatise on Human Nature and
                                                               dete
tive S the Enquiries that humans have “natural beliefs” that are prior to
                                         i t e d In
                                  nd Lim
             experience and shape our perceptions.

             ism               a
                Anticipating Immanuel Kant’s synthetic a priori, Hume
     r m i n
Dete
             argued that a skeptical view of empiricism prevented us from
             knowing basic things like causality and the external world, but
             that a “natural belief ” in causality and the external world could
             not be negated by any skeptical arguments.
         264     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Hume the Skeptic vs. Hume the Naturalist
                  Hume hoped to build a science of Human Nature modeled
               on Isaac Newton’s Principia, which had become the canoni-
               cal model for all science. But Hume’s reintroduction of mitigated
               academic skepticism made any science at all problematic. Hume’s
               skepticism delivered a fatal blow to the quest for certainty.
                  Logical arguments can prove theorems in formal systems, but
               they cannot establish knowledge about the physical world, which
               requires empirical and contingent observations and experiments.
                  Epistemological theories that all knowledge was based on rea-
               soning about sense data, perceived by a mind that began as a
               blank slate, run into the criticism that we can only know those
               sense data, and not the “things themselves” in the external world
               that are producing the perceptions.
                  For for the Scottish School of philosophy, which strongly influ-
               enced Hume, there are natural transcendental beliefs could trump
               reason. They are prior to reason. Hume argued that we could not
               reason without beliefs, desires, and passions. Indeed, he argued
Chapter 21




               that an act of will was driven by beliefs and desires, never by rea-
               son, which was merely an instrument to evaluate various means to
               our ends. This was not unlike the position of Scholastic philoso-
               phers like Thomas Aquinas.
                  Natural beliefs that Hume felt could not be denied by the most
               clever reasoned arguments include ideas such as the principle of
               uniformity and the existence of the external world. These were
               incorporated by Kant into his transcendental theory that the mind
               imposed categories of understanding on the world. Kant’s “syn-
               thetic a priori” claimed to establish certain truths about the world
               that could be known without empirical, a posteriori, studies of the
               world.
                  Among Kant’s attempts at synthetic a priori truths were Euclid-
               ean geometry and determinism. The discovery of non-Euclidean
               geometries shows us that there is nothing that can be proved logi-
               cally about the physical world.
                                                       Naturalism       265

   Kant’s argument that we must limit reason to make room for
beliefs seems to me to be a simple extension of Hume’s view that
some beliefs necessarily precede any reason. Both the Humean
and Kantian projects are best seen as trying to establish morality
in an age of empirical and deterministic science, in short, to derive
“ought” from “is.”
   Peter F. Strawson’s influential argument that we would not
give up our natural attitudes toward moral responsibility, even if
we are presented with a powerful logical argument for the exis-
tence of determinism, is to me an example of applied Humean
naturalism.
Freedom and Values
   Today some of the most strongly held scientific beliefs are
just assumptions or axioms that are tested by their explanatory
power in empirical science.1 But science and pure reason seem
unable to deal with the fundamental questions of free will and
moral responsibility, which for Hume and Kant (and later Ludwig
Wittgenstein) were all-important.




                                                                          Chapter 21
   Hume and Hobbes were the two leading compatibilists of their
times, believing that free will was compatible with strict deter-
minism. Hobbes categorically denied and Hume seriously ques-
tioned the reality of absolute chance. For them, chance was the
result of human ignorance. Chance is an epistemic question, not
an ontological problem.
   But in contrast to Hobbes’ moral skepticism and the suprema-
cy of self-interest, Hume hoped to establish the foundations of a
morality based on natural moral sentiments in An Enquiry con-
cerning the Principles of Morals, Part II
      “Self-love is a principle in human nature of such extensive
      energy, and the interest of each individual is, in general, so
      closely connected with that of the community, that those phi-
      losophers were excusable, who fancied, that all our concern for
      the public might be resolved into a concern for our own hap-
      piness and preservation. They saw every moment, instances of
  1       See the Free Will Axiom in Chapter 14.
         266   Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   approbation or blame, satisfaction or displeasure towards char-
                   acters and actions; they denominated the objects of these sen-
                   timents, virtues, or vices; they observed, that the former had
                   a tendency to encrease the happiness, and the latter the mis-
                   ery of mankind; they asked, whether it were possible that we
                   could have any general concern for society, or any disinterested
                   resentment of the welfare or injury of others; they found it sim-
                   pler to consider all these sentiments as modifications of self-
                   love; and they discovered a pretence, at least, for this unity of
                   principle, in that close union of interest, which is so observable
                   between the public and each individual.
                   “But notwithstanding this frequent confusion of interests, it is
                   easy to attain what natural philosophers, after Lord Bacon, have
                   affected to call the experimentum crucis, or that experiment,
                   which points out the right way in any doubt or ambiguity. We
                   have found instances, in which private interest was separate from
                   public; in which it was even contrary; And yet we observed the
                   moral sentiment to continue, notwithstanding this disjunction
                   of interests. And wherever these distinct interests sensibly con-
                   curred, we always found a sensible encrease of the sentiment,
Chapter 21




                   and a more warm affection to virtue, and detestation of vice,
                   or what we properly call, gratitude and revenge. Compelled by
                   these instances, we must renounce the theory, which accounts
                   for every moral sentiment by the principle of self-love. We must
                   adopt a more public affection, and allow, that the interests of
                   society are not, even on their own account, entirely indifferent
                   to us. Usefulness is only a tendency to a certain end; and it is a
                   contradiction in terms, that any thing pleases as means to an
                   end, where the end itself no wise affects us. If usefulness, there-
                   fore, be a source of moral sentiment, and if this usefulness be
                   not always considered with a reference to self; it follows, that
                   every thing, which contributes to the happiness of society rec-
                   ommends itself directly to our approbation and good-will. Here
                   is a principle, which accounts, in great part, for the origin of
                   morality: And what need we seek for abstruse and remote sys-
                   tems, when there occurs one so obvious and natural?“ 2

               2       Hume (1975)
                                                           Naturalism        267

  Hume gives the argument for moral sentiment as superior to
reason or judgment in Appendix I, Concerning Moral Sentiment,
though reason helps with calculations of utility.
      “If the foregoing hypothesis be received, it will now be easy for
      us to determine the question first started, concerning the gener-
      al principles of morals; and though we postponed the decision
      of that question, lest it should then involve us in intricate specu-
      lations, which are unfit for moral discourses, we may resume
      it at present, and examine how far either reason or sentiment
      enters into all decisions of praise or censure.
      “One principal foundation of moral praise being supposed
      to lie in the usefulness of any quality or action; it is evident,
      that reason must enter for a considerable share in all decisions
      of this kind; since nothing but that faculty can instruct us in
      the tendency of qualities and actions, and point out their ben-
      eficial consequences to society and to their possessors...And a
      very accurate reason or judgment is often requisite, to give the
      true determination, amidst such intricate doubts arising from
      obscure or opposite utilities.




                                                                               Chapter 21
      “But though reason, when fully assisted and improved, be suffi-
      cient to instruct us in the pernicious or useful tendency of qual-
      ities and actions; it is not alone sufficient to produce any moral
      blame or approbation. Utility is only a tendency to a certain
      end; and were the end totally indifferent to us, we should feel
      the same indifference towards the means. It is requisite a senti-
      ment should here display itself, in order to give a preference to
      the useful above the pernicious tendencies. This sentiment can
      be no other than a feeling for the happiness of mankind, and a
      resentment of their misery; since these are the different ends
      which virtue and vice have a tendency to promote. Here, there-
      fore, reason instructs us in the several tendencies of actions,
      and humanity makes a distinction in favour of those which are
      useful and beneficial.” 3
  In the famous passage where Hume shows that “Ought” cannot
be derived from “Is,” he again makes the case for natural passions,
  3       Hume (1975) Part II
         268     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               motives, volitions, thoughts, and feelings as the source for senti-
               ments of morality. There is no matter of fact discernible by reason
               alone.(Treatise, Book III, Sect I)
                     “Nor does this reasoning only prove, that morality consists not
                     in any relations, that are the objects of science; but if examin’d,
                     will prove with equal certainty, that it consists not in any matter
                     of fact, which can be discover’d by the understanding. This is the
                     second part of our argument; and if it can be made evident, we
                     may conclude, that morality is not an object of reason. But can
                     there be any difficulty in proving, that vice and virtue are not
                     matters of fact, whose existence we can infer by reason? Take
                     any action allow’d to be vicious: Wilful murder, for instance.
                     Examine it in all lights, and see if you can find that matter of
                     fact, or real existence, which you call vice. In which-ever way
                     you take it, you find only certain passions, motives, volitions
                     and thoughts. There is no other matter of fact in the case. The
                     vice entirely escapes you, as long as you consider the object. You
                     never can find it, till you turn your reflection into your own
                     breast, and find a sentiment of disapprobation, which arises in
                     you, towards this action. Here is a matter of fact; but `tis the
Chapter 21




                     object of feeling, not of reason. It lies in yourself, not in the ob-
                     ject. So that when you pronounce any action or character to be
                     vicious, you mean nothing, but that from the constitution of
                     your nature you have a feeling or sentiment of blame from the
                     contemplation of it. Vice and virtue, therefore, may be compar’d
                     to sounds, colours, heat and cold, which, according to modern
                     philosophy, are not qualities in objects, but perceptions in the
                     mind: And this discovery in morals, like that other in physics,
                     is to be regarded as a considerable advancement of the specula-
                     tive sciences; tho’, like that too, it has little or no influence on
                     practice. Nothing can be more real, or concern us more, than
                     our own sentiments of pleasure and uneasiness; and if these be
                     favourable to virtue, and unfavourable to vice, no more can be
                     requisite to the regulation of our conduct and behaviour.” 4
                    Hume the Skeptic doubts “ought” can be derived from “is.”
               Hume the Naturalist has no such problem. Here is the famous
               passage in which he criticizes previous philosophers.
                 4       Hume (1978) p. 468.
                                                           Naturalism        269

      “I cannot forbear adding to these reasonings an observation,
      which may, perhaps, be found of some importance. In every
      system of morality, which I have hitherto met with, I have al-
      ways remark’d, that the author proceeds for some time in the or-
      dinary way of reasoning, and establishes the being of a God, or
      makes observations concerning human affairs; when of a sud-
      den I am surpriz’d to find, that instead of the usual copulations
      of propositions, is, and is not, I meet with no proposition that
      is not connected with an ought, or an ought not. This change
      is imperceptible; but is, however, of the last consequence. For
      as this ought, or ought not, expresses some new relation or af-
      firmation, `tis necessary that it shou’d be observ’d and explain’d;
      and at the same time that a reason should be given, for what
      seems altogether inconceivable, how this new relation can be
      a deduction from others, which are entirely different from it.
      But as authors do not commonly use this precaution, I shall
      presume to recommend it to the readers; and am persuaded,
      that this small attention wou’d subvert all the vulgar systems of
      morality, and let us see, that the distinction of vice and virtue is
      not founded merely on the relations of objects, nor is perceiv’d
      by reason.” 5




                                                                               Chapter 21
   Long before Immanuel Kant, David Hume is putting limits
on Reason to make room for natural Belief. Indeed, there seems
to be very little in Kant in this regard that was not already present
in some form in Hume.
Peter F. Strawson’s Natural Moral Responsibility
  Perhaps the most important recent discussion of naturalism
and free will is P. F. Strawson’s 1962 essay Freedom and Resent-
ment, which changed the subject from the truth of determinism
or free will to the Humean claim that moral attitudes exist quite
independently of the reasoned “truth” of determinism or the free-
will thesis.
  This is of course also Hume’s position, since no reasoned ar-
gument can cause us to abandon our natural beliefs that lead to
sympathy with others and feelings of gratitude and resentment.
  5       Hume (1978) p. 468.
         270     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Surprisingly, this famous Strawson essay has only a single ref-
               erence to Hume, a footnote on Hume’s denial of any “rational”
               justification of induction. So, says Strawson, there is no rational
               denial of moral responsibility, based on what he calls the reactive
               attitudes. This argument leads directly to John Martin Fischer’s
               semi-compatibilism.
                  Strawson arrays “pessimists” - genuine moral skeptics - against
               “optimists” - apparently compatibilists - and hopes to reconcile
               them:
                     “Some philosophers say they do not know what the thesis of
                     determinism is. Others say, or imply, that they do know what it
                     is. Of these, some — the pessimists perhaps — hold that if the
                     thesis is true, then the concepts of moral obligation and respon-
                     sibility really have no application, and the practices of punishing
                     and blaming, of expressing moral condemnation and approval,
                     are really unjustified. Others—the optimists perhaps—hold that
                     these concepts and practices in no way lose their raison d’être if
                     the thesis of determinism is true. Some hold even that the justi-
                     fication of these concepts and practices requires the truth of the
Chapter 21




                     thesis. There is another opinion which is less frequently voiced:
                     the opinion, it might be said, of the genuine moral sceptic.” 6
                 Note Strawson uses the standard argument against free will
                     “This is that the notions of moral guilt, of blame, of moral
                     responsibility are inherently confused and that we can see this
                     to be so if we consider the consequences either of the truth of
                     determinism or of its falsity. The holders of this opinion agree
                     with the pessimists that these notions lack application if deter-
                     minism is true, and add simply that they also lack it if deter-
                     minism is false. If I am asked which of these parties I belong
                     to, I must say it is the first of all, the party of those who do not
                     know what the thesis of determinism is. But this does not stop
                     me from having some sympathy with the others, and a wish to
                     reconcile them.” 7
                  In his 1985 book Skepticism and Naturalism, Strawson de-
               scribes two naturalisms, a “reductive naturalism” (which he also
                 6       Strawson (1962) p. 1.
                 7       ibid.
                                                        Naturalism        271

calls strict or hard) and another naturalism, perhaps his own view
(which he calls liberal, catholic, or soft).
   He connects reductive naturalism to skepticism and scientism,
which he feels denies some evident truths and realities (such as
the existence of the world), but thinks the liberal naturalist might
be accused of fostering illusions or propagating myths. He then
applies these two approaches to his reactive moral attitudes.
      “The area I have in mind is that of those attitudes and feelings,
      or “sentiments,” as we used to say, toward ourselves and oth-
      ers, in respect of our and their actions, which can be grouped
      together under the heads of moral attitudes and judgments and
      personal reactive attitudes and are indissolubly linked with that
      sense of agency or freedom or responsibility which we feel in
      ourselves and attribute to others.
      “The fundamental thought is that once we see people and their
      doings (including ourselves and our doings) objectively, as what
      they are, namely as natural objects and happenings, occurrenc-
      es in the course of nature.” 8




                                                                            Chapter 21
  Again, neither determinism nor chance can provide free will
      “— whether causally determined occurrences or chance oc-
      currences — then the veil of illusion cast over them by moral
      attitudes and reactions must, or should, slip away. What simply
      happens in nature may be matter for rejoicing or regret, but not
      for gratitude or resentment, for moral approval or blame, or for
      moral self-approval or remorse.
      “Attempts to counter such reasoning by defending the reality
      of some special condition of freedom or spontaneity or self-
      determination which human beings enjoy and which supplies
      a justifying ground for our moral attitudes and judgments have
      not been notably successful; for no one has been able to state
      intelligibly what such a condition of freedom, supposed to be
      necessary to ground our moral attitudes and judgments, would
      actually consist in.

  8       Strawson (1985) p. 31.
         272     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     “Such attempts at counter-argument are misguided; and not
                     merely because they are unsuccessful or unintelligible. They are
                     misguided also for the reasons for which counter-arguments to
                     other forms of skepticism have been seen to be misguided; i.e.
                     because the arguments they are directed against are totally inef-
                     ficacious. We can no more be reasoned out of our proneness to
                     personal and moral reactive attitudes in general than we can be
                     reasoned out of our belief in the existence of body.” 9
                  A few years after Strawson’s naturalistic arguments for the mor-
               al sentiments that he called the reactive attitudes, Willard van
               Orman Quine argued that epistemology should be naturalized.
                  In his essay Two Dogmas of Empiricism, Quine argued that the
               distinction between analytic (a priori) and synthetic (a posteriori)
               knowledge was moot because ultimately the “truth” or validity of
               analytic statements depends on their applying in the world.
                  Naturalized epistemology has been called “scientism” because
               it makes science the last word on whether we know what we think
               we know. And Quine initially agreed with Bertrand Russell
               that “what science cannot discover, mankind cannot know.”
Chapter 21




                  Epistemological naturalism today assumes that science is the
               final arbiter of public knowledge arrived at by consensus of the
               community of inquirers. This was Charles Sanders Peirce’s
               idea of pragmatic knowledge. But it also admits some private
               knowledge that may be unsuitable for such public empirical veri-
               fication.




                 9       Strawson (1985) p. 32.
                                                   Naturalism          273


The Center for Naturalism
   We should mention here Tom Clark’s Center for Naturalism,10
most of whose members deny that individuals have ultimate
responsibility for their actions (in the sense of origination, i.e.,
being the self-caused authors of their actions) and assert that free
will is an illusion. Nevertheless, the Center believes that indi-
viduals should be held morally responsible for their actions, and
should be given appropriate rewards or sanctions, to help control
behavior. So their moral responsibility position is similar to that
of David Hume, and perhaps to John Martin Fischer’s semi-
compatibilism, although Fischer is agnostic on the free will ques-
tion, and Hume’s free will is compatible with determinism.
   However, unlike Hume or Fischer, they take a strongly revisionist
position with respect to our responsibility practices. They agree
with philosophers such as Joshua Greene and Derk Pereboom
that in light of determinism it’s difficult to justify strong moral
desert or retributive punishment, in which case our criminal jus-
tice system and our approach to behavioral health (e.g., to addic-




                                                                         Chapter 21
tion, mental illness and obesity) should be premised on a humane
consequentialism informed by a respect for human rights.




  10   www.naturalism.org
         274      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                              ism
                 com  patibil
                                    t i v i t y                                         Inc
                                Crea
        n
 Hard I
                                                p a t i bilism
                                             om
                                               Semic
             n    ism
     Illusio
Chapter 22




                                                             a tibil    ism
                                                     nco m p
                                                 wI
                     lism                  Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                               So  ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                          informationphilosopher.com/freedom/creativity.html
                         m i n i s m
                   deter
                                                                         Creativity          275
              In
              Creativity                         n ism
                                        a  r i a
                                      rt new information come into the world.
                              L ibethat
                 Creativity requires
              It must be information that was not implicit in earlier states of the
           world, determined by the “fixed past and the laws of nature.a            ” usal
                                                                          n  t - C
               Human creativity requires the same freedom        Agofe thought and
           action needed for free will in my
                                         a u s a l Cogito Model.
               If everythingn
                        E v   e     t-C was pre-determined, then all the works of
                                 created
           Mozart would have been implicit in the first beat of an aboriginal
           drum. Einstein’s E=mc2 would have been already there at theC
                                                                                n  -    a
                                                                                      time usal
           of the first Aristotle syllogism.                            No
               Cosmological systems are creative,
                                              S F A because atoms and mole-
         t   b i l i s m
           cules did not exist in the first three minutes of the universe. And
           i
co   mpa   the great astrophysical structures made from atoms,alike
           stars, and planets, did not exist in the first        a u s
                                                               C years.
                                                         oftmillion
                                                                            litygalaxies,
                                                       S
               Biological systems are creative. Darwinian evolution accounts
                                      m species of organisms.
                           tibilofisnew
           n  c o      p a
           for the creation
                    m                                                             a r i a n ism
         I                                                                    r t
  Broad themselves,
               Many organisms create informational structures
                            in the world, like beehives,Sbird
                                                                    Libeand
                                                              oftnests,
                                                                             outside
                                                                                   beaver
                                                                                          of




                                                                                                  Chapter 22
           dams.
                              a r i a n ism                                                     a tion
               Humansib e r t
                           are  the   most  conspicuous  creators and   consumers   er   mofi n
     o d e  st Linformational                                       e l f - D   etEarth.
   M       new                        structures, altering the   S
                                                               face of   planet
           And they create the constructed ideal world of thought, of intel-
           lect, of spirit, includingCthe       ito of nature, in which we humans
                                            oglaws
          t i b       m as co-creator.
                ilaisrole
      p a  play
Incom ueAll          es) processes have the same underlying physics as the
                nccreative                                                      n is           m
        q                                                                 r m i
                                                                     dete
      e
tive S cosmic creative process.                    In
                                           i t e d
               Biological processes add the element of natural selection. This

               ma                   nd Lim
           is accomplished by something Jacques Monod called the teleo-
             s
     m i n i
           nomic information, the purposive element in all life.

Deter “This allows us to put forward at least the principle of a defini-
                   tion of a species’ “teleonomic level.” All teleonomic structures
                   and performances can be regarded as corresponding to a certain
                   quantity of information which must be transmitted for these
         276     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     structures to be realized and these performances accomplished.
                     Let us call this quantity “teleonomic information.” A given
                     species’ “teleonomic level” may then be said to correspond to
                     the quantity of information which, on the average and per indi-
                     vidual, must be transferred to assure the generation-to-genera-
                     tion transmission of the specific content of reproductive invari-
                     ance.” 1

               Blind Variation and Selective Retention
                  The best known theory of creativity is the two-stage model pro-
               posed by Donald Campbell, who investigated creative thought
               and described it as a process involving the generation of “blind”
               variations of ideas, followed by a selective retention of good ideas.
                   Campbell proposed that his Blind Variation and Selective
               Retention (BVSR) could also explain the development of human
               knowledge, including inventions and the increase in scientific
               knowledge. I agree that all human knowledge creation is the same
               two-stage process that explains human freedom.
                  Creativity and Free Will are two sides of the same coin.
Chapter 22




                  BVSR is itself a variation on common-sense and ancient
               notions of trial-and-error, and, like my free will model, it seems
               directly inspired by the two-step process of biological evolution,
               but Campbell sees it as more general than these. He says BVSR is
               applicable to organic evolution, the learning process in individual
               organisms, and the social construction of knowledge.
                  BVSR clearly describes my two-stage Cogito model for free
               will. Other biological examples include the immune system and
               quality control in protein/enzyme factories.
                  But Dean Keith Simonton, a social psychologist who has in-
               vestigated the origins of and evolution of genius, creativity, and
               leadership., is wary of identifying “blind” with the chance of two-
               stage models for free will. 2

                 1       Monod (1971), Chance and Necessity, p. 14.
                 2       Simonton (2004)
                                                      Creativity          277


    Simonton has researched the personal, social, cultural, develop-
mental, and cognitive factors that contribute to greatness in the arts,
the humanities, and especially the sciences.
   He uses the tools of historiometrics, a combination of personal
histories, biographies, and psychometrics, to build theories and
principles of human behavior that might account for the develop-
ment of pre-eminent individuals.
   But Simonton is cautious about identifying the variation prin-
ciple with irreducible ontological chance, because that concept is
still controversial in the social sciences. Recall that the founders of
“social physics,” who produced the rise of statistical thinking in the
nineteenth century, did not believe that chance was real. It is merely
epistemic, they maintained. 3
   Simonton hopes to establish “blindness” as the main require-
ment, viz., that the creative process cannot see ahead - sightedness
is antithetical to creativity, he says. 4
   Then, because randomness is inherently blind, there should be no
problem incorporating chance once blindness is established.
   In biological evolution, the original blind variation is preserved




                                                                            Chapter 22
by genetic inheritance. In learning, random variations are preserved
by individual organisms memories. In social knowledge, chance
variation of ideas get preserved as new inventions, new works of art,
and new scientific theories. Whether any of these get selected and
retained depends on their pragmatic usefulness to the species, the
individual and the society.
   The idea that units of cultural knowledge undergo variation and
then are selected for is perhaps better known from the recent work
of Richard Dawkins, who named the self-replicating unit of cul-
tural evolution the “meme” in his 1976 book The Selfish Gene.
   BVSR is widely used in cybernetics. For example, the “general
problem solver” programs of Allan Newell and Herbert Simon
involve two stages, first the blind generation of theorems and then
testing of the theorems for validity.
  3    See Quételet and Buckle in Chapter 7, p. 91.
  4    personal communication.
         278       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis         m
                                       De t e r

                                                          a t i b i lism
                                                 C    omp      r min   m  is
                                 i n ism                 e t e
                    De   t e r m                  Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                          So
           ncom         patibil
                                ism
                                 e r i c h   ’  s
 H a r d I
                         H o n d                                                        Inc
                      Ted erm Seimn
                                      sm
                                  icoim p a t i bilism

           s i o n ism Det
     Ill u
                                                ilism
Chapter 23




                                                       c o mp  atib
                                               row I n
                                           Nar
               o s s i b ilism
      Im     p                                                          ism
                                                            m p a tibil
                                                   ft Inc o
                                                 So                                     yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                informationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/honderich
                           m i n i s m
                     deter
                                                                    Ted Honderich           279
              In
              Ted Honderich’s nism
                         e r t a ria
              Determinism
                    Li b
               Ted Honderich is the principal spokesman for strict-C             ausa
                                                                              physical
                                                                                        l
           causality and “hard determinism.”                      Age   n  t
               He has written more widely
                                     - C a  u sal (with excursions into quantum
           certainly E
                           vent
           mechanics, neuroscience,           and consciousness), more deeply, and
                         more extensively than most of his colleagues on the
           problem of free will.
                                                                             n  - C  a  usal
               Unlike most of his determinist colleagues specializing   No             in
           free will, Honderich has notFA
                       m                       S succumbed to the easy path of
         t i b i l i s
           compatibilism by simply declaring that the free will we have (and

co   mpa   should want, says Daniel Dennett) is completely
           with determinism, namely a Humean              oft C   a u s
                                                          “voluntarism”
                                                                        a   ty
                                                                          liconsistent
                                                                         or “freedom
                                                        S
           of action” in which our will is completely caused by prior events.
                      p
               Normdoes  a    bilism go down the path of incompatibilism,
                           tiHonderich                                                 n ism
         I n  c o                                                            t a
                       for non-physical substances, dualist formsiboferagency, orr i a
  Broad looking
           gifts of God. He does not simply identify S         oft Lwith Epicurean
                                                             freedom
           chance, as have manyisscientists m        with ideas of brain mechanisms




                                                                                               Chapter 23
                        e r t a r i a n
                                                                                      m  i n a tion
            st Lib “origination” of actions and decisions. 1elf-Deter
           amplifying      quantum      mechanical   indeterminism   to help  with   the
   M o d e uncaused
                                                                  S
               Honderich does not claim to have found a solution to the prob-
           lem of free will or determinism,C       o he does claim to have confront-
                                             ogitbut
          t i b      m
                ilisconsequences
      p a  ed  the                     of determinism.2 He is “dismayed” because the
Incom utruth             )
                  cofesdeterminism                                               n is        m
        q    e n
                                                                           r m i
                                          requires that we give up “origination” with

                                                                      dete
      e
tive S its     promise of an open future, restricting - though not eliminating
                                                   In
           - our “life hopes.”
                                           i t e d
                                    nd Lim
               Unlike many of his hard determinist colleagues, who appear to
                                 a
     r m i n ism
           welcome determinism and enjoy describing belief in free will as

Dete
           an illusion, Honderich is unique in his passionate sense of real
           loss. We might have been the author of our own actions, he says,
           we could have done otherwise, and thus be held accountable and
           morally responsible in a way more acceptable to common sense.
                 1     informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_will_mechanisms.html
                 2     Honderich (1990)
         280     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Honderich describes the main life hope that is lost as a future
               we can make for ourselves.
                        “We have a kind of life-hope which is incompatible with a
                     belief in determinism. An open future, a future we can make for
                     ourselves, is one of which determinism isn’t true.
                        “Suppose you become convinced of the truth of our theory
                     of determinism. Becoming really convinced will not be easy,
                     for several reasons. But try now to imagine a day when you do
                     come to believe determinism fully. What would the upshot be?
                     It would almost certainly be dismay. Your response to deter-
                     minism in connection with the hope would be dismay. If you
                     really were persuaded of determinism, the hope would collapse.
                        “This is so because such a hope has a necessary part or condi-
                     tion on which the rest of it depends. This is the image of origi-
                     nation. There can be no such hope if all the future is just effects
                     of effects. It is for this reason, I think, that many people have
                     found determinism to be a black thing. John Stuart Mill
                     felt it as an incubus, and, to speak for myself, it has certainly got
                     me down in the past.” 3
                  Though he is its foremost champion, I find it most extraordi-
Chapter 23




               nary that Honderich characterizes determinism as a “black thing”
               and as what John Stuart Mill called an “incubus.” Determin-
               ism gives him “dismay.” he says.
                  In my readings of hundreds of philosophers and scientists on
               the problem of free will, I have found none with such deep heart-
               felt feelings and frank openness about the implications of their
               work for the state of humanity.
               The Failure of Compatibilism and
               Incompatibilism
                 In Honderich’s article for Kane’s Oxford Handbook of Free Will,
               he says “Determinism is True, Compatibilism and Incompatibilism
               are False.”
                 3       Honderich (2002) p. 94.
                                     Ted Honderich’s Determinism            281

   Honderich faults both the Compatibilists and Incompatibilists
on three counts.
   First, he says that moral responsibility is not all that is at
stake, there are personal feelings, reactive attitudes, problems of
knowledge, and rationalizing punishment with ideas of limited
responsibility.
   Second, these problems can not be resolved by logical “proofs”
nor by linguistic analyses of propositions designed to show “free”
and “determined” are logically compatible.
   And third, he faults their simplistic idea that one or the other of
them must be right.
   Furthermore, unlike some of his colleagues, Honderich does
not completely dismiss indeterminism and considers the sugges-
tion of “near-determinism.” He says,
      “Maybe it should have been called determinism-where-it-mat-
      ters. It allows that there is or may be some indeterminism but
      only at what is called the micro-level of our existence, the level
      of the small particles of our bodies.” 4
  Despite this openness to indeterminism, in his book
On Determinism and Freedom, Honderich has an extensive dis-




                                                                              Chapter 23
cussion of Quantum Theory in which he says
           “Does Quantum Theory as interpreted have some clause,
      hitherto unheard of, that its random events occur only in such
      places as to make us morally responsible in a certain sense? This
      objection of inconsistency, perhaps, is less effective with some
      uncommitted philosophers because they do not really take the
      philosophers of origination seriously. If it really were accepted
      as true that a random event could get in between the question
      and the intention, with great effect, then it would have to be
      accepted that one could get in between the intention and the
      lie, with as much effect. Any attempt to exclude the possibility is
      bound to be fatally ad hoc.” 5

  4       Honderich (2003) p. 5.
  5       Honderich (2005) p. 125.
         282     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Here Honderich puts his finger on the stumbling block that has
               prevented philosophers and scientists from accepting an ampli-
               fied quantum event as the source of indeterminism in a decision.
                  It is highly unlikely that individual quantum events could
               be synchronized and located precisely, near or inside the right
               neurons for example. The “master switch amplifier” concept of
               Arthur Holly Compton seems only to have been offered as a
               source of randomness centered in the second stage of the deci-
               sions themselves.
                  Robert Kane recognized this problem in his early work, when
               he thought he needed a random event precisely at the moment of
               his Self-Forming Actions (SFAs). Today he sees ever-present noise
               in the brain as providing the required indeterminism.
                  Kane described the problem,
                     “We do not know if something similar goes on in the brain of
                     cortically developed creatures like ourselves, but I suspect it
                     must if libertarian theories are to succeed. The main problem
                     is the one addressed by Eccles of locating the master switch
                     and the mechanisms of amplification. We have no substan-
                     tial empirical evidence on these matters (especially regarding
Chapter 23




                     the master switch), merely speculation, and libertarian theo-
                     ries may fail dismally at this juncture. But there is much to be
                     learned yet about the brain; and research exists...suggesting that
                     master switch plus amplifier processes play more roles in the
                     functioning of organisms than was previously supposed.” 6
                  Honderich is right that quantum events do not “occur only in
               such places as to make us morally responsible,” as various free will
               mechanisms have proposed.7 But the “inconsistency” is not with
               the quantum mechanics, just its misapplication by philosophers.
                  In my Cogito model, I depend on the fact that quantum noise
               is ever present. It just normally averages out in macroscopic situ-
               ations. Microscopic situations, like the storage and retrieval of
               information in the neurons of the mind/brain, are much more
               susceptible to noise. Information structures in computers, and in
                 6       Kane (1985) p. 168.
                 7       informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_will_mechanisms.html
                                     Ted Honderich’s Determinism                 283

modern digital media devices like CDs and DVDs, are also sus-
ceptible to random noise. Media devices, and perhaps the brain,
have elaborate error detection and suppression capabilities.
On Determinism
   Honderich has long defended what he calls the “truth” of
determinism. I agree that there must be “adequate determin-
ism” in our choices and actions for us to take moral responsi-
bility. I have tried to convince Honderich that all we lose with
my “adequate determinism” is the truly grand, but unsupport-
able, idea of pre-determinism, namely that every event and all
prior events form a causal chain back to the origin of the universe.
Indeed, in On Determinism and Freedom (p. 6), Honderich calls
for “the truth of a conceptually adequate determinism.” 8
   In some of his earliest thoughts, Honderich wrote in 1973, in
his essay “One Determinism,” that determinism may preclude
responsibility (as David Hume also had feared) ..
         “States of the brain are, in the first place, effects, the effects of
      other physical states. Many states of the brain, secondly, are cor-
      relates. A particular state accompanied my experience the other




                                                                                   Chapter 23
      moment of thinking about having walked a lot on Hampstead
      Heath, and a like state accompanies each like experience: each
      of my experiences of thinking of having walked a lot on Hamp-
      stead Heath. Given our present concern, it is traditional that
      the most important experiences are decidings and choosings.
      Some states of the brain, thirdly, are causes, both of other states
      of the brain and also of certain movements of one’s body. The
      latter are actions. Some are relatively simple while others, such
      as speech acts and bits of ritual, depend on settings of conven-
      tion and have complex histories. Simple or complex, however,
      all actions are movements, or of course stillnesses, caused by
      states of the brain. It follows from these three premisses, about
      states of the brain as effects, as correlates and as causes, that on
      every occasion when we act, we can only act as in fact we do.
      It follows too that we are not responsible for our actions, and,
      what is most fundamental, that we do not possess selves of a
      certain character.” 9
  8       Honderich (2005) p. 6.
  9       Honderich (1973) p. 187.
         284     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Most compatibilists and determinists since Hobbes and Hume
               never mention the fact that a causal chain of events going back
               before our birth would not provide the kind of liberty that com-
               mon sense expects But Hume, like Honderich, frankly admits (in
               a passage rarely quoted by compatibilist philosophers) that such a
               causal chain would be a serious objection to his theory.
                     “I pretend not to have obviated or removed all objections to
                  this theory, with regard to necessity and liberty. I can foresee
                  other objections, derived from topics which have not here been
                  treated of. It may be said, for instance, that, if voluntary actions
                  be subjected to the same laws of necessity with the operations
                  of matter, there is a continued chain of necessary causes, pre-
                  ordained and pre-determined, reaching from the original cause
                  of all to every single volition, of every human creature. No con-
                  tingency anywhere in the universe; no indifference; no liberty.
                  While we act, we are, at the same time, acted upon.” 10
                 To escape this objection, we might imagine that Hume wanted
               some kind of agent-causal freedom in voluntarist acts?
               The Consequences of Determinism
                  Honderich’s great work is the 750-page The Theory of Determin-
Chapter 23




               ism, Oxford, 1988, later broken into two volumes, of which one
               is The Consequences of Determinism. Honderich claims to have
               solved the “problem of the consequences of determinism.”
                  Note that this is not the problem of free will and determinism.
               Honderich believes determinism is true.
                  Rather than discuss the problem of free will directly, or even
               indirectly via the familiar though muddled terms determinism,
               compatibilism, incompatibilism, and libertarianism, Honderich
               introduces new concepts and still more new terminology.
                  In the style of Peter F. Strawson, Honderich’s interest is in
               our feelings and attitudes toward the truth of determinism, as
               what he calls our “life-hopes” are altered by belief in determinism.
                  One hope is that we should be able to originate the actions
               affecting our future life. The truth of determinism, which denies
                 10   Hume (1975) p. 99.
                             Ted Honderich’s Determinism                285

the freedom to originate actions, might give rise to a “sad” attitude
of “dismay.” In this respect, Honderich regards determinism as a
“black thing.” He calls dismay the “sad” attitude toward determin-
ism.
   But we can have another “tough” attitude, that of intransigence,
in that our hope involving belief in “voluntariness” is consistent
with determinism. This kind of voluntarism goes back to Thomas
Hobbes and freedom of action.11 With his term intransigence,
Honderich wants us to resist compromise with ideas like origina-
tion. But he seems to imply that moral responsibility can be rec-
onciled with determinism.
   Finally, Honderich argues that we can choose the attitude of
affirmation rather than intransigence or dismay.
   It might appear that Honderich’s terms dismay and intransi-
gence roughly correlate with the ideas of
     • incompatibilist libertarian free will (involving randomness),
which is denied by determinism, leading to his attitude of dismay
     • compatibilism which is reconciled to determinism, leading
to the attitude of intransigence, (irreconcilable with the “fiction”
of origination)




                                                                          Chapter 23
   But Honderich says he avoids the mistakes of Incompatibil-
ism and Compatibilism. His point of their mistakes is subtle. It
depends on his introduction of the two kinds of “life hopes,” the
one voluntariness alone, the other voluntariness plus origination.
He says:
   “Let us finish here by having clear the relation of affirmation to
   Compatibilism and Incompatibilism. Affirmation differs whol-
   ly from both in that it recognizes the existence of two attitudes
   where Compatibilism and Incompatibilism assert a single con-
   ception and a single connection with moral responsibility and
   the like. Affirmation does involve reliance on a single attitude,
   having to do only with voluntariness, which of course is relat-
   ed to the single conception of initiation which Compatibilists
   assign to us. Affirmation also has to do with the other attitude,
   pertaining also to origination, related to the single conception
  11   informationphilosopher.com/freedom/freedom_of_action.html
         286     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  which Incompatibilists assign to us. It is not much more like
                  Compatibilism than Incompatibilism.” 12
                  The mistake of Incompatibilism appears to be that it assumes
               that determinism destroys moral approval and disapproval. This,
               Honderich says, ignores the tough attitude of intransigence.
                  The mistake of Compatibilism, is to assert that nothing changes
               as a consequence of determinism, when clearly we have lost the
               life-hope of origination. This ignores the sad attitude of dismay.
                  Honderich recapitulates his lengthy argument.
                  “The argument about the consequences of determinism has
                  been a long one, and can usefully be brought into a succinct
                  form.
                  “1.2 All our life-hopes involve thoughts to the effect that we
                  somehow initiate our future actions. Some involve not only
                  beliefs as to voluntariness or willingness but also an idea, or
                  what is more an image, of our originating our future actions.
                  To think of life-hopes of this kind, and their manifest inconsis-
                  tency with determinism, and to accept the likely truth of deter-
                  minism, is to fall into dismay. We are deprived of the hopes.” 13
                  In my Cogito model, our life-hopes are thoughts. They present
Chapter 23




               themselves freely to us in the undetermined first stage of the two-
               stage model. This gives us Honderich’s “origination.”
                  But Honderich makes it clear, and I agree, that some determin-
               ism is needed in, is consistent with, our voluntary actions,
                  “1.3 We also have life-hopes involving only beliefs as to volun-
                  tariness — that we will act not from reluctant desires and inten-
                  tions, but from embraced desires and intentions, that we will act
                  in enabling circumstances rather than frustrating ones. These
                  circumstances have to do with at least the way of my world, the
                  absence of self-frustration, independence of others, and absence
                  of bodily constraint. Thinking of hopes of this kind, and noting
                  the clear consistency of a determinism with them, may issue in
                  intransigence. These life-hopes are not at all significantly threat-
                  ened by determinism.”
                 12   Honderich (1990b) p. 149.
                 13   Honderich (1990b) p. 169.
                              Ted Honderich’s Determinism              287

   In my view, all the determinism that Honderich needs is R. E.
Hobart’s determination (See p. 23).
   P. F. Strawson distinguished treating some persons as auton-
omous participants in our moral universe, from others who are
treated “objectively,” as ruled by deterministic forces. Honderich
feels dismay about the latter, intransigence about the former.
   “1.4 We have appreciative and also resentful feelings about
   others, owed to their actions deriving from good or bad feel-
   ings and judgements about us. Both sorts of personal feelings
   involve assumptions somehow to the effect that others could
   do otherwise than they do. It is natural in one way of thinking
   and feeling to take the assumptions to amount to this: others
   act with knowledge, without internal constraint, in character,
   and in line with personality, not out of abnormality, not be-
   cause of constraint by others. This second one of a set of fun-
   damentally like conceptions of voluntary action, wholly con-
   sistent with determinism, may lead us to make the response
   of intransigence with respect to personal feelings. However,
   we also have other personal feelings, having a certain person-
   directed character and including an assumption as to a power
   or control of their actions by others. The assumption is incon-




                                                                         Chapter 23
   sistent with determinism and may lead to dismay.” 14
  Honderich recognizes that in a deterministic universe our
knowledge claims are suspect. Information philosophy puts the
basis of knowledge on the sounder foundation of information,
in the universe outside us, and isomorphic information in our
brains. But that is the subject of another book.
  Honderich thinks (correctly) that origination is needed to
ground knowledge claims. (See the Free Will Axiom on page 231.)
      “1.5 We accept that our claims to knowledge derive in part
   from beliefs and assumptions to our mental acts and our ordi-
   nary actions, by which we come to have evidence and the like.
   We may take it that originated acts and actions are necessary,
   and, taking them as ruled out by a determinism, suffer a want of
   confidence in our beliefs, a dismay having to do with the pos-
   sibility of a further reality. Inevitably, however, we can have a
  14   Honderich (1990b) p. 169.
         288     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  different kind of confidence, owed only to an assumption as to
                  voluntariness, the possibility of our satisfying our desires for
                  information. Hence intransigence about knowledge. These are
                  facts which the Epicurean tradition of objection to determinism
                  has greatly misconstrued.” 15

               On Consciousness and Radical Externalism
                 Honderich’s study of Mind and Brain, originally the first two
               parts of Theory of Determinism, informs Honderich’s later works
               On Consciousness and Radical Externalism.
                 How do these works reveal Honderich’s perception of the prob-
               lem of the originator, the kind of free will that libertarians are
               looking for?
                 A careful reading of Mind and Brain tells us that Honderich is
               concerned about micro-indeterministic chance being the direct
               cause of action. He calls this the “Postulate of Neural Indetermi-
               nacy,” and generally opposes the idea.
                  “How could an unnecessitated or chance event be something
                  for which the person in question could be censured in the given
                  way?”
Chapter 23




                 (p. 184)
                 He finds
                  “strong and clear support for the proposition that neural se-
                  quences are somehow or in some way causal sequences.”
                 (p. 266)
                  Neurobiologists, and cell biologists before them, have long
               shown that the size of cellular structures is macroscopic enough
               for quantum micro-indeterminism to be irrelevant in the normal
               operations of a cell. We grant this, and it seems as if this is the
               basic evidence for Honderich’s claim of determinism and causality
               in the “Psychoneural Intimacy” of the mind/brain.
                  But there is another level of operations in the mind, the one
               computer scientists and cognitive scientists use to defend the
               “mind as computer” or “machine.” That is the famous analogy of
               the relationship of software to the hardware.
                 15    Honderich (1990b) p. 169-170.
                           Ted Honderich’s Determinism                  289

    The identity theory of mind says that mind and brain are one
thing. Philosophers of mind take a more nuanced view and say
that mind events “supervene” on brain events. There is a one-to-
one correspondence that sounds like Gottfried Leibniz and
Immanuel Kant’s ideas of a parallel noumenal or mental world
in “pre-established harmony” with the physical noumenal world.
    My Cogito model is a purely physical model. But like the cogni-
tive scientists, I see an important distinction between the software,
considered as “pure” information, and the hardware, considered
as embodied information structures.
    The macroscopic neurological brain is storing and retrieving
pure information to serve the mind’s consciousness of its sur-
roundings, to inform its actions and interactions with the world.
    Now we know that there is no such thing as an information
system that can communicate without noise in the system, both
quantum noise and the more common thermal noise. Such noise
is the informational equivalent of those chance microscopic events
in Honderich’s “Postulate of Neural Indeterminacy,” but now the
emphasis must be on the psyche side of Psychoneural intimacy. It
is indeterminacy of thought, not of action.




                                                                          Chapter 23
    Indeterminacy of thought, while not directly causing action,
can influence our choices for action, not by causing them, and
not by changing their probabilities, but simply by becoming
alternative possibilities for action by the adequately determined
will, which also includes determination of our muscular motions
to implement the action.
    We may occasionally exhibit spastic behaviors, but there is
absolutely no evidence, and no need, for actions that are affected
randomly by microscopic quantum uncertainty, despite the fears
of many philosophers of the consequences of admitting some
indeterminism.
    Determinists have been right about the Will, but wrong about
Freedom (or origination).
    Libertarians have been right about Freedom, but wrong about
the Will, which must be as adequately determined as the rest of
our physical selves.
         290     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Consciousness as Existence
                  What does this information in the mind/brain have to do with
               Honderich’s theory of “Consciousness as Existence” or more
               recently “Radical Externalism?” Consciousness is quintessentially
               ideas, including of course our feelings about those ideas, which
               as associationists from Hume’s time thought, are recollections of
               sense experiences.
                  Now small errors or “noise” in our recollections are the stuff of
               “new ideas,” such as we experience when dreaming or half-dream-
               ing, musing about possibilities.
                  Radical Externalism says that:
                     “Consciousness is perceptual, reflective or affective — in brief
                  it has to do with seeing, thinking and wanting. We are as good
                  as never engaged in only one of the sorts of things. There are
                  large problems here. One is the understanding of the mixing
                  and melding of the three parts, kinds, sides or whatever of con-
                  sciousness, of how one contributes to another, even in ordinary
                  seeing and acting.” 16
                  Honderich wants his “perceptual consciousness” to encompass
Chapter 23




               not merely the representation of the world in the mind but a com-
               mitment to the existence of the perceived world. In informational
               terms we say that there is at least a partial isomorphism, a “map-
               ping” of the information stored in our neural systems onto the
               information in the external world that I am seeing.
                     “You are seeing this page. What does that fact come to? What
                  is that state of affairs? The natural answer has a lot in it, about
                  the page as a physical thing, whatever one of those is, and about
                  your retinas and your visual cortex. It also has in it philosophy
                  and science about the relation between a neural process and
                  your consciousness.
                   “So there is more to your seeing the page than your conscious-
                  ness of it.“ 17
                 16   Freeman (2006) p. 6.
                 17   Freeman (2006) p. 3.
                                 Ted Honderich’s Determinism             291

   Honderich seems to agree with the partial isomorphism in his
description of reflective and affective consciousness, which can
have thoughts that correspond not to the real world, but to a mod-
ified world of the imagination, including states of affairs that the
agent has the power to originate, to bring about in an open future.
     “Now a few words about reflective consciousness, say think-
   ing of home, and affective consciousness, say wanting to be
   there or intending to get there.
      “Very briefly, what it seems to be to think of home now is
   for something to exist that has some of the properties of home.
   That is what a representation essentially is — something that
   shares some effects with what is represented.
      “As for wanting to be at home or intending to get there, and
   affective consciousness generally, one essential point is that this
   too is to be understood in terms of the characters of anyone’s
   perceptual and also reflective consciousness.” 18
   Can Honderich see that our affective consciousness is so much
more powerful if it can imagine, if it can freely create, ways of
wanting the world (for example, wanting to be home) that are not
already pre-determined in the one possible future of his intransi-




                                                                           Chapter 23
gence attitude toward the meagre “life-hope” he accepts in volun-
tarism with no origination?
   We can originate, we can create, in the abstract world of infor-
mation, thoughts in our minds about how we want the world to
be. These thoughts can then activate our reflective consciousness,
and stimulate our affective consciousness, helping our delibera-
tions and evaluations of those thoughts, before we act on one of
them.
   In his latest work for the second edition of the Oxford Hand-
book of Free Will, Honderich takes a stand opposing Peter F.
Strawson, who said that he did not understand the problem of
determinism and free will.19 Honderich says,
   “Determinism is not one of those theories filling up the world
   whose truth you cannot be sure about because you cannot be
   sure what the theory is, or what it really comes to. You know
  18   Freeman (2006) pp. 8-9.
  19   Strawson (1962) p. 1.
         292     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   what determinism is. It is even plainer in its essentials than the
                   lovely theory of evolution... So much for the essential content
                   of determinism. Come round as quickly to the question of the
                   truth of the theory—the truth of the proposition that every
                   event, each thing that happens, is a standard effect.” 20
                 But Honderich is unhappy with our current understanding of
               quantum mechanics, that some events are merely probable, not
               necessitated. I call it “soft” causality. It is not that the causative
               event does not exist, but that it itself was only probable. Honderich
               remarks...
                   “about probabilism. It is argued that interpretations of quan-
                   tum mechanics establish, about events of which we are sure
                   that they cause cancer, that these events are undetermined or
                   unnecessitated. So, unless we take causation to be probabilistic,
                   we will have to be agnostic about well-supported or even best
                   supported causal claims. A reply is that there is a less confus-
                   ing and maybe less confused response. If later unnecessitated
                   events are said to be explained by prior events only in some
                   unnecessitating way, then the prior events are not causes and
                   the later events not effects, whatever else is to be said of them in
                   terms of some kind of explanation.
Chapter 23




                   “Probabilism, it seems, despite the great interest, history, and
                   technical competence of work on probability, is the intrusion of
                   a specialism into a subject not explained by it and not in need
                   of it.”
                  Sadly, Honderich is no scientist, not even a philosopher of sci-
               ence. He says he must “navigate around” what he does “not under-
               stand and cannot judge.” But judge he does,
                  “It is my own judgment that modern physics at least does not
               give consistent support to a denial of general determinism.... No
               doubt a little intemperately, I have in the past spoken of the inter-
               pretations of quantum mechanics, and in particular those taken to
               show that the world is indeterministic, as a mess.” 21
                 20    Kane (2011) p. 442.
                 21    Kane (2011) p. 447.
                             Ted Honderich’s Determinism                     293

   Honderich, as always, is keeping up with events in physics. He
mentions Bell’s theorem, and the recent experimental tests (which
confirm quantum mechanics). He says he polled a number of his
colleague philosophers, and found only hesitation on whether the
experiments establish indeterminism.22
   But these philosophers (of science mostly) are still clinging
to the hope (shared originally by John Bell) that Einstein was
right, that quantum reality might be shown to be “local” and that
determinism would be restored.
     I have presented the latest evidence on nonlocality and
entanglement in several web pages.23 I hope that Honderich and
his colleagues will study them closely. I have edited a video presen-
tation by John Bell, shortly before his death in 1990, in which he
confirms that the experimental tests of his theorem show Einstein
to have been quite wrong about his idea of “local” reality. 24

   Honderich himself maintains a website on Determinism and
Freedom, with a selection of important pieces by various thinkers,
and a companion guide to the terminology.25 His website was an
inspiration for my own.




                                                                               Chapter 23




  22   Kane (2011) p. 456.
  23   See informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/Bells_Theorem/
  24   See youtube.com/watch?v=V8CCfOD1iu8 or search YouTube for John Bell
  25   http://www.ucl.ac.uk/~uctytho/dfwTerminology.html
         294       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                 m inis        m
                                        De t e r

                                                          a t i b i lism
                                                 C    omp      r min   m   is
                                 i n ism                 e t e
                    De   t e r m                  Soft D
             Hard
                                                                       pati      bilism
                                                              ft C o m
                                                          So
                        patibil
                                ism
                                              a n e     ’s
 H a r d I ncom
                                    b e r t K            m
                                                                                          Inc
                                 Ro tSaemriicaomnis
                                                 p a t i b ilism


     Illusio
             n     ism           Liber                      sm       ili
                                                           m patib
Chapter 24




                                                     n c o
                                           Nar row I
               o s s i b ilism
      Im     p                                                             ism
                                                            m p a tibil
                                                   ft Inc o
                                                 So                                       yI
                         M  odel                                                  Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                       p a tibilism             (Altern
                                                                                           a
                                                        m
                                       o u r c e Inco uence)
                                     S               l Seq
                                        (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                      This chapter on the web
                      informationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/kane
                         m i n i s m
                   deter
                                                                     Robert Kane             295
              In
              Robert Kane’s Libertarianism
                              nism     ar        ia
                                Libert
                Robert Kane is the acknowledged dean of the libertarian
            philosophers actively writing on the free will problem. In the
                                                                                - C      sal
                                                                                     aufirst
            half of the twentieth century, many Anglo-American             n  t
                                                                   Agephilosophers
            had largely dismissed libertarian
                                        a u s a l free will as a “pseudo-problem.”
                In addition,nwhen
                       E  v  e     t-C Kane began work in the 1960’s, most
            philosophers and scientists thought free will was compatible with
            determinism, or perhaps impossible because of determinism.
                                                                                 n  - C a usal
                Kane developed the Aristotelian view that even ifNmost        o of our
            actions are determined entirely
                                             S F  Aby our character, these actions
         t i b i l i s m
            can be free if we at times in the past freely created our own

co   mpa    character (and if we remain free to change it) with a
            “Self-Forming Actions” (SFAs).                oft C    a u s     lityhe calls
                                                                          what
                                                        S
                Kane’s model for free will is designed to provide an agent with
                        a
            what hepcalls      ilism Responsibility (UR), based on his idea ofism
                          tibUltimate
      a d I n
            the
                    m
               coSelf-Forming Action.                                       e  r t a r ian
  Bro                                                                  ib
                                                                  ft Lwill
                Kane’s importance in the history of the      Sofree           problem is

                             a r i a n ism
            fourfold. First, his event-causal         free will model has in recent
                                                                                                a tion
                       e r t                                                                i n

                                                                                                  Chapter 24
                  Lib which other models are compared. Second,
            years been
             st against
                          the   libertarian  model     most  often discussed,
                                                                                     er
                                                                                   and   m
                                                                                        the
                                                                                 etprolific
   M o  d e one
                                                                   S e l f - Dhis
            writing has produced several important books on free will and
            ethics. His editing has C       ogusitoa free will anthology and the mas-
                                         given
         a t i b
            sive   ism Handbook of Free Will. Thirdly, he has mentored many
                 ilOxford
       p
Incom uofethe      c es) participants in the free will debates.
                    current
                                                                                n is           m
                 n
       eq But for me, the fourth reason that Kane is critically important r m i
tive S is because
                                               e d In                dete
                                             t
                         he is one of the very few thinkers to find a place for
                                           i
                                    nd Lim
            quantum indeterminacy in a free-will model. Most all other

             ism                 a
            thinkers can see no way that quantum events can make a coherent
     r m i n
Dete
            and intelligible contribution to human freedom. Kane continues
            to look for ways that quantum randomness contributes. Today he
            does not look to individual quantum events affecting individual
            decisions, but the general quantum and thermal noise in the brain
            as providing the needed indeterminacy at all times.
         296     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  I want to look closely in this chapter at Kane’s work over the
               years, to see how his idea of Self-Forming Action (SFAs) and Ulti-
               mate Responsibility (UR) has evolved and how I believe that SFAs
               can now be integrated into my two-stage model of free will.
                  Kane has always maintained that two-stage models of the kind
               proposed by Karl Popper and Daniel Dennett were an impor-
               tant “part of the puzzle” of free will. For me, two-stage models are
               the central element. In my view, Kane’s Self-Forming Actions add
               another“free” element to human decisions, and I will try below to
               show how I understand the way in which they are involved in the
               formation of one’s character.
                  As we shall see, Kane regards my two-stage Cogito model of
               free will as “determined,” because once the last of the alternative
               possibilities is generated, the agent’s choice is, and Kane and I
               agree on this, adequately determined, by the agent’s character
               and values, beliefs and desires, etc. See Chapter 13 for details on
               my Cogito model, especially Figure 13-6.
                  Kane now agrees that decisions in my model are not pre-
               determined by the laws of nature or the fixed past before delib-
               erations begin. So, looking at the overall decision process, which
               involves some time between the starting circumstances and the
Chapter 24




               final action resulting from a decision, Kane and I agree that my
               two-stage model is as free from the many forms of determinism
               as any model of libertarian free will needs to be.
                  And I argue that my two-stage decisions are as good a candi-
               date for assigning responsibility as Kane’s Ultimate Responsibility
               (UR), which he traces back in time to the remote past when one of
               his free Self-Forming Actions added to an agent’s character.
                  To be sure, many of our decisions that are not adequately
               determined by character and value, by motives and reasons, may
               well be decided indeterministically. These are related to decisions
               that the ancients described as the “liberty of indifference” (liberum
               arbitrium indifferentiae). But Kane’s SFAs are not “arbitrary” in the
               sense that there are no good reasons to choose. Unlike the liberty
               of indifference, there are equally good and important reasons on
               both (or all) sides. I call them undetermined liberties.
                                  Robert Kane’s Libertarianism             297

   In a Self-Forming Action, an agent chooses between two (or
more) equally justifiable actions, each with excellent reasons, so
that the agent can take responsibility for either choice.
   In this kind of choice, Kane has cleverly defeated the common
objection made against indeterministic libertarian free will, that
if chance is involved, the agent has no control and thus cannot
be responsible for the action. I agree that Kane’s agent can claim
ultimate responsibility either way in an SFA, and the reduction in
control is more than offset by the gain in freedom, as we shall see.
   In his book Libertarian Accounts of Free Will, Randolph
Clarke criticized Kane’s ultimacy as
      “wholly negative: it is just a matter of the absence of any deter-
      mining cause of a directly free action. The active control that is
      exercised on such a view is just the same as that exercised on an
      event-causal compatibilist account.” 1
   Clarke says that Kane’s model provides no more control than
the compatibilist view, that is to say, no control at all. This is
wrong. The agent has control over which actions are considered
in an SFA.
Kane’s Libertarian Free Will Model


                                                                             Chapter 24
   Perhaps Kane’s most original contribution to the free-will
debates are his examples of decisions that are indeterministic, but
for which the agent can properly claim moral responsibility.
   Chance as the direct cause of an action compromises agent con-
trol and therefore any responsibility. But in the case of what Kane
calls a “torn decision,” the agent may have excellent reasons for
choosing “either way.” In such a case, the agent can choose inde-
terministically, yet properly take responsibility for either option.
Kane calls this “dual (or plural) rational control.”
   In the normal case of self-determination in the two-stage
model, the second (“will”) stage arrives at the best choice based
on the complex set of the agent’s character and values, reasons and
motives, feelings and desires.
  1       Clarke (2003) p. 220.
         298     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  But there are times when the two-stage model does not nar-
               row down the alternatives to a single choice. In such cases, and
               especially where the decisions are “torn” and involve moral or
               prudential considerations, Kane says that in these cases the agent
               must exert an effort to make a decision, indeed must make dual or
               plural efforts in defense of each option.
                  The role of indeterminacy is to reduce the likelihood of some
               options, making them fail, but for the option that does succeed, it
               is not the indeterminism that deserves credit as the cause of suc-
               cess, but the efforts of the agent.
                  This type of torn decision is made in the Self-Forming Actions
               (SFAs) that form the basis for an agent’s “ultimate responsibility”
               (UR). By ultimate responsibility Kane means that the sources or
               origins of our actions lie “in us” rather than in something else
               (such as decrees of fate, foreordained acts of God, or antecedent
               causes and laws of nature) which are outside us and beyond our
               control.
                  Aristotle and Epicurus said that decisions “in us” or that
               “depend on us” are a tertium quid, or third thing, that is neither
               chance nor necessity.
                  Kane at first argued that having alternative possibilities for ac-
Chapter 24




               tion (he calls them AP) is not enough to establish free will. It is
               ultimate responsibility (UR), he says, that is required for free will.
               Ultimate responsibility requires that some of our actions are self-
               forming actions (SFAs). In turn, our self-forming actions require
               plural rational control in our decisions. And it is the plural ratio-
               nal control that requires alternative possibilities (AP).
                  Much of Kane’s work has been to establish the role of quantum
               indeterminacy in making at least some of our actions undeter-
               mined. Let’s look at Kane’s major works over the past four decades
               to understand the development of his free will model.
               Free Will and Values
                 In his 1985 book Free Will and Values, Kane considered the
               two-stage models of Karl Popper (as described by Popper in
                                 Robert Kane’s Libertarianism              299

his 1965 Arthur Holly Compton memorial lecture, “Of Clouds
and Clocks”), and Daniel Dennett (as presented in Dennett’s
1978 book Brainstorms, especially the chapter, “On Giving Liber-
tarians What They Say They Want”).
   To produce quantum indeterminacy, Kane initially proposed
an ambitious amplifier model for a quantum randomizer in the
brain - a spinning wheel of fortune with probability bubbles
corresponding to alternative possibilities, in the massive switch
amplifier (MSA) tradition of Compton.
   Kane imagines a specific mechanism for incorporating the
indeterminacy. This work is squarely in the tradition of several
other brain mechanisms proposed to underlie freedom of the will
(these all are described in detail on the I-Phi website).2
       • James Clerk Maxwell’s “Singularities” (1856)
       • Arthur Stanley Eddington’s “Free Electrons” (1928)
       • Arthur Holly Compton’s Photocell Amplifier (1931)
        • John Eccles’ “Critically Poised Neurons” (1953)
        • A. O. Gomes’ Quantum Composer (1964)
   Kane says:
      “What I would like to do then, is to show how an MSA [mas-




                                                                             Chapter 24
      sive switch amplifier] model, using Eccles’ notion of critically
      poised neurons as a working hypothesis, might be adapted to
      the theory of practical, moral and prudential decision making.
      “Keeping these points in mind, let us now suppose that there
      are neurons in the brain “critically poised” in Eccles’ sense,
      whose probability of firing within a small interval of time is .5.
      (We shall tamper with this simplifying assumption in a mo-
      ment.) For every n such neurons, there are 2n possible ordered
      combinations of firings and non-firings, which may be repre-
      sented by sequences, such as (101... ), (01101... ), where the “1”
      ‘s indicate firings, the “0” ‘s non-firings, and the dots indicate
      that the sequences are continued with “0” ‘s up to n figures. A
      reasonably small number of such neurons, say a dozen, would
      yield ordered combinations, in the thousands, enough for the
  2       informationphilosopher.com/freedom/mechanisms.html
         300   Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   purposes of the theory. As indicated in 8.4, the
                   exact number of possible alternatives or parti-
                   tionings does not matter so long as it is large; it
                   would likely depend on the exigencies of neuro-
                   logical programming rather than the demands of
                   the theory.
                   “For practical choice, these ordered combinations
                   of firings and non-firings of critically poised neu-
                   rons would correspond to places on a spinning
                   wheel, most of which would give rise to chance
                   selected considerations, opening doors to consciousness of pos-
                   sibly relevant memories, triggering associations of ideas and/or
                   images, focussing attention in various ways, etc. Some combi-
                   nations of firings and non-firings might draw a blank. But the
                   wheel would keep spinning until it hit something worth consid-
                   ering, so long as the practical reasoner or creative thinker were
                   in a receptive, yet reflective, state of mind. Then the relevance of
                   the consideration to deliberation would have to be assessed and
                   the consideration either accepted or rejected.” 3
               Kane introduces his mechanism as a probability bubble.
                   “One might think of this as a picture of an air bubble in a glass
                   tube filled with a liquid, with the lines A and B marked on the
Chapter 24




                   outside of the glass as on an ordinary carpenter’s level. But this
                   description is merely an aid to the imagination. We are going to
                   give the bubble some extraordinary properties. The bubble may
                   represent either the desire to choose to act from duty (out of
                   equal respect) or the effort made to realize this desire in choice.
                   The respective desire and effort are conceptually related because
                   the desire is defined as the disposition to make the effort; and
                   the intensity of the desire is measured by the intensity of the
                   effort. The lines A and B in the figure represent choice thresh-
                   olds. If the bubble passes above the line A, the choice is made to
                   act from duty; if it passes below B, the choice is made to act on
                   self interested motives. When the bubble is between the lines,
                   as in the figure, no choice has yet been made. A downward pull
                   of gravity in the figure may be thought to represent the natural
                   pull of one’s self interested motives, which must be counteracted
                   by an effort to resist temptation.”

               3       Kane (1985) p. 169
                                     Robert Kane’s Libertarianism            301

  Kane’s example of SFAs involves moral choices between a
Kantian deontological duty and motives of self interest.
      “There is an ambiguity, essential to our problem, about what
      it means to say that the bubble “passes above” the line A, or
      “below” the line B. If the bubble passes above A, or below B,
      then the choice is made to act from duty, or from self interest,
      respectively.
      “To complicate matters further, we want to as-
      sume that the bubble or probability space does
      not have an exact position vis a vis the thresh-
      olds at any given time and that this inexact-
      ness of position is also due to the undeter-
      mined movement of the point particle in the
      regions. There are a number of ways to repre-
      sent this in the diagram, but the simplest way
      is the following. Imagine, as in the following
      figure, that the choice thresholds A and B have
      indeterminate position so that they can be anywhere between
      (or on) the extremes A’-A” and B’-B” respectively:
      “The distances between any two possible threshold positions
      for A (or any two for B) are equal and each possible thresh-
      old position corresponds to a region in the bubble such that, if



                                                                               Chapter 24
      the point particle is in that region, the threshold is at the corre-
      sponding position. But adjacent regions in the bubble need not
      correspond to adjacent positions of the thresholds and higher
      or lower regions of the bubble need not correspond to higher
      and lower threshold positions respectively.
      “What all this means is that the intensity of the effort to over-
      come temptation at any given time, which is measure of the in-
      tensity of the desire to act from duty (represented by the posi-
      tion of the bubble vis a vis the thresholds and the position of
      the point particle within the bubble) is indeterminate. And, as
      a consequence, the outcome of the choice situation at a given
      time is undetermined and unpredictable as long as the bubble is
      not wholly above A’ or wholly below B”. 4

  4       Kane (1985) pp. 144-146.
         302     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  To summarize his 1985 book, Free Will and Values, Kane
               described two-stage models as a “significant piece in the overall
               puzzle of a libertarian freedom.” 5 But he thought them limited
               to practical decision making, and not suitable for moral decision
               making, which require his dual rational control and chance in the
               decision itself to provide “ultimate responsibility” (UR).
                  Given the random alternative possibilities in the first stage of
               the model, Kane thought that an agent would be determined in
               the second stage to choose the best available option.
                   But I have pointed out to Kane, and he agrees, that the agent
               would not be pre-determined, even from moments just before
               deliberations began. As John Locke noted, the will itself can be
               determined, it need not itself be free in the sense of random. It is
               the man that is free, not the will, said Locke. 6
                  Kane’s model is also “restrictive,” a term coined by John Martin
               Fischer to describe Peter van Inwagen’s claim that only a tiny
               fraction of our decisions and actions can properly be called free
               actions. For van Inwagen, it is those which have closely balanced
               alternatives (the ancient problem of the liberty of indifference).
                  Kane disagreed with van Inwagen on the frequency of free
               decisions. For Kane, they are not rare but quite common. They
Chapter 24




               include not only the “torn” moral and prudential decisions but
               many everyday practical decisions.
                  In this early work, Kane was not completely satisfied with his
               solution. He explained that the main reason for failure is
                     “locating the master switch and the mechanism of amplifica-
                     tion...We do not know if something similar goes on in the brains
                     of cortically developed creatures like ourselves, but I suspect it
                     must if libertarian theories are to succeed.” 7
                 We shall see that in later work, Kane sees the source of indeter-
               minism as the general noise that is ever-present in the brain, as in
               any information processing system.


                 5       ibid., p. 104.
                 6       Locke (1959) p. 323.
                 7       Kane (1985) p. 168.
                               Robert Kane’s Libertarianism               303


Doing Otherwise in the Same Circumstances
   Kane claims he needs quantum indeterminacy because the
major criticism of all libertarian models is how they explain the
power to choose or do otherwise in “exactly the same conditions.”
He calls this “dual rational (or voluntary) self-control.” Given that
A was the rational choice, how can one defend doing B under
exactly the same circumstances?” 8 Kane himself was concerned
that such a “dual power” could be seen as arbitrary, capricious,
and irrational. Critics of Kane’s theory, Randolph Clarke and
Richard Double, for example, focus on this concern.
   Apart from the fact that information-rich systems with a his-
tory are never in the exact same conditions, and ignoring the fact
that random alternative possibilities are unlikely to repeat, an
adequately determined will would indeed very likely make the
same choice, for the same reasons, from the same set of alternative
possibilities. It might even exercise its irrational prerogative! We
humans are unpredictable, which makes us occasionally capri-
cious and arbitrary. While this is possible, and amounts to a kind
of freedom, Kane wants the freedom without the irrationality.
The Significance of Free Will


                                                                            Chapter 24
  In his 1995 book The Significance of Free Will, Kane again in-
vokes quantum events in the brain at the moment of decision:
    “We now turn to the second part of an answer to the question
    of how prior reasons or motives can explain the effort to resist
    temptation without also explaining the choice that terminates
    the effort. We must now look at this “effort of will” (to resist
    moral or prudential temptation) that intervenes between prior
    reasons or motives, on the one hand, and the resulting choice,
    on the other.
       “T24 (on FW): Let its suppose that the effort of will (to resist
    temptation) in moral and prudential choice situations of T22
    and T23 is (an) indeterminate (event or process), thereby mak-
    ing the choice that terminates it undetermined.

8        Kane (1985) p. 59.
         304          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  “Consider a quantum analogue. Imagine an isolated particle,
                  such as an electron, moving toward a thin atomic barrier.
                  Whether or not the particle will penetrate the barrier is unde-
                  termined. There is a probability that it will penetrate, but not
                  a certainty, because its position and momentum are not both
                  determinate as it moves toward the barrier. Imagine that the
                  choice (to overcome temptation) is like the penetration event.
                  The choice one way or the other is undetermined because the
                  process preceding it and potentially terminating in it (i.e., the
                  effort of will to overcome temptation) is indeterminate.” 9
                  Kane’s approach here was similar to Arthur Stanley Eddington’s
               in 1928 - making an analogy between human freedom and “free”
               electrons. Kane did not think that was enough and then added
               chaos to amplify the microscopic quantum indeterminacy up to
               the macroscopic neurons.
                  “But this quantum analogy is merely that — an analogy. Our ef-
                  forts of will most likely correspond to complex processes in our
                  brains that are macro processes involving many neuron firings
                  and connections. Since we know that the effects of quantum
                  level fluctuations are usually negligible at the macro level, how
                  can these efforts be indeterminate? One way to begin thinking
                  about this issue is to imagine that the neural processes occur-
Chapter 24




                  ring when the efforts are being made are chaotic processes, in
                  the sense of what is nowadays called “chaos theory.” In chaotic
                  systems, very minute changes in initial conditions grow expo-
                  nentially into large differences in final outcome, a phenomenon
                  called “sensitivity to initial conditions.”
                  “But chaotic behavior, though unpredictable, is not necessarily
                  indeterministic. In fact, chaos theory has shown that one can
                  have determinism without predictability. Yet chaos theory may
                  nonetheless be significant for discussions of human freedom, if
                  quantum indeterminacy is also brought into the picture.” 10
                  Kane described the tension during “torn” decisions as stirring
               up deterministic chaos. He makes the deterministic chaos sensi-
               tive to quantum indeterminacy at the neuronal level (in a way re-
               sembling John Eccles’ ideas about “critically poised neurons.”).
                 9      Kane (1995) p. 128.
                 10     Kane (1995) p. 129.
                             Robert Kane’s Libertarianism              305

          “T25 (on FW): Imagine that the indeterminate efforts of
   will of T24 are complex chaotic processes in the brain, involving
   neural networks that are globally sensitive to quantum indeter-
   minacies at the neuronal level. Persons experience these com-
   plex processes phenomenologically as “efforts of will” they are
   making to resist temptation in moral and prudential situations.
   The efforts are provoked by the competing motives and con-
   flicts within the wills of the persons described in T22 and T23.
   These conflicts create tensions that are reflected in appropriate
   regions of the brain by movement further from thermodynamic
   equilibrium, which increases the sensitivity to micro indeter-
   minacies at the neuronal level and magnifies the indetermina-
   cies throughout the complex macro process which, taken as a
   whole, is the agent’s effort of will.
         “T26 (on FW): In effect, conflicts of will of the kinds de-
   scribed in T22 and 23 stir up chaos in the brain and make the
   agents’ thought processes more sensitive to undetermined influ-
   ences. The result is that, in soul-searching moments moral and
   prudential struggle, when agents are torn between conflicting
   visions of what they should become (that is, on the occasions
   of self-forming willings, or SFWs), the outcomes are influenced
   by, but not determined by, past motives and character. The
   uncertainty and inner tension that agents feel at such moments



                                                                         Chapter 24
   are reflected in the indeterminacy of their neural processes.” 11

A Contemporary Introduction to Free Will
   In 2005, Kane wrote a perceptive analysis of a two-stage solu-
tion for free will like our Cogito mind model and the suggestions
of Arthur Holly Compton, Karl Popper, Daniel Dennett,
and Alfred Mele.
   “The final libertarian theory I want to consider in this chap-
   ter takes a very different approach to explaining libertar-
   ian free choices. This view rejects both simple indetermin-
   ism and agent-causation. Instead it focuses on the process of
   deliberation. When we deliberate, for example, about where to
   vacation or which law firm to join, many different thoughts,
  11   Kane (1995) p. 130.
         306          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  images, feelings, memories, imagined scenarios, and other con-
                  siderations pass through our minds. Deliberation can be quite a
                  complex process. When Mike thinks about Hawaii, he pictures
                  himself surfing, walking on sunny beaches, eating in his favorite
                  Hawaiian restaurants; and these various thoughts incline him
                  to choose Hawaii. But he also thinks about skiing, sitting by a
                  fireplace after a long day on the slopes, and visiting with friends
                  he knows in Colorado; and he leans toward Colorado. Back
                  and forth he goes, until after a period of time considerations on
                  one side outweigh the others and he finally chooses one option.
                  (Unless, of course he is one of those indecisive types who finds
                  it hard to make up his mind.)” 12
                  Note that in Kane’s first stage he describes our free thoughts as
               ‘coming to mind,’ like William James’ “present themselves.”
                  “In the course of such deliberations — which may sometimes
                  take hours or days and may be interrupted by daily activities
                  — new thoughts, memories or images can often come to mind
                  that influence our deliberations. Mike may suddenly remember
                  a lively nightclub he visited in Honolulu when he was last there
                  — great music, great girls — and the idea of going back to this
                  place gives him an added reason to favor Hawaii, a reason that
                  hadn’t previously entered his deliberation. Other images that
Chapter 24




                  flit through his mind may turn him against Hawaii. Imagining
                  himself out on the beach all day, suddenly he remembers his
                  doctor’s warning about not getting too much sun if he wants to
                  avoid skin cancer.
                  “Now one could imagine that some of these various thoughts,
                  memories, and imagined scenarios that come to mind during
                  our deliberations are undetermined and arise by chance and
                  that some of these ‘chance selected considerations’ might make
                  a difference in how we decide. If this were to happen in Mike’s
                  case, the course of his deliberation, hence his choice, would be
                  undetermined and unpredictable. A Laplacian demon could not
                  know in advance which way Mike would go, even if the demon
                  knew all the facts about the universe prior to Mike’s deliberation,
                  for these facts would not determine the outcome.” 13

                 12     Kane (2005) p. 64.
                 13     Kane (2005) p. 64.
                              Robert Kane’s Libertarianism                 307

   In Kane’s second stage, choices result from rational evaluations
of the alternative possibilities that have come in part by chance
   “Yet Mike would still have control over his choice in a certain
   sense. He could not control all the thoughts and imagined sce-
   narios that come to mind by chance. But he would be in con-
   trol of how he reacted to those thoughts and imaginings once
   they did occur. And his choice of Hawaii in the end would be
   perfectly rational, not arbitrary, if the weight of all the consider-
   ations that did come to mind (some of them by chance) weighed
   in favor of Hawaii. In this way, choices could thus be controlled
   and rational even though indeterminism was involved in the
   deliberations leading up to them.” 14
   Kane calls this “causal indeterminism” or “event-causal liber-
tarianism.” It is, like my Cogito, a two-stage model, first “free”
thoughts, then “willed” actions. But, like Daniel Dennett and
Alfred Mele, Kane did not at that time endorse this view.
   “A view of this kind is called causal indeterminism or event–
   causal libertarianism, for it allows that our thoughts, images,
   memories, beliefs, desires, and other reasons may be causes of
   our choices or actions without necessarily determining choices
   and actions; and yet this view does not postulate any extra kind
   of agent-causation either. Two philosophers who have suggest-



                                                                             Chapter 24
   ed causal indeterminist views of this kind (without endorsing
   them), Daniel Dennett and Alfred Mele, argue that a view of
   this kind would give libertarians at least some of the important
   things they demand about free will. Such a view, for example,
   provides for an “open future,” such as we think we have when we
   exercise free will. We would not have to think that our choices
   and the future direction of our lives had somehow been decided
   long before we were born. Nor would it be possible for behav-
   ioral engineers to completely control our behavior as in Walden
   Two or for Laplacian demons to know what we were going to
   do, if chance considerations might enter our deliberations.” 15
   It is unfortunate that Kane did not accept Dennett’s 1978 ideas
for “giving libertarians what they want.” 16 He might have recon-
ciled many libertarians and compatibilists.
  14   Kane (2005) pp. 64-5.
  15   Kane (2005) p. 65.
  16   See Chapter 27, What If - Kane had accepted Dennett’s ideas?
         308          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Instead, Kane focused on the “something more” - indeterminism
               in the decision itself - so that our actions are not determined by
               our prior deliberations and alternative possibilities, however
               much these are our own creations, and our own reasons.
                  “Yet, as Dennett and Mele also admit, a causal indeterminist
                  view of this deliberative kind does not give us everything lib-
                  ertarians have wanted from free will. For Mike does not have
                  complete control over what chance images and other thoughts
                  enter his mind or influence his deliberation. They simply come
                  as they please. Mike does have some control after the chance
                  considerations have occurred.” 17
                  The evaluation of alternative possibilities is of course only
               adequately determined, but this is real control, and Kane was
               still concerned that control in the second stage implied an unac-
               ceptable determinism.
                  “But then there is no more chance involved. What happens
                  from then on, how he reacts, is determined by desires and beliefs
                  he already has. So it appears that he does not have control in
                  the libertarian sense of what happens after the chance consider-
                  ations occur as well. Libertarians require more than this for full
                  responsibility and free will. What they would need for free will
Chapter 24




                  is for the agent to be able to control which of the chance events
                  occur rather than merely reacting to them in a determined way
                  once they have occurred.
                  “Yet, as Mele points out, while this causal indeterminist view
                  does not give us all the control and responsibility that libertar-
                  ians have wanted, it does give us many of the things they crave
                  about free will (an open future, a break in the causal order, etc.).
                  And it is clearly a possible view. Perhaps it could be further
                  developed to give us more; or perhaps this is as much as liber-
                  tarians can hope for.” 18
                  Kane seems to want his freedom both ways. He wants the agent
               to “control which of the chance events occur” and he also wants
               chance to be involved at the later decision stage to prevent its be-
                 17     Kane (2005) p. 65.
                 18     Kane (2005) p. 65.
                               Robert Kane’s Libertarianism                  309

ing controlled by the agent or “determined by desires and beliefs
he already has.”
   In my two-stage Cogito model, the main place for chance is in
the first stage, where alternative possibilities are generated. And
control is only needed in the second stage, where decisions and
choices are adequately determined by the agent’s character and
values, beliefs and desires.
   Kane gets his “something more” by adding indeterminism to
“torn” decisions, to produce what he calls “dual (or plural) rational
control” over our actions, allowing us to choose different options,
while still taking responsibility for the indeterministic choice.
   “When we wonder about whether agents have freedom of will
   (rather than merely freedom of action), what interests us is not
   merely whether they could have done otherwise, even if the
   doing otherwise is undetermined, but whether they could have
   done otherwise voluntarily (or willingly), intentionally, and
   rationally. Or, more generally, we are interested in whether they
   could have acted in more than one way voluntarily, intention-
   ally, and rationally, rather than only in one way voluntarily, and
   so on, and in other ways merely by accident or mistake, unin-
   tentionally or irrationally. 19




                                                                               Chapter 24
   Kane appreciates that our thoughts “come to us” unbidden, we
cannot control them, at least sometimes. We do have control, in
the second stage, which insures that our actions “come from us.”
Our willed actions “depend on us,” as Aristotle required.
   Kane offers an illustrated version of the standard argument
against free will. He describes the usual determinism and random-
ness objections (the two horns of the Libertarian Dilemma) as the
ascent and descent of what he calls “Incompatibilism Mountain.” 20
   The ascent problem is to show free will is incompatible with de-
terminism. The descent problem is to show that free will is compat-
ible with indeterminism. In earlier works Kane described ascent
as “the compatibility question” and descent as “the intelligibility
problem.”
  19   Kane (2005) p. 128.
  20   See the discussion of Incompatibilist Mountain in Chapter 4, p. 44.
         310          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 This is similar to what I do in a critical analysis of the standard
               argument against free will, in my two-stage model for free will,
               and in the two-fold requirements for free will.
                 Free will is incompatible with strict causal determinism,
               but it actually requires an adequate determinism for moral
               responsibility. And free will is compatible with an indetermin-
               ism that generates alternative possibilities without making
               chance the direct cause of actions. Finally, I agree that indeter-
               minism can play a positive role in Kane’s “torn” decisions.
               Four Views on Free Will
                  In a recent work (Four Views on Free Will, 2007), Kane defends
               his libertarian free-will model and again suggests that his Self-
               Forming Actions might involve a tension and uncertainty in our
               minds that stirs up a deterministic “chaos” which is sensitive to
               micro-indeterminacies at the neuronal level.
                  “All free acts do not have to be undetermined on the libertar-
                  ian view, but only those acts by which we made ourselves into
                  the kinds of persons we are, namely the “will-setting” or “self-
                  forming actions” (SFAs) that are required for ultimate respon-
                  sibility.” 21
Chapter 24




                  “Now I believe these undetermined self-forming actions or SFAs
                  occur at those difficult times of life when we are torn between
                  competing visions of what we should do or become. Perhaps we
                  are torn between doing the moral thing or acting from ambi-
                  tion, or between powerful present desires and long-term goals,
                  or we are faced with difficult tasks for which we have aversions.”
                  Note that SFAs are similar in some respects to cases of the
               classical “liberty of indifference,” where the choice can go either
               way. I call these undetermined liberties.
                  “In all such cases, we are faced with competing motivations and
                  have to make an effort to overcome temptation to do something
                  else we also strongly want. There is tension and uncertainty

                 21     Kane (2007) p. 26.
                            Robert Kane’s Libertarianism                311

   in our minds about what to do at such times, I suggest, that
   is reflected in appropriate regions of our brains by movement
   away from thermodynamic equilibrium — in short, a kind
   of ‘stirring up of chaos’ in the brain that makes it sensitive to
   micro-indeterminacies at the neuronal level. The uncertainty
   and inner tension we feel at such soul-searching moments of
   self-formation is thus reflected in the indeterminacy of our
   neural processes themselves. What we experience internally
   as uncertainty about what to do on such occasions would then
   correspond physically to the opening of a window of oppor-
   tunity that temporarily screens off complete determination by
   influences of the past.” 22
   “When we do decide under such conditions of uncertainty, the
   outcome would not be determined because of the preceding
   indeterminacy — and yet the outcome can be willed (and hence
   rational and voluntary) either way owing to the fact that in such
   self-formation, the agents’ prior wills are divided by conflicting
   motives.” 23
    “Now let us add a further piece to the puzzle. Just as indeter-
   minism need not undermine rationality and voluntariness of
   choices, so indeterminism in and of itself need not undermine
   control and responsibility. Suppose you are trying to think




                                                                          Chapter 24
   through a difficult problem, say a mathematical problem, and
   there is some indeterminacy in your neural processes compli-
   cating the task — a kind of chaotic background.” 24
   Henri Poincaré said chance led to alternative possibilities
for the solutions of mathematical problems..
    “It would be like trying to concentrate and solve a problem, say
   a mathematical problem, with background noise or distraction.
   Whether you are going to succeed in solving the problem is
   uncertain and undetermined because of the distracting neural
   noise. Yet, if you concentrate and solve the problem nonethe-
   less, we have reason to say you did it and are responsible for it,
   even though it was undetermined whether you would succeed.
   The indeterministic noise would have been an obstacle that you
   overcame by your effort.” 25
  22   ibid.
  23   Kane (2007) p. 26.
  24   ibid. p. 27.
  25   ibid.
         312          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Kane says that the indeterminism arising from a tension-
               creating conflict in the will
                  “would be reflected in appropriate regions of the brain by
                  movement away from thermodynamic equilibrium. The result
                  would be a stirring up of chaos in the neural networks involved.
                  Chaos in physical systems is a phenomenon in which very small
                  changes in initial conditions are magnified so that they lead to
                  large and unpredictable changes in the subsequent behavior of
                  a system.” 26
                  “Now determinists are quick to point out that chaos, or chaotic
                  behavior, in physical systems, though unpredictable, is usually
                  deterministic and does not itself imply genuine indeterminism
                  in nature. But some scientists have suggested that a combina-
                  tion of chaos and quantum physics might provide the genuine
                  indeterminism one needs. If the processing of the brain does
                  ‘make chaos in order to make sense of the world’ (as one recent
                  research paper puts it), then the resulting chaos might magnify
                  quantum indeterminacies in the firings of individual neurons
                  so that they would have large-scale indeterministic effects on
                  the activity of neural networks in the brain as a whole. If cha-
                  otic behavior were thus enhanced in these neural networks by
                  tension-creating conflict in the will, the result would be some
Chapter 24




                  significant indeterminism in the cognitive processing of each of
                  the competing neural networks.” 27
                      “’indeterminism’ is a technical term that merely rules out
                  deterministic causation, though not causation altogether. Inde-
                  terminism is consistent with nondeterministic or probabilistic
                  causation, where the outcome is not inevitable. It is therefore
                  a mistake (in fact, one of the most common in debates about
                  free will) to assume that ‘undetermined’ means ‘uncaused’ or
                  ‘merely a matter of chance.”’ 28
                  I agree with Kane that something that is probabilistically caused
               is still caused, but it is not a mistake to say that is a ‘matter of
               chance.” It is an undetermined liberty.
                 26     ibid.
                 27     Kane (2007) p. 28.
                 28     ibid. p. 31.
                             Robert Kane’s Libertarianism                313

  Kane wants to reconcile the role of chance in his Self-Forming
Actions, by emphasizing the fact is that it is not mere chance that
gets credit for the final choice between alternative possibilities.
      “If indeterminism is involved in a process so that its out-
   come is undetermined, one might argue that the outcome must
   merely happen and therefore cannot be somebody’s choice. But
   there is no reason to assume such a claim is true. A choice is
   the formation of an intention or purpose to do something. It
   resolves uncertainty and indecision in the mind about what
   to do. Nothing in such a description implies that there could
   not be some indeterminism in the deliberation and neural
   processes of an agent preceding choice corresponding to the
   agent’s prior uncertainty about what to do. Recall from the pre-
   ceding arguments that the presence of indeterminism does not
   mean the outcome happened merely by chance and not by the
   agent’s effort. Self-forming choices are undetermined, but not
   uncaused. They are caused by the agent’s efforts.” 29
   “In a similar fashion, the idea is not to think of the indetermin-
   ism involved in free choices as a cause acting on its own, but as
   an ingredient in a larger goal-directed or teleological process or
   activity.” 30




                                                                           Chapter 24
   “What we need when we perform purposive activities, mental
   or physical, is rather macro-control of processes involving many
   neurons — complex processes that may succeed in achieving
   their goals despite the interfering effects of some recalcitrant
   neurons. We don’t micro-manage our actions by controlling
   each individual neuron or muscle that might be involved.
   We don’t know enough about neurology or physiology to do
   that; and it would be counterproductive to try. But that does
   not prevent us from macro-managing our purposive activities
   (whether they be mental activities such as practical reasoning,
   or physical activities, such as arm-swingings) and being respon-
   sible when those purposive activities attain their goals.
   “In summary, I think the key to understanding the role of
   chance in free will is not to think of chance as a causal factor by

  29   Kane (2007) p. 33..
  30   ibid. p. 35.
         314          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  itself, but rather to think of chance as an interfering ingredient
                  in larger goal-directed processes. Viewing chance in this way is
                  related to a peculiarly modern scientific way of understanding
                  human agency that also his its roots in the ancient view of Aris-
                  totle. Agents, according to this modern conception with ancient
                  roots, are to be conceived as information-responsive complex
                  dynamical systems.” 31
                 Here Kane insightfully suggests that information theory may
               help understanding the problem of will. He proposes that indeter-
               minism is a limited ingredient in the teleological process of will.
               But it should not be seen as the main “cause” of a decision. That
               causal credit goes to the agent’s efforts on behalf of each of the
               possible choices.
                  “We should concede that indeterminism, wherever it occurs,
                  does diminish control over what we are trying to do and is a
                  hindrance or obstacle to the realization of our purposes.” 32
                  But all the options are hindered by the introduction of indeter-
               minism, so the agent’s efforts to make them all succeed will be af-
               fected slightly differently by indeterminism. Some will fail, partly
               as a result of chance, but the one that succeeds should not be cred-
               ited to mere chance, but rather to the effort of the agent.
Chapter 24




                  Kane addresses the implications of adding chance “centered”
               in the decision itself, which threatens to make chance the direct
               cause of our actions.
                  “Let me conclude with one final objection to the account of free
                  will presented here, which is perhaps the most telling and has
                  not yet been discussed. Even if one granted that persons, such
                  as the businesswoman, could make genuine self-forming choic-
                  es that were undetermined, isn’t there something to the charge
                  that such choices would be arbitrary? A residual arbitrariness
                  seems to remain in all self-forming choices since the agents
                  cannot in principle have sufficient or conclusive prior reasons
                  for making one option and one set of reasons prevail over the
                  other.

                 31     ibid. p. 40.
                 32     Kane (2007) p. 39.
                                Robert Kane’s Libertarianism              315

   “There is some truth to this objection also, but again I think it is
   a truth that tells us something important about free will.
   “Suppose we were to say to such persons: ‘But look, you didn’t
   have sufficient or conclusive prior reasons for choosing as you
   did since you also had viable reasons for choosing the other
   way.’ They might reply. ‘True enough. But I did have good rea-
   sons for choosing as I did, which I’m willing to stand by and
   take responsibility for. If these reasons were not sufficient or
   conclusive reasons, that’s because, like the heroine of the novel,
   I was not a fully formed person before I chose (and still am not,
   for that matter). Like the author of the novel, I am in the pro-
   cess of writing an unfinished story and forming an unfinished
   character who, in my case, is myself.’ ” 33

The Cogito Model
   Robert Kane independently developed a two-stage model be-
fore Daniel Dennett published his 1978 book Brainstorms. He
had read the same sources (Compton and Popper), but he thought
that “something more” was needed.
   Kane had always felt that at the completion of the first stage
in my Cogito model, when all the random considerations have




                                                                            Chapter 24
been generated, there is a finite time, however small, during which
the model assumes that the willed decision, the choice between
alternative possibilities, is determined.
   Kane feels that the two-stage model is adequate for practical
everyday decisions, and that it may play a role in moral and
prudential choices by providing the considerations for different
choices. Where the two-stage deliberative process does not result
in a single choice, we can say that the options that remain were
as a group self-determined, namely, consistent with the agent’s
character and values, reasons and motives, desires and feelings.
   Kane says that libertarian free will requires that the decision
not be completely determined by the agents desires and beliefs,
which are among the causal factors, but not determining factors.
In the case of his SFAs, decisions remain undetermined up to the
moment of choice. It is determined by the choice, says Kane.
  33   Kane (2007) pp. 41-42.
         316       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Just as Kane accepts the loss of some control in SFAs, the agent
               does not have complete control over the random considerations
               that get generated in my two-stage model. Of course, the agent
               can decide when to stop generating new possibilities. And if eval-
               uation finds none satisfactory, can go back and generate more.
               Kane agrees with the importance of these “second thoughts.” But
               after the last new random option is generated, and during that
               time, however small, before the decision is made, Kane is right
               that the choice at that point is already adequately determined
               by the agent’s character, reasons, motives, etc. - unless, of course
               more than one option remains.
                  In my Cogito model, I admit that the decision could be reliably
               (though not perfectly) predicted by a super-psychiatrist who knew
               everything about the agent and was aware of all the alternative
               possibilities. This is because the second (“will”) stage evaluation
               and decision process is indeed adequately determined.
                  I therefore agree with Kane that the second stage is normally
               “determined,” in the sense of adequately determined, but note
               that it is in no way pre-determined before deliberations began.
                  Kane agrees with me that, before the first stage of the two-stage
               model, the decision has not yet been determined. It is at that time
Chapter 24




               undetermined. So our decisions are not pre-determined back to
               the Big Bang.
                  Kane agrees that my two-stage Cogito model, with indetermin-
               ism in the first stage, is libertarian free.
                  But in Kane’s Self-Forming Actions, indeterminism remains up
               to and including the moment of choice.
               Kane’s Self-Forming Actions
                  Kane has found a way to avoid any “determinism” at all in these
               cases, not even the determination by character and values, rea-
               sons and motives, feelings and desires, that compatibilists properly
               think is needed for moral responsibility. For Kane, reasons and
               motives are only partial causes of the decisions.
                           Robert Kane’s Libertarianism                   317

   These are Kane’s Self-Forming Actions (SFAs). He says the
agent’s decision may not be “determined” by anything other than
the agent’s choice, which can be rational (made for properly evalu-
ated reasons), but nevertheless might have been otherwise and
yet be equally rational and voluntary.
   As we have seen, Kane calls this “dual (or plural) control.” I now
see that this is an acceptable extension of my Cogito model, one
that adds still more libertarian freedom. Let’s see how it works.
   To find a way around the “determinism” of my second stage,
without invoking metaphysical agent-causality, Kane adds event-
causal randomness in the decision itself. Randolph Clarke
calls such randomness “centered” in the decision,34 as opposed to
chance located earlier in the “deliberative” stage (my “free” stage).
   There are times when the deliberation and evaluation process
of the two-stage process may not narrow down to a single self-
determined option. In such cases, the agent has developed reasons
for more than one option. None of these options should be seen
as random, in the sense that as a group they have been adequately
determined by the deliberations of the second stage.
   For everyday practical decisions, the agent may essentially “flip
a coin” to make the decision between equally attractive options,



                                                                            Chapter 24
and take responsibility for the outcome.
   However, in difficult moral or prudential decisions, the agent
may be seriously conflicted about the remaining options. This
conflict requires extra effort on the part of the agent to make the
decision, which Kane says may generate noise in the brain’s neural
circuitry. This noise may make the specific decision indetermi-
nate, although it selects from among options that are all defended
by reasons.
   Although the actual decision is indeterminate, and chance has
played a role in the decision, Kane rejects the view that chance is
the “cause” of the decision. The role of chance has increased the
probability that the agent’s efforts for some of the options will fail,
but for the option that succeeds, says Kane, it is the agent’s effort
that deserves the major credit. Effort is the cause of the choice.
  34    See page 211.
         318       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  I agree with Kane that it is inappropriate to make chance the
               “cause” of the decision.
                  My two-stage Cogito model accepts decisions that are made at
               random, when the reason (the non-reason?) is that the agent has
               no good reasons to prefer one option over others, and thus “delib-
               erately” chooses at random.
                  I call these undetermined liberties, to distinguish them from
               the de-liberated self-determination of my second stage.




                 Figure 24-1. Kane’s Self-Forming Actions are Undetermined Liberties.
                  As I see it, the second stage has left the agent with a group of
               options that are equally attractive. The final choice seems to me
               arbitrary, any one of them will have adequate reasons for agent
               responsibility. This, in my view, is related to the ancient liberum
               arbitrium and the liberty of indifference.
                  But for many years, Kane has vigorously denied that his Self-
Chapter 24




               Forming Actions are arbitrary and the random result of chance.
               To make chance a contributing cause devalues the effort of the
               agent that deserves the credit for the decision. Negative words like
               random and chance mislead many thinkers. Kane accepts inde-
               terminism (his noise results from quantum indeterminacy), but
               rejects random chance.
                  I agree with Kane that it is inappropriate to say that chance is
               the cause of the action. I have been mistaken to say so in the past.
                  But I must go farther to defend the positive role for chance in
               the universe as a critical part of the cosmic creation process. I
               trace negative attitudes about chance to the ancient idea that
               chance explains nothing so cannot be a cause (the Greek word for
               cause, ἀιτία, means explanation) or even stronger, that chance is
               unintelligible and perhaps atheistic.
                              Robert Kane’s Libertarianism              319

  Kane’s critics, and perhaps even Kane to some degree, share
what William James called “antipathy to chance.”
   “The stronghold of the deterministic sentiment is the antipathy
   to the idea of chance. As soon as we begin to talk indeterminism
   to our friends, we find a number of them shaking their heads.
   This notion of alternative possibilities, they say, this admission
   that any one of several things may come to pass, is, after all,
   only a roundabout name for chance; and chance is something
   the notion of which no sane mind can for an instant tolerate
   in the world…many persons talk as if the minutest dose of
   disconnectedness of one part with another, the smallest modi-
   cum of independence, the faintest tremor of ambiguity about
   the future, for example, would ruin everything, and turn this
   goodly universe into a sort of insane sand-heap or nulliverse,
   no universe at all.
   “In every outwardly verifiable and practical respect, a world in
   which the alternatives that now actually distract your choice
   were decided by pure chance would be by me absolutely undis-
   tinguished from the world in which I now live. I am, therefore,
   entirely willing to call it, so far as your choices go, a world of
   chance for me.
   “Determinism denies the ambiguity of future volitions, because



                                                                          Chapter 24
   it affirms that nothing future can be ambiguous. Indeterminate
   future volitions do mean chance. Let us not fear to shout it from
   the house-tops if need be; for we now know that the idea of
   chance is, at bottom, exactly the same thing as the idea of gift,-
   -the one simply being a disparaging, and the other a eulogistic,
   name for anything on which we have no effective claim.
   “We have seen what determinism means: we have seen that in-
   determinism is rightly described as meaning chance; and we
   have seen that chance, the very name of which we are urged to
   shrink from as from a metaphysical pestilence, means only the
   negative fact that no part of the world, however big, can claim
   to control absolutely the destinies of the whole.” 35
  More than perhaps any other philosopher, Kane has accepted
the reality and importance of quantum indeterminism. In my
  35   James (1956) pp. 153-159.
         320       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               view, he should not shy away from recognizing indeterminism as
               pure chance just because the current philosophical community
               has a strong bias against randomness and chance.
               Kane’s Businesswoman Example
                  Kane’s best-known case of an SFA is the businesswoman on the
               way to an important meeting when she witnesses an attack on a
               victim in an alley. She has to decide whether to stop and aid the
               victim (deontological moral choice) or continue on to her meet-
               ing (self-interest).
                  But now consider what my Cogito model offers her. Rather than
               stop with these two options, she could go back and generate more
               alternative possibilities in the first stage of my model.
                  She might get out her cell phone and call 911 for an ambulance
               to help the victim (giving more real assistance than she would be
               able provide herself).
                  Or a random event might occur. Another passerby might
               appear that she can ask to aid the victim.
                  I don’t mean to dismiss Kane’s example, which he restricts to
               the “torn” moral decisions he claims are the only truly free SFAs.
               But my variation on his example nicely puts the emphasis on the
Chapter 24




               origination and creativity in my model of free will.
               Kane’s SFAs as Adequately Determined
                  Kane has long held that his last-possible-second indeterminis-
               tic decisions at the moment of choice provide the long-held lib-
               ertarian dream of some sort of absolute freedom at that moment.
                  Kane is not thinking metaphysically, of course, but before that
               “libertarian free” moment there is an element of “self-determina-
               tion” by motives and reasons, by character and values, that Kane
               recognizes always come just before examples of dual (or plural)
               rational control..
                  In my two-stage model, the agent may generate a great many
               alternative possibilities, as we saw in my extended version of
               Kane’s businesswoman. Evaluation of those possibilities normally
                                Robert Kane’s Libertarianism                         321

reduces the possibilities to the one chosen, but it may only narrow
them down to two or more equally attractive options, which gives
us undetermined liberties like Kane’s cases.
  The possibilities in a Kane “torn decision” have as a group
been “adequately determined” by the second stage of my model,
though not as much as if they had been reduced to only one.
   Kane in Barcelona
   Kane and I were invited in October 2010 to an “Experts
Meeting” in Barcelona, Spain at the Social Trends Institute (STI).
The question debated was “Is Science Compatible with Our Desire
for Freedom?” The meeting was organized by Antoine Suarez of
The Center for Quantum Philosophy in Geneva.
   Also invited was Alfred Mele, who directs the Big Ques-
tions in Free Will project at Florida State University, and Martin
Heisenberg, the neurogeneticist and son of Werner Heisenberg,
the founder of quantum mechanics.
   There were animated exchanges between all of us. The pro-
ceedings were videotaped and are available on the STI website.36
I edited the discussion between Mele, Kane, myself, and remarks
by Heisenberg.37




                                                                                       Chapter 24
   In Kane’s presentation, he said of the current situation,
    “As Bob Doyle also notes in his conference paper, my own first
    efforts at dealing with this problem in the 1970’s was to formu-
    late a two-stage model very much like the one he nicely pres-
    ents in his paper. I thought from the beginning that a two-stage
    model must be a part of the solution to the free will problem.
    But I also believed that it could not be the complete solution.
    Hence I did not publish anything about it in the 1970’s and was
    surprised to see that Daniel Dennett had come up with a similar
    idea in a 1978 paper. He also believed a two-stage model was
    not all that libertarians wanted, but thought it at least provided
    some of what they wanted, as did Al Mele who also later formu-
    lated such a view. I believe Dennett and Mele were correct in
    thinking the two-stage model could not be all of what libertar-
   36    www.socialtrendsinstitute.org/Activities/Bioethics/Is-Science-Compatible-
with-Our-Desire-for-Freedom/Free-Will-debate-on-YouTube.axd
   37    youtube.com/watch?v=iwDZUXr6dIc
         322          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  ians wanted; and hence, while I made the two-stage model part of
                  my own theory in my first book on free will in 1985, it was only a
                  part of the theory and I also tried to go beyond it.
                  “I am even more convinced today through the work of Martin
                  Heisenberg as well as these others just mentioned and at this con-
                  ference that not only is the two-stage model an important part of
                  any adequate theory of free will, but that it is also an important,
                  indeed a crucial, step in the evolution of human free will. The abil-
                  ity to randomize in lower organisms affords them flexibility and
                  creativity as it does for humans. But I believe, as I did in the 70’s,
                  that a number of other steps are needed to get from this first cru-
                  cial evolutionary step to the full evolution of free will in human
                  beings, and that the two-stage model must be folded into a larger
                  picture.” 38
                  Since William James in the 1880’s, more than a dozen philoso-
               phers and scientists, including Heisenberg and myself have called
               for indeterminism in the first stage of our model. Since the 1980’s,
               Robert Kane has called for indeterminism when second-stage de-
               liberations do not result in a single act of self-determination. These
               are two places in what Kane calls a “larger picture” of free will where
               indeterminism can break the causal chain of determinism without
Chapter 24




               reducing agent control or responsibility for decisions and actions.
                 Kane at Harvard
                  I had the privilege in 2009 of hosting Kane at the Harvard Faculty
               Club and recording an 82-minute video on his life’s work.
                  Entitled Free Will: Some New Perspectives on an Ancient Problem,
               the Information Philosopher published it as a DVD, and Kane
               recently agreed to make it available on YouTube,39 in the hope that it
               will be widely seen by philosophy students.
                  The above-mentioned YouTube videos can be found without
               typing in complex URLs, by searching in my YouTube channel
               called “infophilosopher.”




                 38     Presentation at STI “Experts Meeting,” October 30, 2010
                 39     youtube.com/watch?v=A61X-5b847U
                                                                             323


Kane’s Oxford Handbook of Free Will
   In addition to his own work to find some pathway through what
he calls the “free will labyrinth” to an intelligible account of free-
dom, Kane has assembled in his massive sourcebook The Oxford
Handbook of Free Will perhaps the best survey of modern positions
on free will, from theology and fatalism to metaphysical libertarian
perspectives.
   The Handbook, now in its second (2011) edition, has contribu-
tions from over two dozen contemporary philosophers with strong
ideas about free will. Sadly, most continue to be inconclusive debates
and attempts to logically refute one another’s positions. Daniel
Dennett calls this “philosophical judo.”
   The articles reflect the fact that Peter F. Strawson changed the
subject of the discussions from free will to moral responsibility,
Harry Frankfurt changed the debate from free will to the exis-
tence of alternative possibilities, and Peter van Inwagen changed
the problem from showing indeterminism to be true to showing
incompatibilism to be true.
   They ask convoluted questions like “Is Incompatibilism Intui-
tive?” and describe freedom as Nondeterministic Incompatibilism.



                                                                               Chapter 24
   Many of the writers tend to conflate free will and moral
responsibility. They describe free will as the “control condition” of
moral responsibility. Free will is indeed a prerequisite for responsi-
bility. But whether an action is moral is a question for ethicists, not
for psychologists and neuroscientists who study the nature of the
mind and its capacity for free actions.
   While no reflection on the editorial quality, that there is little new,
and that it is sometimes dismissive of freedom as unintelligible,
makes the Oxford Handbook an accurate reflection of the current
state of the free will problem.
   Kane insightfully remarks “One may legitimately wonder why
worries about determinism persist at all in the twenty-first century,
when the physical sciences - once the stronghold of determinist
thinking - seem to have turned away from determinism.” 40 Amen.
  40    Kane (2011) p. 5.
         324       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                 m inis         m
                                        De t e r

                                                         a t i b i lism
                                                C    omp       r min  m   is
                                 i n ism                 e t e
                    De   t e r m                  Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                        patibil
                                ism
                                          e  t
                                      n ibilismt  ’s
 H a r d I ncom
                              l D e n                                                   Inc
                   D  a n i e       m il
                                 Sieb     imspm
                                              at
                     m ompa
                                 t   i c o

     Illus i o n i s
                      C                       atibilis
                                                       m
                                                         ncom p
                                                   o w I
Chapter 25




                                           Na  r r
               o s s i b ilism
      Im     p                                                          ism
                                                            m p a tibil
                                                   ft Inc o
                                                So                                      yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                      This chapter on the web
                   informationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/dennett
                        m i n i s m
                  deter
                                                                      Daniel Dennett                    325
              In
              Daniel Dennett’snism
                          e
              Compatibilism
                        b   r t a ria
                     Li
                 While he himself is a confirmed compatibilist, even-C    aa  usa
                                                                            deter-
                                                                                                    l
              minist, in “On Giving Libertarians What They          n  t
                                                              AgSaye They Want,”
              Chapter 15 of his 1978 book
                                  - C a u  sal Brainstorms,   Daniel Dennett
              articulated the n
                        E v e   t
                              case  for a two-stage model of free will better than
              any libertarian had done at the time.
                 His “Valerian” model of decision making, named after the
                                                                         n - C a usal
                                                                              poet
              Paul Valéry, combines indeterminism to generate          o
                                                                    Nalternative
              possibilities, with (in my view, Aadequate) determinism to choose
                                            S F
        t i b i l i s m
              among the possibilities.

co   mpa “The model of decision making I am proposing,ushasalithety fol-
                                                         ofant C  a decision,
               lowing feature: when we are faced with S        important
               a consideration-generator whose output is to some degree
                                  m
                         tibilisproduces
           n c o m  p a
               undetermined                  a series of considerations, some of
                                                                                  a r i a n ism
         I                                                                      t
  Broad                                                              Liber
               which   may   of course   be immediately   rejected as irrelevant    by
                                                            S
               the agent (consciously or unconsciously). Those oft considerations
               that are selected by the agent as having a more than negligi-
               ble bearing onia
                              r   n
                                the    sm then figure in a reasoning process,
                                     idecision                                                  a t ion
                     e  r t a                                                            m  i n
         e      Libif the agent is in the main reasonable, those considerations
           st and                                                         f - D   ter
                                                                                efinal

                                                                                                          Chapter 25
   M o d       ultimately   serve as predictors and  explicators  S
                                                                 of  e
                                                                    the lagent’s
               decision.”1
                                              ogito
                                   C reasons why this is the kind of free
        ti b
            Dennett
             i l i s m gives six excellent

Inc ompa will that libertarians say they want. He says,
                   es)                                                                 m
             e n1.c“First...The intelligent selection, rejection, and weighing of inis
       e q u                                                                r
                                                                         e of m
                                                               In isea tmatter
tive S          the considerations that do occur to the subjectd

                                          i m    ited
                  intelligence making the difference.”
                                      L
                    m     a  n   d
       r m in   i s
           2. “Second, I think   it installs indeterminism in the right place

De t e     for the libertarian, if there is a right place at all.”
                  3. “Third...from the point of view of biological engineering, it
                 1     Dennett (1978) p. 295. Dennett studied in Oxford under Gilbert Ryle, whose
              “Concept of Mind” (1949) revolutionized the approach to philosophical psychology
              within analytic philosophy, eliminating mind as a “ghost in the machine.”.
         326     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     is just more efficient and in the end more rational that decision
                     making should occur in this way.”
                     4. “A fourth observation in favor of the model is that it permits
                     moral education to make a difference, without making all of the
                     difference.”
                     5. “Fifth - and I think this is perhaps the most important thing
                     to be said in favor of this model - it provides some account of
                     our important intuition that we are the authors of our moral
                     decisions.”
                     6. “Finally, the model I propose points to the multiplicity of
                     decisions that encircle our moral decisions and suggests that in
                     many cases our ultimate decision as to which way to act is less
                     important phenomenologically as a contributor to our sense of
                     free will than the prior decisions affecting our deliberation pro-
                     cess itself: the decision, for instance, not to consider any further,
                     to terminate deliberation; or the decision to ignore certain lines
                     of inquiry.” 2
                 I might add a seventh reason to Dennett’s otherwise
               comprehensive list, that this kind of free will is a process that
               could have evolved naturally from the lower animals.
                     “These prior and subsidiary decisions contribute, I think, to our
Chapter 25




                     sense of ourselves as responsible free agents, roughly in the fol-
                     lowing way: I am faced with an important decision to make, and
                     after a certain amount of deliberation, I say to myself: “That’s
                     enough. I’ve considered this matter enough and now I’m go-
                     ing to act,” in the full knowledge that I could have considered
                     further, in the full knowledge that the eventualities may prove
                     that I decided in error, but with the acceptance of responsibility
                     in any case.” 3
                 At times, Dennett seems pleased with his result.
                     “This result is not just what the libertarian is looking for, but it is
                     a useful result nevertheless. It shows that we can indeed install
                     indeterminism in the internal causal chains affecting human
                     behavior at the macroscopic level while preserving the intel-
                     ligibility of practical deliberation that the libertarian requires.
                     We may have good reasons from other quarters for embracing
                     determinism, but we need not fear that macroscopic indeter-
                 2       Dennett (1978) pp. 295-207.
                 3       ibid.
                               Daniel Dennett’s Compatibilism                327

      minism in human behavior would of necessity rob our lives of
      intelligibility by producing chaos.” 4
      “we need not fear that causal indeterminism would make our
      lives unintelligible.” 5
  He realizes that his model is still at its base deterministic.
      “Even if one embraces the sort of view I have outlined, the
      deterministic view of the unbranching and inexorable history
      of the universe can inspire terror or despair, and perhaps the
      libertarian is right that there is no way to allay these feelings
      short of a brute denial of determinism. Perhaps such a denial,
      and only such a denial, would permit us to make sense of the
      notion that our actual lives are created by us over time out of
      possibilities that exist in virtue of our earlier decisions; that we
      trace a path through a branching maze that both defines who
      we are, and why, to some extent (if we are fortunate enough to
      maintain against all vicissitudes the integrity of our delibera-
      tional machinery) we are responsible for being who we are.” 6
  At other times, Dennett is skeptical. His model, he says,
      “installs indeterminism in the right place for the libertarian, if
      there is a right place at all.” and “it seems that all we have done
      is install indeterminism in a harmless place by installing it in an
      irrelevant place.” 7


                                                                               Chapter 25
   Dennett seems to be soliciting interest in the model - from lib-
ertarian quarters? It is too bad that libertarians did not accept and
improve Dennett’s two-stage model. See What if Libertarians Had
Accepted What Dan Dennett Gave Them in 1978? in Chapter 27.
   If they had, the history of the free will problem would have been
markedly different for the last thirty years, perhaps reconciling
indeterminism with free will, as the best two-stage models now
do, just as Hume reconciled freedom with determinism.
         “There may not be compelling grounds from this quarter for
      favoring an indeterministic vision of the springs of our action,
      but if considerations from other quarters favor indeterminism,
      we can at least be fairly sanguine about the prospects of incor-
  4       Dennett (1978) p. 292.
  5       ibid. p. 298.
  6       ibid. p. 299.
  7       ibid. p. 295.
         328     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     porating indeterminism into our picture of deliberation, even
                     if we cannot yet see what point such an incorporation would
                     have.” 8
                 The point of incorporating indeterminism is of course first
               to break the causal chain of pre-determinism, and second to
               provide a source for novel ideas that were not already implicit in
               past events, thus explaining not only free will but creativity. This
               requires irreducible and ontological quantum indeterminacy.
                 But Dennett does not think that irreducible quantum random-
               ness provides anything essential beyond the deterministic pseu-
               do-random number generation of computer science.
                        “Isn’t it the case that the new improved proposed model for
                     human deliberation can do as well with a random-but-deter-
                     ministic generation process as with a causally undetermined
                     process? Suppose that to the extent that the considerations that
                     occur to me are unpredictable, they are unpredictable simply
                     because they are fortuitously determined by some arbitrary and
                     irrelevant factors, such as the location of the planets or what I
                     had for breakfast.” 9
                  With his strong background in computer science and artifi-
               cial intelligence, it is no surprise that Dennett continues to seek a
               “computational” model of the mind.
Chapter 25




                  But man is not a machine and the mind is not a computer.
                  Dennett accepts the results of modern physics and does not
               deny the existence of quantum randomness. He calls himself a
               “naturalist” who wants to reconcile free will with natural science.
                  But what is “natural” about a computer-generated pseudo-
               random number sequence? The algorithm that generates it is
               quintessentially artificial. In the course of evolution, quantum
               mechanical randomness (along with the quantum stability of in-
               formation structures, without which no structures at all would ex-
               ist) is naturally available to generate alternative possibilities.
                  Why would evolution need to create an algorithmic computa-
               tional capability to generate those possibilities, when genuine and
               irreducible quantum randomness already provides them?
                 8       ibid. p. 299.
                 9       ibid. p. 298.
                         Daniel Dennett’s Compatibilism                329

   And who, before human computer designers, would be the
author or artificer of the algorithm? Gregory Chaitin tells us that
the information in a random-number sequence is only as much
as is in the algorithm that created the sequence. And note that the
artificial algorithm author implicitly has the kind of knowledge
attributed to Laplace’s Demon.
   Since Dennett is a confirmed atheist, it seems odd that he has
the “antipathy to chance” described by William James that is
characteristic of religious believers. Quantum randomness is far
more atheistic than Dennett’s pseudo-randomness, with the lat-
ter’s implicit author or artificer still conceivable.
   Despite his qualms, Dennett seems to have located randomness
in exactly the right place, in the first stage of a two-stage model.
His model randomly generates alternative considerations for his
adequately determined selection process. He is not concerned that
random possibilities make the decisions themselves random.
Evolution as an Algorithmic Process
   Dennett maintains that biological evolution does not need
quantum randomness, and says he was shocked by Jacques
Monod’s claim that random quantum processes are “essential”
to evolution. Monod defines the importance of chance, or what


                                                                         Chapter 25
he calls “absolute coincidence” as something like the intersec-
tion of causal chains that Aristotle calls an “accident.” But, says
Dennett, in his 1984 book Elbow Room,
      “when Monod comes to define the conditions under which
   such coincidences can occur, he apparently falls into the actu-
   alist trap. Accidents must happen if evolution is to take place,
   Monod says, and accidents can happen — “Unless of course
   we go back to Laplace’s world, from which chance is excluded
   by definition and where Dr. Brown has been fated to die under
   Jones’ hammer ever since the beginning of time.” (Chance and
   Necessity, p. 115)
     “If “Laplace’s world” means just a deterministic world, then
   Monod is wrong. Natural selection does not need “absolute”
         330     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   coincidence. It does not need “essential” randomness or perfect
                   independence; it needs practical independence — of the sort
                   exhibited by Brown and Jones, and Jules and Jim, each on his
                   own trajectory but “just happening” to intersect, like the cards
                   being deterministically shuffled in a deck and just happening
                   to fall into sequence. Would evolution occur in a deterministic
                   world, a Laplacean world where mutation was caused by a non-
                   random process? Yes, for what evolution requires is an unpat-
                   terned generator of raw material, not an uncaused generator of
                   raw material. Quantum-level effects may indeed play a role in
                   the generation of mutations, but such a role is not required by
                   theory.” 10

               Where Quantum Indeterminism Might Matter?
                  Dennett graciously invited me to participate in his graduate
               seminar on free will at Tufts in the Fall of 2010.11 He challenged
               me to provide cases where quantum indeterminism would make
               a substantive improvement over the pseudo-randomness that
               he thinks is enough for both biological evolution and free will.
               Dennett does not deny quantum indeterminacy. He just doubts
               that quantum randomness is necessary for free will. Information
               philosophy suggests that the primary importance of quantum in-
               determinacy is that it breaks the causal chain of pre-determinism.
Chapter 25




                  See the I-Phi page Where, and When, is Randomness Located?
               for more details on where indeterminism is located in the two-
               stage models of Bob Doyle, Robert Kane, Alfred Mele, and
               Dennett’s Valerian Model of free will. 12
                  Quantum randomness has been available to evolving species
               for billions of years before pseudo-randomness emerges with
               humans. But Dennett does not think, as does Jacques Monod,
               for example, that quantum indeterminacy is necessary for
               biological evolution. The evolved virtual creatures of artificial life
               programs demonstrate for Dennett that biological evolution is an
               algorithmic process.

                 10    Dennett (1985) p. 150.
                 11    See informationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/dennett/seminar
                 12    informationphilosopher.com/freedom/location.html
                         Daniel Dennett’s Compatibilism                  331

   Below are five cases where quantum chance is critically impor-
tant and better than pseudo-randomness. They all share a basic
insight from information physics. Whenever a stable new infor-
mation structure is created, two things must happen. The first
is a collapse of the quantum wave function that allows one or
more particles to combine in the new structure. The second is the
transfer away from the structure to the cosmic background of the
entropy required by the second law of thermodynamics to balance
the local increase in negative entropy (information).
Laplace’s Demon
    Indeterministic events are unpredictable. Consequently, if
any such probabilistic events occur, as Dennett admits, Laplace’s
demon cannot predict the future. Information cosmology pro-
vides a second reason why such a demon is impossible. There was
little or no information at the start of the universe. (See the Layzer
diagram on page 11.) There is a great deal of information today,
and more being created every day. There is not enough informa-
tion in the past to determine the present, let alone completely de-
termine the future. Creating future information requires quantum
events, which are inherently indeterministic. The future is only
probable, though it may be “adequately determined.” Since there is


                                                                           Chapter 25
not enough information available at any moment to comprehend
all the information that will exist in the future, Laplace demons
are impossible.
Intelligent Designers
   Suppose that determinism is true, and that the chance driv-
ing spontaneous variation of the gene pool is merely epistemic
(human ignorance), so that a deterministic algorithmic process
is driving evolution. Gregory Chaitin has shown that the amount
of information (and thus the true randomness) in a sequence of
random numbers is no more than that in the algorithm that gen-
erates them.
   This makes the process more comprehensible for a supernat-
ural intelligent designer. And it makes the idea of an intelligent
         332     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               designer, deterministically controlling evolution with complete
               foreknowledge, more plausible. This is unfortunate.
                  An intelligent designer with a big enough computer could
               reverse engineer and alter the algorithm behind the pseudo-ran-
               domness driving evolution. This is just what genetic engineers do.
                  But cosmic rays, which are inherently indeterministic quantum
               events, damage the DNA to produce mutations, variations in the
               gene pool. No intelligent designer can control such evolution.
                  So genetic engineers are intelligent designers, but they cannot
               control the whole of evolution.
               Frankfurt Controllers
                  For almost fifty years, compatibilists have used Frankfurt-style
               Cases to show that alternative possibilities are not required for
               freedom of action and moral responsibility.
                  Robert Kane showed in 198513 that, if a choice is undetermined,
               the Frankfurt controller cannot tell until the choice is made
               whether the agent will do A or do otherwise. Compatibilists were
               begging the question by assuming a deterministic connection
               between a “prior sign” of a decision and the decision itself.
                  More fundamentally, information philosophy tells us that
Chapter 25




               because chance (quantum randomness) helps generate the alter-
               native possibilities, information about the choice does not come
               into the universe until the choice has been made.
                  Either way, the controller would have to intervene before the
               choice, in which case it is the controller that is responsible for the
               decision. Frankfurt controllers do not exist.
               Dennett’s Eavesdropper
                  We can call this Dennett’s Eavesdropper because, in a discus-
               sion of quantum cryptography, Dennett agrees there is a strong
               reason to prefer quantum randomness to pseudo-randomness
               for encrypting secure messages. He sees that if a pseudo-random
               number sequence were used, a clever eavesdropper might discov-
               er the algorithm behind it and thus be able to decode the message.
                 13    David Widerker independently showed this in the 1990’s.
                             Daniel Dennett’s Compatibilism             333

   Quantum cryptography and quantum computing use the non-
local properties of entangled quantum particles. Non-locality
shows up when the wave-function of a two-particle system col-
lapses and new information comes into the universe. See the
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiment.14
Creating New Memes
   Richard Dawkins’ unit of cultural information has the same
limits as purely physical information. Claude Shannon’s math-
ematical theory of the communication of information says that
information is not new without probabilistic surprises. Quantum
physics is the ultimate source of that probability and the possibili-
ties that surprise us. If the result were not truly unpredictable, it
would be implicitly present in the information we already have. A
new meme, like Dennett’s intuition pumps, skyhooks, and cranes,
would have been already predictable there in the past and not his
very original creations.
The Valerian Model




                                                                          Chapter 25

  Figure 25-1. Dennett’s Valerian Model.
   Dennett’s Valerian Model of decision making adds randomness
in the first-stage generation of considerations, but he believes that
pseudo-randomness (the kind generated by computer algorithms)
is random enough.
   Dennett sees no need for genuine irreducible quantum ran-
domness in the mind, although he does not deny that the world
contains genuine quantum indeterminacy. He also does not think,
as does Jacques Monod, for example, that quantum indeterminacy
is necessary for biological evolution. The evolved virtual creatures
  14    informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/EPR/
         334     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               of artificial life programs demonstrate for Dennett that biological
               evolution is an algorithmic process.
                  Dennett says of the second stage that “after a certain amount of
               deliberation, I say to myself: ‘That’s enough. I’ve considered this
               matter enough and now I’m going to act,’ in the full knowledge
               that I could have considered further, in the full knowledge that
               the eventualities may prove that I decided in error, but with the
               acceptance of responsibility in any case.”
                  He says that “this model...provides some account of our impor-
               tant intuition that we are the authors of our moral decisions.”
               Who’s Afraid of Indeterminism?
                  Dennett and his colleague Christopher Taylor wrote an article
               for the Oxford Handbook of Free Will entitled “Who’s Afraid of
               Determinism.” They say that “introducing indeterminism adds
               nothing in the way of worthwhile possibilities, opportunities, or
               competences to universe... Though pseudo-random generators
               may not produce genuinely random output, they come so close
               that no ordinary mortals can tell the difference.”
                  Taylor and Dennett liken a deterministic universe to a computer
               playing games of chess.
Chapter 25




                  “Computers are marvels of determinism. Even their so-called
                  random number generators only execute pseudo-random func-
                  tions, which produce exactly the same sequence of “random”
                  digits each time the computer reboots. That means that com-
                  puter programs that avail themselves of randomness at vari-
                  ous “choice” points will nevertheless spin out exactly the same
                  sequence of states if run over and over again from a cold start…
                  If you turned off the computer and then restarted it, running
                  the same program, exactly the same variegated series of games
                  would spin out.” 15
                 The purpose of the Taylor and Dennett article is “to untangle the
               complexity of the underlying concepts” in two “deeply confused
               theses concerning possibility and causation: (1) In a deterministic
                 15   Kane (2002) p. 257.
                         Daniel Dennett’s Compatibilism                 335

universe, one can never truthfully utter the sentence ‘I could have
done otherwise,’ and (2) In such universes, one can never really
take credit for having caused an event, since in fact all events have
been predetermined by conditions during the universe’s birth.”
   We agree that these two theses are confusing, but the confusion
seems not that deep.
   To clarify the first, (1) In a deterministic universe, the meaning
of the true statement “I could have done otherwise” is “I could
have done otherwise, if the past had been slightly different and I
had chosen to do otherwise.”
   To clarify the second, (2) In such universes, one can take credit
for having caused an event, since in fact the event and one’s taking
credit for it both would have been predetermined by conditions
during the universe’s birth.”
   Even if indeterminism were true, Taylor and Dennett say, the
theses would be unaltered. But is this the case? At a minimum,
some important points in their article would be altered.
   Most important, the “fact”of predeterminism in thesis 2 would
not be a fact. Indeed, they note the discovery of indeterminacy
in modern quantum mechanics (p.259) and go on to observe (in
footnote 22) that randomness could result from the presence or
absence of a pulse from a Geiger counter. This would produce


                                                                          Chapter 25
what they refer to as “genuine” randomness. (p.270)
   It would then follow that a chess computer equipped with access
to “genuine” quantum randomness would not “spin out exactly
the same sequence of states if run over and over again from a cold
start.” But more significantly, there is no way for an indetermin-
istic universe at its birth to know the future. There is simply not
enough information present at the origin, or any other time, to
describe perfectly and completely the present and future.
         336      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m   is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati    bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                               ism
  Hard I
         n       com   patibil
                                   M   e l e’ s                                        Inc
                             re d
                       Alf odSeemsictom      p a   t i bilism

                 n ism       M ianism
     Ill u s i o
                               r t a r
                              e Narrow Incom           ilism
                       m
                        L i b                p a t i b
Chapter 26




             s sibi   lis
      Im p o                                                            ism
                                                           m p a tibil
                                                  ft Inc o
                                               So                                      yI
                         M  odel                                               Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism           (Altern
                                                                                        a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                         i m i t e d
                                                     e lw          ith L
                                                 o d
                                 - S t     age M
                            Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                    informationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/mele/
                        m i n i s m
                  deter
                                                                     Alfred Mele           337
              In
              Alfred Mele’s nism
                          e r t a ria
              ModestLLibertarianism
                      i b
                                                                                 ausal
                                                                                 t-C who
                Alfred Mele has developed the idea of autonomous
                                                                       A genagents,
            among other things exercise a kind of self-control that is related to
            metaphysical freedomaterms         u     l “free will” and “free action.” He
                                                 salike
                                         - C
                         Event a number of models for free will, most notably
            has also developed
            his 1995 two-stage model called “Modest Libertarianism. Others sal
                                                                                 o   n  - C   au
            include Soft Compatibilism, Soft Libertarianism, and             N  Daring       Soft
            Libertarianism

                       m                          SFA
         t i b i l i s
                Without committing himself             to the idea that human autonomy

     mpa
            is compatible with determinism or incompatible (the position of
                                                                                lioftyautono-
co          the libertarians), Mele provides arguments in a
            mous agents for both positions. He is,         Sasofhet C
                                                                         u s a
                                                                       support
                                                                    says, “officially agnos-
            tic about the truth
                             t i b i l ism
                                         of compatibilism”  and  describes   his position as
                 o
            “agnostic
            n  c          a
                      mpautonomism.”                                                   a r i a n ism
          I                                                                          t
                                                                            ibenor free and
  Broad Mele’s opponents are those who believe                   S    ft Lare
                                                                    there
                                                                    o
            morally responsible human beings. They are philosophers who
                                  r
            deny both compatibilism
                                a     i a n ismand libertarianism - Richard Double ation
                   L  i     r t
                        beHonderich,                                                   t e  r min
            and
             s t    Ted                       for example, “Impossibilists” like
                                                                            lf-D and e  Galen
   ModeStrawson, “Hard Incompatibilists” like Derk                     SePereboom
                                                                                                Chapter 26
            “Illusionists” Saul Smilansky.
                                             C  o g ito
                                                      Mele has debated the psychologist
            Danielm
         a t i b i l is Wegner,          whose position is that the conscious will is an
       p
Incom ueNote
            illusion,    based    primarily     on the Libet experiments.
                       e s )
                nc that Randolph Clarke’s “narrow incompatibilism”          i n is           m
tive S e q
                                                                   dete r m
                                           i t e   In
            denies the compatibilism of free will and determinism, but
                                                 d
                                    nd Lim
            accepts the compatibilism of moral responsibility and deter-
                                 a
            minism. John Martin Fischer’s “semicompatibilism” similarly
             ism
     r m i naccepts the compatibilism of moral responsibility, while remain-

Dete        ing agnostic about free will and the truth of determinism. Clarke’s
            and Fischer’s morally responsible agents presumably would be
            Mele “autonomous agents.”
         338     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


               Agnostic Autonomous Agents
                 Most libertarians, Mele thinks, both agent-causalists like
               Timothy O’Connor and event-causalists, like Robert Kane,
               might subscribe to his “autonomous agent” idea.
                     “My plan in Mele [Autonomous Agents] 1995 was to use
                     the resources both of libertarianism and of compatibil-
                     ism in defending agnostic autonomism and to do that partly
                     by developing the best compatibilist and libertarian posi-
                     tions I could develop. Part of my strategy was to construct an
                     account of an ideally self-controlled agent (where self-control is
                     understood as the contrary of akrasia: [a Greek term, meaning]
                     roughly, weakness of will), to argue that even such an agent may
                     fall short of autonomy (or free agency), and to ask what may be
                     added to ideal self-control to yield autonomy (or free agency). I
                     offered two answers, one for compatibilists and another for lib-
                     ertarians. I then argued that a disjunctive thesis associated with
                     both answers—agnostic autonomism - is more credible than
                     [believing there are no free and moral human beings] NFM.” 1

               Modest Libertarianism
                  Mele in his 1995 book Autonomous Agents, had proposed a
               “Modest Libertarianism” for consideration by libertarians.2 He
               himself did not endorse the idea. But he is concerned about the
Chapter 26




               proper place to locate the indeterminism. His soft libertarians
               locate it somewhere in the chain of events leading up to the for-
               mation of intentions, the evaluation of options, the decision and
               ultimate action. His “daring soft libertarians” move the indeter-
               minism up into the “time of action,” where indeterministic alter-
               native possibilities for actions may (or may not) exist.
                  He made it clear, following Daniel Dennett’s “Valerian” mod-
               el in Brainstorms, 1978, that any indeterminism should come
               early in the overall process. He even describes the latter - deci-
               sion - stage of the process as compatibilist (effectively determin-
               ist). This of course could only be adequate determinism. Mele
                 1       Mele (2006) p. 5.
                 2       Mele (1995) p. 211.
                        Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                  339

proposes a “soft compatibilism” that sees some value for indeter-
minism in the early stages. This will be the basis for our “Compre-
hensive Compatibilism” proposal in Chapter 28.
      “These observations indicate that it might be worth exploring
      the possibility of combining a compatibilist conception of the
      later parts of a process issuing in full blown, deliberative, inten-
      tional action with an incompatibilist conception of the earlier
      parts. For example, it might be possible to gain “ultimate con-
      trol” while preserving a considerable measure of nonultimate
      agential control by treating the process from proximal decisive
      better judgment through overt action in a compatibilist way
      and finding a theoretically useful place for indeterminacy in
      processes leading to proximal decisive better judgments.” 3
  For Mele and most other modern compatibilists, quantum
physics has shown that determinism is not true.
      “Recall that compatibilism does not include a commitment to
      determinism. The thesis is that determinism does not preclude
      autonomy. Treating the process from proximal decisive better
      judgment through overt action in a compatibilist way does not
      require treating it in a determinist way. Compatibilists may,
      in principle be willing to accept an account of causation that
      accommodates both deterministic and probabilistic instances,
      and they are not committed to holding that probabilistic causa-


                                                                               Chapter 26
      tion in the process just mentioned precludes the freedom of its
      product. In the same vein, advocates of autonomy who seek a
      “theoretical useful place” for indeterminism in the springs of
      action need not insist that indeterminism does not appear at
      other places, as well, in internal processes issuing in autono-
      mous action. Their claim on that matter may merely be that
      indeterminism at these other junctures is of no use to them.
      “External indeterminism, as I have already explained, does
      not give libertarians what they want. That leaves internal
      indeterminism. Assume, for the sake of argument, that human
      beings sometimes act autonomously, that acting autonomously
      requires “ultimate control,” and that the latter requires internal
      indeterminism. Then, with a view to combining ultimate control
  3       Mele (1995) p. 212.
         340     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     with robust nonultimate control, we can ask what location(s)
                     for internal indeterminism would do us the most good.” 4

               A Problem about Luck for Libertarians
               Mele’s plan in his book Free Will and Luck is to pay more atten-
               tion to Frankfurt-style examples and to “agential luck.”
                     “Agents’ control is the yardstick by which the bearing of luck
                     on their freedom and moral responsibility is measured. When
                     luck (good or bad) is problematic, that is because it seems sig-
                     nificantly to impede agents’ control over themselves or to high-
                     light important gaps or shortcomings in such control. It may
                     seem that to the extent that it is causally open whether or not,
                     for example, an agent intends in accordance with his consid-
                     ered judgment about what it is best to do, he lacks some con-
                     trol over what he intends, and it may be claimed that a positive
                     deterministic connection between considered best judgment
                     and intention would be more conducive to freedom and moral
                     responsibility.
                     “This last claim will be regarded as a nonstarter by anyone who
                     holds that freedom and moral responsibility require agential
                     control and that determinism is incompatible with such con-
                     trol. Sometimes it is claimed that agents do not control anything
                     at all if determinism is true. That claim is false.
Chapter 26




                     “As soon as any agent...judges it best to A, objective probabili-
                     ties for the various decisions open to the agent are set, and the
                     probability of a decision to A is very high. Larger probabilities
                     get a correspondingly larger segment of a tiny indeterministic
                     neural roulette wheel in the agent’s head than do smaller prob-
                     abilities. A tiny neural ball bounces along the wheel; its landing
                     in a particular segment is the agent’s making the corresponding
                     decision. When the ball lands in the segment for a decision to
                     A, its doing so is not just a matter of luck. After all, the design is
                     such that the probability of that happening is very high. But the
                     ball’s landing there is partly a matter of luck.

                 4       Mele (1995) p. 213.
                         Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                341

      “All libertarians who hold that A’s being a free action depends
      on its being the case that, at the time, the agent was able to do
      otherwise freely then should tell us what it could possibly be
      about an agent who freely A-ed at t in virtue of which it is true
      that, in another world with the same past and laws of nature, he
      freely does something else at t. Of course, they can say that the
      answer is “free will.” But what they need to explain then is how
      free will, as they understand it, can be a feature of agents — or,
      more fully, how this can be so where free will, on their account
      of it, really does answer the question. To do this, of course, they
      must provide an account of free will — one that can be tested
      for adequacy in this connection.” 5
   Mele proposes his “modest libertarianism” to satisfy these
needs. It includes a two-stage process that first generates random
alternative possibilities, which is then followed by a determina-
tion stage. When he first mentioned his idea in 1995, Mele cited
the similar “Valerian” example Daniel Dennett had proposed in
1978 as something libertarians should want.
   Note that both Dennett and Mele are skeptical that any such
process exists, but note that Mele’s model does indeed satisfy most
of the requirements for libertarian free will. 6
A Modest Libertarian Proposal (redux)

                                                                              Chapter 26
      “According to typical event-causal libertarian views, the proxi-
      mate causes of free actions indeterministically cause them. This
      is a consequence of the typical event-causal libertarian ideas
      that free actions have proximate causes and that if an agent
      freely A-s at t in world W, he does not A at t in some other pos-
      sible world with the same laws of nature and the same past up
      to t. Now, approximate causes of actions, including actions that
      are decisions, are internal to agents.” 7
      “In light of the general point about the proximate causation of
      actions, typical event-causal libertarianism encompasses a com-
      mitment to what may be termed agent-internal indeterminism.

  5       Mele (2006) p. 7.
  6       See Chapter 5.
  7       Mele (2006) p. 9.
         342   Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   “What I call modest libertarianism (see Mele 1995, pp. 211-
                   21) embraces that commitment, too, even though it rejects the
                   idea that the proximate causes of free actions indeterministi-
                   cally cause the actions. Indeterministic worlds in which every
                   instance of causation within any agent is deterministic are hos-
                   tile environments for libertarian freedom. What libertarians
                   want that determinism precludes is not merely that agents have
                   open to them more than one future that is compatible with
                   the combination of the past and the laws of nature, but that,
                   on some occasions, which possible future becomes actual is
                   in some sense and to some degree up to the agents. The want
                   something that seemingly requires that agents themselves be
                   indeterministic in some suitable way - that some relevant things
                   that happen under the skin are indeterministically caused by
                   other such things. The focus is on psychological events, of
                   course (as opposed, for example, to indeterministically caused
                   muscle spasms), and, more specifically, on psychological events
                   that have a significant bearing on action.
                   “Requiring internal indeterminism for free action and moral
                   responsibility is risky. To be sure, quantum mechanics, accord-
                   ing to leading interpretations, is indeterministic. But indeter-
                   minism at that level does not ensure that any human brains
                   themselves sometimes operate indeterministically, much less
                   that they sometimes operate indeterministically in ways appro-
Chapter 26




                   priate for free action and moral responsibility. One possibility,
                   as David Hodgson reports, is that “in systems as hot, wet, and
                   massive as neurons of the brain, quantum mechanical indeter-
                   minacies quickly cancel out, so that for all practical purposes
                   determinism rules in the brain” (2002, p. 86). Another is that
                   any indeterminism in the human brain is simply irrelevant to
                   free action and moral responsibility. Modest libertarians join
                   other event-causal libertarians in taking this risk.” 8
                   “In principle, an agent-internal indeterminism may provide for
                   indeterministic agency while blocking or limiting our proxi-
                   mal control over what happens only at junctures at which we
                   have no greater proximal control on the hypothesis that our
                   universe is deterministic. Obviously, in those cases in which

               8       Mele (2006) p. 10.
                   Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                   343

 we act on the basis of careful, rational deliberation, what we do
 is influenced by at least some of the considerations that “come
 to mind” — that is, become salient in consciousness — during
 deliberation and by our assessments of considerations. Now,
 even if determinism is true, it is false that, with respect to every
 consideration — every belief, desire, hypothesis, and so on —
 that comes to mind during our deliberation, we are in control of
 its coming to mind, and some considerations that come to mind
 without our being in control of their so doing may influence the
 outcome of our deliberation. Furthermore, a kind of internal
 indeterminism is imaginable that limits our control only in a
 way that gives us no less proximal control than we would have
 on the assumption that determinism is true, while opening up
 alternative deliberative outcomes. (Although, in a determinis-
 tic world, it would never be a matter of genuine chance that a
 certain consideration came to mind during deliberation, it may
 still be a matter of luck relative to the agent’s sphere of control.)
 As I put it in Mele 1995, “Where compatibilists have no good
 reason to insist on determinism in the deliberative process as
 a requirement for autonomy, where internal indeterminism
 is, for all we know, a reality, and where such indeterminism
 would not diminish the nonultimate control that real agents
 exert over their deliberation even on the assumption that real
 agents are internally deterministic — that is, at the intersection
 of these three locations — libertarians may plump for ultimacy-


                                                                           Chapter 26
 promoting indeterminism (p. 235). Modest libertarians try to
 stake out their view at this intersection.” 9
 “One kind of possible deliberator may be so constituted that no
 beliefs and desires of his that are directly relevant to the topic of
 his current deliberation have a chance of not coming to mind
 during his deliberation, whereas it is causally open whether
 some of his indirectly relevant beliefs and desires will come to
 mind. The causally open possibilities of this kind do not need
 to be extensive to secure the possibility of more than one delib-
 erative outcome. Modest libertarians both need and fear inter-
 nal indeterminism, and they are disposed to constrain it when
 engaged in the project of inventing indeterministic agents who
 can act freely and morally responsibly.” 10

9    Mele (2006) pp. 11-12.
10   ibid.
         344     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Alfred Mele here comes as close as any philosopher to my Cogito
               model of free will.
                       “The modest indeterminism at issue allows agents ample
                  control over their deliberation. Suppose a belief, hypothesis, or
                  desire that is indirectly relevant to a deliberator’s present prac-
                  tical question comes to mind during deliberation but was not
                  deterministically caused to do so. Presumably, a normal agent
                  would be able to assess this consideration. And upon reflec-
                  tion might rationally reject the belief as unwarranted, rationally
                  judge that the hypothesis does not merit investigation, or ratio-
                  nally decide that the desire should be given little or no weight in
                  his deliberation. Alternatively reflection might rationally lead
                  him to retain the belief, to pursue the hypothesis to give the
                  desire significant weight. That a consideration is indeterministi-
                  cally caused to come to mind does not entail that the agent has
                  no control over how he responds to it. Considerations that are
                  indeterministically caused to come to mind (like considerations
                  that are deterministically caused to come to mind) are nothing
                  more than input to deliberation. Their coming to mind has at
                  most an indirect effect on what the agent decides, an effect that
                  is mediated by the agent’s assessment of them. They do not set-
                  tle matters. Moreover, not only do agents have the opportunity
                  to assess these considerations, but they also have the opportu-
                  nity to search for additional relevant considerations before they
                  decide, thereby increasing the probability that other relevant
Chapter 26




                  considerations will be indeterministically caused to come to
                  mind. They have, then, at least sometimes, the opportunity to
                  counteract instances of bad luck — for example, an indetermin-
                  istically caused coming to mind of a misleading consideration
                  or, a chance failure to notice a relevant consideration. And giv-
                  en a suitable indeterminism regarding what comes to mind in
                  an assessment process, there are causally open alternative pos-
                  sibilities for the conclusion or outcome of that process.” 11
                  “Compatibilists who hold that we act freely even when we are
                  not in control of what happens at certain specific junctures in
                  the process leading to action are in no position to hold that an
                  indeterministic agent’s lacking control at the same junctures
                 11   Mele (2006) p. 12.
                     Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                  345

   precludes free action. And, again, real human beings are not
   in control of the coming to mind of everything that comes to
   mind during typical processes of deliberation. If this lack of
   perfect proximal control does not preclude its being the case
   that free actions sometimes issue from typical deliberation on
   the assumption that we are deterministic agents, it also does
   not preclude this on the assumption that we are indeterministic
   agents.
   “Now, even if garden-variety compatibilists can be led to see
   that the problem of luck is surmountable by a libertarian, how
   are theorists of other kinds likely to respond to the libertar-
   ian position that I have been sketching? There are, of course,
   philosophers who contend that moral responsibility and free-
   dom are illusions and that we lack these properties whether
   our universe is deterministic or indeterministic — for example,
   Richard Double (1991) and Galen Strawson (1986).” 12
   “Modest libertarians can also anticipate trouble from traditional
   libertarians, who want more than the modest indeterminism
   that I have described can offer. Clarke, who has done as much
   as anyone to develop an agent-causal libertarian view, criticizes
   event-causal libertarianism on the grounds that it adds no “pos-
   itive” power of control to compatibilist control but simply plac-
   es compatibilist control in an indeterministic setting. Of course,
   given that combining compatibilist control with indeterminism

                                                                            Chapter 26
   in a certain psychological sphere was my explicit strategy in
   constructing a modest libertarian position (Mele 1995, pp. 212-
   13, 217), I do not see this as an objection. In any case, tradition-
   al libertarians need to show that what they want is coherent.” 13
  In my view, there is no avoiding luck in general, but keeping
randomness out of the decision and action prevents it from un-
dermining control and responsibility
   “That requires showing that what they want does not entail or
   presuppose a kind of luck that would itself undermine moral
   responsibility. The typical libertarian wants both indetermin-
   ism and significant control at the moment of decision. That is
  12   Mele (2006) pp. 13-14.
  13   Mele (2006) p. 14.
         346     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  the desire that prompts a serious version of the worry about
                  luck I sketched earlier. In the absence of a plausible resolution
                  of the worry, it is epistemically open that a modest libertarian
                  proposal of the sort I sketched is the best a libertarian can do.
                  Of course, even if I happen to hit on the best libertarian option,
                  it does not follow that I have hit on the best option for believers
                  in free action and moral responsibility — as long as compatibil-
                  ism is still in the running.” 14
                 But true compatibilism, which assumes determinism is true, is
               not in the running. Mele and his colleagues have long ago given
               up hope for determinism being true. See the Strawson/Fischer/
               Mele hypothesis below.
               The Modest Libertarianism Process




                 Figure 26-1. Mele’s Modest Libertarianism.
                  Al Mele’s modest libertarianism provides what he calls an
               “incompatibilist” first stage (he means indeterminist) and a com-
Chapter 26




               patibilist second stage (he means determinist).
                  Mele does not (as do many philosophers since a mistaken read-
               ing of R. E. Hobart’s 1934 Mind article) think this determination
               of the will would imply pre-determinism.
                  Mele locates the randomness in the incompatibilist first stage
               of his two-stage model, where alternative possibilities are gener-
               ated.
                  Mele’s model is similar to Dennett’s, but he does not argue for
               Dennett’s pseudo-random (deterministic) randomness. Howev-
               er, because Mele is agnostic about the truth of determinism and
               indeterminism, he does not discuss the importance of quantum
               randomness explicitly.

                 14    Mele (2006) p. 14.
                    Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                  347


Mele’s Other Models for Free Will
   Being a self-proclaimed “agnostic” on these questions, Mele
has developed both compatibilist and libertarian positions. His
position on compatibilism needs some explaining. He says that
because contemporary compatibilists (he mentions especially
John Martin Fischer) attend to what modern quantum physics
tell us, the overwhelming majority do not believe that determin-
ism is true.
   One might then ask what they think free will is compatible
with, if not determinism. The answer is that they believe that
even if determinism were true, it would leave it open that people
sometimes act freely. “Freely” here is in the compatibilist sense of
free will that Immanuel Kant called a “wretched subterfuge and
William James called a “quagmire of evasion.” I call their idea the
Strawson/Fischer/Mele Hypothesis.
   Mele says this is the traditional framing of the problem of
whether “free action” (to be distinguished from free will”) is pre-
cluded by determinism. Ever since Hume, as long as an agent is
not coerced physically, her/his actions could be judged to be free,
even if they are part of a deterministic causal chain. But “freedom
of action” (Isaiah Berlin’s negative liberty) is distinctly not free-
dom of the will. See Chapter 3.

                                                                           Chapter 26
   Mele’s 1995 Modest Libertarianism discussed above is Mele’s
strongest two-stage model. In 1996 he developed a related posi-
tion called “Soft Libertarianism,” useful in the context of Frank-
furt-style cases. Then in his 2006 work he developed a variation
called “Daring Soft Libertarianism.”
Soft Libertarianism
   Soft libertarians find determinism unacceptable because it
claims that for all their intentions, evaluations, decisions, and sub-
sequent actions, events were in progress before they were born
that cause all those intentions and actions. This is the core concern
         348     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               of Peter van Inwagen’s Consequence Argument. Soft libertar-
               ians are not primarily motivated because indeterminism may
               provide the alternative possibilities that are denied by Frankfurt
               cases, but simply that the causal chain of determinism might be
               broken, allowing them to make a causal contribution. He says,
                  “Unlike hard libertarians, soft libertarians leave it open that
                  determinism is compatible with our actions’ being up to us in
                  a way conducive to freedom and moral responsibility [presum-
                  ably in the second stage of a two-stage model?]. However, they
                  believe that a more desirable freedom and moral responsibility
                  require that our actions not be parts of the unfolding of deter-
                  ministic chains of events that were in progress even before we
                  were born. If soft libertarians can view themselves as making
                  some choices or decisions that are not deterministically caused
                  or that are deterministically caused by, for example, something
                  that includes deliberative judgments that are not themselves
                  deterministically caused, then they can view themselves as ini-
                  tiating some causal processes that are not intermediate links in
                  a long deterministic causal chain extending back near the big
                  bang.” 15
                  Soft libertarianism differs from modest libertarianism in that
               it does not require robust alternative possibilities. But, somewhat
               inconsistently?, Mele says (p.113) that soft libertarians do not
               assert that free action and moral responsibility require the falsity
Chapter 26




               of determinism. Mele briefly mentions a “soft compatibilism,” but
               does not develop it beyond saying that “soft compatibilism leaves
               soft libertarianism open but is not committed to it.”
               Daring Soft Libertarianism
                  In his 2006 book Free Will and Luck, Mele extended his soft
               libertarian idea to “Daring Soft Libertarianism.” Mele reaches out
               to Robert Kane’s idea of Ultimate Responsibility, in which we
               can be responsible for current actions, ones that are essentially
               determined by our character and values, as long as we formed
                 15   Mele (2006) p. 97.
                     Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                 349

that character ourselves by earlier free actions that he calls Self-
Forming Actions (SFAs). SFAs in turn require brains that are not
deterministically caused by anything outside the agent.
   Some may argue that a modest libertarianism gives libertarians
all the openness they can get without introducing into an agent
a kind of openness that entails freedom-precluding and respon-
sibility-precluding luck. But libertarians like Kane will not settle
for such modest libertarianism. For them, Mele developed a more
daring soft libertarian view, DSL.
   Daring soft libertarians, he says, especially value a power to
make decisions that are not deterministically caused - a certain
initiatory power. They opt for event-causal soft libertarianism
(p. 113). They do not like decisions made indeterministically or
at random, what Mele calls basically free action. But they accept
what Mele calls basically* free action (note the asterisk), whose
requirement for alternative possibilities at the time of action are
reduced, but whose requirement for indeterministic free actions
some time in the past (Kane’s SFAs?) is intact (p. 115).
   They can then replace the indeterministic connection between
judgments and actions with a deterministic one (p. 117). (Note
this can only be the adequate determinism of the two-stage mod-
els like Mele’s modest libertarianism.)
   Mele says that,

                                                                           Chapter 26
     “Part of what DSLs are driving at in their claims about influ-
   ence is that probabilities of actions — practical probabilities —
   for agents are not always imposed on agents. Through their past
   behavior, agents shape present practical probabilities, and in
   their present behavior they shape future practical probabilities.
   The relationship between agents and the probabilities of their
   actions is very different from the relationship between dice and
   the probabilities of outcomes of tosses. In the case of dice, of
   course, the probabilities of future tosses are independent of the
   outcomes of past tosses. However, the probabilities of agents’
   future actions are influenced by their present and past actions.”16

  16   Mele (2006) p. 122.
         350     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                       “DSLs maintain that in the vast majority of cases of basi-
                   cally* free actions and actions for which agents are basically*
                   morally responsible, agents have some responsibility for the rel-
                   evant practical probabilities... These chances are not dictated by
                   external forces, and they are influenced by basically* free and
                   morally responsible actions the agents performed in the past.” 17

               The Strawson/Fischer/Mele Hypothesis
                   Mele tells me that he and John Martin Fischer subscribe
               to the view that “even if determinism were true, we would still
               have free will.” 18 This can only be what Immanuel Kant calls
               the “wretched subterfuge” of “compatibilist free will.” As I see
               it, this hypothesis derives from two sources. First, there is P. F.
               Strawson’s view that whether determinism or indeterminism is
               true, we would not be willing to give up moral responsibility. Sec-
               ond, there is Fischer’s view that free will is only the “control condi-
               tion” for moral responsibility.
                   So we can restate the hypothesis as “even if determinism were
               true, we would still have moral responsibility.” Determinism is not
               “true,” but with this hypothesis I can completely agree.
                   And I can go farther and formulate what might be called the
               Strawson/Doyle hypothesis - “even if indeterminism is true, we
               still have free will and moral responsibility.” In my two-stage
Chapter 26




               model, indeterminism in the first stage does not prevent our will
               and our actions from being adequately determined by reasons,
               motives, feelings, etc., as compatibilists have always wanted. But
               the existence of indeterminism in the first stage means that our
               actions were not pre-determined from the moment just before
               we began to generate alternative possibilities for our actions, let
               alone from before we were born or from the origin of the universe.
                   Thoughts come to us freely. Actions go from us willfully.
                   First chance, then choice. First “free,” then “will.”
                 17    ibid. p. 123.
                 18    Personal communication.
                   Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                  351


Mele and the Libet Experiments
   Mele has lectured and written extensively on interpretations of
the Libet experiments.19 (See Chapter 17.) He has debated Daniel
Wegner, the Harvard psychologist and author of The Illusion of
Conscious Will, who claims that the experiments deny free will.
   Mele’s main criticism is what he sees as a systematic bias in data
collection. All the Libet experiments work by permanently storing
the last few seconds of data that have been collected, when trig-
gered by detecting the wrist flex itself.
   If there is no wrist flex, there is no data collected. The equally
likely (in my view) cases of a rise in the readiness potential (RP)
followed by no wrist flex would have been systematically ignored
by Libet’s method of data collection.
   It seems to imply a one-to-one relationship between initial rise
in RP and the flex, which is misinterpreted as a causal relationship.
   I explain the initial rise in the readiness potential as the first
stage in my Cogito model, where alternative possibilities for
action are being considered, including to flex or not to flex. See
pages 241-3 for more details.
Big Questions in Free Will

                                                                          Chapter 26
   Mele directs a four-year project at Florida State funded with
$4.4 million from the Templeton Foundation. He will be offering
multiple $40,000/year post-doc positions. We can expect some
significant new research on the free-will problem over the next
four years. My hope is that the post-docs will read this book.
Mele in Barcelona
   You can see a discussion between Mele, Robert Kane, and
myself on YouTube debating whether two-stage models should be
called “determined,” because the word implies pre-determinism
to so many philosophers, and our two-stage models are distinctly
not pre-determined.20
  19   Mele (2010)
  20   www.youtube.com/watch?v=iwDZUXr6dIc
         352      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                               ism
                       patibil
                 com
                                     t I f ?                                            Inc
                                  Wha ompatibilism
         n
  Hard I
                                               Semic
              n   ism
      Illusio                                                           ism
                                                         m p a tibil
                                                 wI  nco
                     lism                  Narro
            o s sibi
Chapter 27




       Im p                                                             ism
                                                            m p a tibil
                                                   ft Inc o
                                               So                                       yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                           m i n i s m
                     deter
                                                                                  What If?            353
              In
              What If?                   n ism
                                 a r i a
                         Libert Had Accepted What
              What if Libertarians
              Dan Dennett Gave To Them In 1978?
                                                                               -Ca           usal
               Over thirty years ago, Daniel Dennett proposed a decision-Agent
            making model that heuthought
                                     - C a  sal would appeal to libertarians.
            Unfortunately,     nt
                       Evelibertarians       largely ignored Dennett’s proposal.
               The history of the free-will problem would have been quite dif- al
            ferent if libertarians had accepted and credited what Iomight     n  - C aus
                                                                                     call
            “Dennett’s Dangerous Idea.” I imagine the difference below.
                                                                       N
               In chapter 15 of his 1978 S      FABrainstorms, entitled “On Giving
         t i b i l i s m                     book

     mpa
            Libertarians What They Say They Want,” Dennett articulated the
                                                                          litylibertar-
co          case for a two-stage model of free will better a
            ians had done before.1                     Soft C
                                                                    u
                                                                  thans a
                                                                       most

               Dennett concluded
                        a t i b i l ism his essay optimistically, but he sounds very m
      a d I   comlike
            much
            n        p Ted Honderich in the concern that his determinism
                                                                         e  r t a r ianis
  Bro                                                               Lib 23).
            inspires despair (Honderich calls it dismay. Seet Chapter
                                                                  Sof
                  “Even if one embraces the sort of view I have outlined, the
                                   a
                  deterministicriview
                              a      n  iofsm
                                            the unbranching and inexorable history
                                                                                               a tion
                        e r t
                      b universe can inspire terror or despair, and perhaps
                   Lithe                                                              er m i n
     o d e  st oflibertarian                                            e l f - D etthe
   M                           is right  that  there is no way to    S
                                                                  allay these   feelings

                                                 gitopermit us to make sense of the
                  short of a brute denial of determinism. Perhaps such a denial,
                  and only such a denial,  C  owould                                                    Chapter 27
       p a t i b  lism that our actual lives are created by us over time out of
                 inotion
Incom uenpossibilities
                   c e s) that exist in virtue of our earlier decisions; that we
                                                                                      n is             m
       eq trace a path through a branching maze that both defines who           r m i
tive S
                                                   d In                    dete
                  we are, and why, to some extent (if we are fortunate enough
                                                 e
                                             i t
                                      nd Lim
                  to maintain against all vicissitudes the integrity of our delib-

             ism                  a
                  erational machinery) we are responsible for being who we are.

     r m i n      That prospect deserves an investigation of its own. All I hope to

Dete
                  have shown here is that it is a prospect we can and should take
                  seriously.“ 2

                 1     Dennett (1978), p. 293. See Chapter 25 for more on Dennett’s Valerian model.
                 2     Dennett (1978), p. 299
         354     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  I, for one, took Dennett very seriously. When I read this pas-
               sage, my immediate reaction was that Dennett had invented the
               two-stage model that was my Cogito model3 from the early 1970’s,
               with the exception of my basing the random generation of alter-
               native possibilities on true quantum randomness.
                  I was convinced that other scientists and philosophers would
               add quantum randomness to Dennett’s model and soon publish
               the equivalent of my Cogito model. I set my philosophy aside and
               continued to entrepreneur and develop productivity tools.
                  At the Barcelona “Experts Meeting” on Free Will in October
               2010, Robert Kane says that he also had independently thought of
               Dennett’s two-stage model but did not publish it. He says he want-
               ed “something more,” because once the alternatives are spelled out
               in the first stage, the second-stage decision is “determined” by the
               agent’s character and values.
                  I agree with Kane that decisions are adequately determined,
               given the agent’s character, values, etc., but that they are not pre-
               determined from before the first considerations are generated
               and deliberations began.
                  The “something more” that Kane wants is some randomness
               in the decision itself, something he calls “plural rationality.” This
               allows the agent to flip a coin as long as she has good reasons for
               whatever she chooses randomly. Kane gives an example of a busi-
Chapter 27




               nesswoman on the way to a meeting who witnesses an assault
               and must decide between aiding the victim and continuing to her
               work. Note that Dennett had already described a similar case in
               Brainstorms - a new Ph.D. who could choose randomly between
               assistant professorships at Chicago and Swarthmore. She could
               have an “intelligible rationale” and feel responsible whichever way
               she decided, because both ways had good reasons. 4
                  And note that Kane, like me, specifically is trying to use quan-
               tum randomness as the basis for a free-will model, where Dennett
               thinks some computer pseudo-randomness might be enough to
                 3    See Chapter 13
                 4    Dennett (1978), p. 294
                                                                  What If?   355

generate alternatives. Neither of them could see where such ran-
domness would be located in the brain, without making every-
thing random. Kane and I differ primarily in the timing of the
quantum randomness, I put it in the first stage, he in the second.
   Neither Kane nor Dennett see the randomness located through-
out the brain, like my model.
It takes two - Cogito and Intelligo
   In chapter 5 of Brainstorms, Dennett described the work of
the poet Paul Valéry, who took part in a 1936 Synthése confer-
ence in Paris with Jacques Hadamard. The conference focused
on Henri Poincare’s two-stage approach to problem solving,
in which the unconscious generates random combinations. In
his book, The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Mind,
Hadamard quoted Valéry (as did Dennett later), summarizing the
conference opinion,
      “It takes two to invent anything. The one makes up combina-
      tions; the other one chooses, recognizes what is important to
      him in the mass of things which the former has imparted to
      him.” 5
   The Valéry reference has led to Dennett’s model (and similar
ones from Alfred Mele, for example) being called “Valerian.” At
the end of chapter 5, Dennett finds names for the generator and
                                                                               Chapter 27
tester phases in St. Augustine’s note that the Latin cogito means to
“shake together” and intelligo means to “select among.”
   “The Romans, it seems, knew what they were talking about,”
Dennett comments.
   Actually, most Romans were Stoics. And they violently opposed
Epicureans like Lucretius, who argued for some chance (the
swerve) to break the chain of determinism. For the Stoics, and
for modern determinists who crave strong natural causal laws,
chance is anathema and atheistic. For them, Nature was synony-
mous with God and Reason.

  5      Hadamard (1949), p.30, cited by Dennett (1978), p.293.
         356     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


               What If Kane and Dennett Had Done Otherwise?
                  Dan Dennett’s phone rings a short time after publication of his
               1978 book, Brainstorms.
                  Kane: Hi, Dan. This is Bob Kane. I’ve just been reading your
               essay “On Giving Libertarians What They Say They Want” and
               see a lot to like in it. You know that Wilfrid Sellars challenged
               me some years ago to reconcile his Manifest Image, in which we
               all feel we have free will, with his Scientific Image, in which phys-
               ics either makes everything determined, in which case we are not
               free, or if modern quantum mechanics is right, everything is un-
               determined and we can’t have responsibility for our actions.
                  Dennett: Good to hear from you, Bob. You know, I am a natu-
               ralist and think the will is a natural product of physical laws and
               biological evolution, so Sellars’ Scientific Image should be good
               enough. And Sellars is a Compatibilist, like me.
                  Kane: I know, but I feel we need something more than your
               decision-making model with its intelligent selection from what
               may be a partially arbitrary or chaotic or random production
               of options. Don’t you see that the agent would be determined to
               select the best option from those which were randomly generated,
               consistent with the agent’s reasons, motives, feelings, etc.? Liber-
               tarians want something more, some freedom in the decision itself.
Chapter 27




                  Dennett: What’s wrong with our actions being determined by
               our reasons and motives? R. E. Hobart said in 1934 that free will
               requires some determination, otherwise, our actions would be
               random and we wouldn’t be responsible.
                  Kane: Right, but I think I can show that randomness does not
               always eliminate responsibility. I have this idea that a business-
               woman could be torn between helping a victim and going on to
               her business meeting. She has good reasons for doing either one
               and she could feel responsible even if she acted indeterministi-
               cally. What do you think?
                  Dennett: I agree. I showed the same thing, with my example
               of a new Ph.D. choosing between the University of Chicago and
                                                 What If?              357

Swarthmore. Her choice would depend on what considerations
happened to come to her before her decision. But luck is real. I
think we need to keep randomness out of the decision and limit
it to generating options, what you libertarians call the alternative
possibilities.
    Kane: Well, having alternative possibilities (I call them AP) is
not enough. I want what I call Ultimate Responsibility (or UR).
That needs what I call a self-forming action (an SFA) in which the
choice is a torn decision like that of the businesswoman.
    Dennett: But if that torn decision is ultimately based on a coin
flip, or a quantum event in your brain amplified to the neuron
level, as Compton suggested, it would be random actions that
form your self. Is that intelligible?
    Kane: I’m not happy with it. I concede that indeterminism,
wherever it occurs, diminishes control over what we try to do.
    Dennett: I think that my model installs indeterminism in the
right place for a libertarian, if there is a right place at all.
    Kane: I haven’t figured out the location and the mechanism of
amplification, but something like quantum randomness must be
going on in our brains if we are free.
    Dennett: Isn’t it the case that my proposed model for human
deliberation can do as well with a random-but-deterministic gen-
eration process as with a causally undetermined process?
    Kane: Don’t pseudo-random number generators always have              Chapter 27
an algorithm that determines them? Wouldn’t the author of that
algorithm determine your life, like Laplace’s demon? And aren’t
computer algorithms quintessentially artificial and not natural?
    Dennett: You have a point. Quantum randomness is no doubt
more natural than the pseudo-random number generators we
cognitive scientists are using in artificial intelligence and compu-
tational models of the mind.
    Kane: I could perhaps agree that randomness should be limited
to generating ideas for your intelligent selection process, if you
would agree that the randomness could be quantum randomness.
         358     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Dennett: I never denied the existence of quantum randomness.
               I’m just not convinced it is necessary for free will.
                  Kane: It seems to be necessary, if we want to break the causal
               chain that pre-determines every event since the beginning of the
               universe. The cosmic-rays that cause genetic variations are irre-
               ducibly random quantum events. Otherwise, every new biological
               species would have been pre-determined at the universe creation.
               That would satisfy the intelligent design crowd. Do we want to do
               that?
                  Dennett: Absolutely not. Did you see that Karl Popper
               recently gave a lecture at Darwin College, Cambridge, and he
               likened free will to genetic evolution? He said that the selection of
               a kind of behavior out of a randomly offered repertoire may be an
               act of free will.
                  I can quote him. He said
                  “I am an indeterminist; and in discussing indeterminism I have
                  often regretfully pointed out that quantum indeterminacy does
                  not seem to help us; for the amplification of something like, say,
                  radioactive disintegration processes would not lead to human
                  action or even animal action, but only to random movements.
                  “I have changed my mind on this issue. A choice process may
                  be a selection process, and the selection may be from some
                  repertoire of random events, without being random in its turn.
Chapter 27




                  This seems to me to offer a promising solution to one of our
                  most vexing problems, and one by downward causation.”
                 Popper says he changed his mind! Not usual for a philosopher.
               He compared free will to natural selection. Again I quote him:
                  “New ideas have a striking similarity to genetic mutations. Now,
                  let us look for a moment at genetic mutations. Mutations are,
                  it seems, brought about by quantum theoretical indeterminacy
                  (including radiation effects). Accordingly, they are also probabi-
                  listic and not in themselves originally selected or adequate, but
                  on them there subsequently operates natural selection which
                  eliminates inappropriate mutations. Now we could conceive
                  of a similar process with respect to new ideas and to free-will
                  decisions, and similar things.”
                                                               What If?                   359

   Dennett: What do you think, Bob? Could libertarians accept
this as the most plausible and practical model for free will? It has
your quantum randomness but also my limiting randomness to
the consideration-generator in my decision-making model.
   Kane: Perhaps I should accept your point (and Hobart’s) that
our willed decisions need to be determinations. Ever since Hume,
you Compatibilists have insisted that free will can be reconciled
with some determinism. I guess I should go along.
   Dennett: And I can accept quantum indeterminism as a
natural part of the free-will process. If Hume reconciled free will
with determinism, perhaps we can say that we reconciled it with
indeterminism?
   Kane: Sounds good to me. My Libertarian friends, most of
whom had little appetite for my idea that genuine quantum
randomness helps with the free will problem, might be pleased
with your two-part Valerian idea, if quantum indeterminism in
the right place does no harm to the will.
   Dennett: Compatibilists, and most of my friends are compat-
ibilists, will be delighted that they were right all along insisting
on compatibility with some determinism, to make their actions
reasons responsive. What should we call our compromises?
   Kane: Maybe a “corrected” or more comprehensive compati-
bilism? Since you compatibilists are in the majority, I think you
                                                                                            Chapter 27
should keep the naming rights. And “Libertarian” is too easily
confused with the politicians anyway.
   Dennett: That sounds good to me. Comprehensive
compatibilism makes free will compatible with both some deter-
minism and some indeterminism, both in the right places at last. 6




   6      If Dennett and Kane could have seen this compromise, today I would just be
writing the history of philosophy, instead of helping to make the history of philosophy
with the two-stage model for comprehensive compatibilism. See the next chapter.
         360       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis         m
                                       De t e r

                                                          a t i b i lism
                                                 C    omp      r min   m  is
                                 i n ism                 e t e
                    De   t e r m                  Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                          So
                        patibil
                                ism
                                e  n   s  i v    e
 H a r d I ncom
                         p re h             m
                                                                                        Inc
                      Com paSteimbicoimlis
                                         p a t i b ilism

           s i o n ism Com
     Ill u
                                              bilism       mp  ati
                                                   I n c o
                                           Nar row
               o s s i b ilism
      Im     p                                                          ism
                                                                  tibil
Chapter 28




                                                          o m p a
                                                 Soft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                           i m i t e d
                                                     e lw            ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                         This chapter on the web
             informationphilosopher.com/freedom/comprehensive_compatibilism.html
                         m i n i s mComprehensive Compatibilism 361
             In    deter
             Comprehensive nism
                     b e r t a ria
             Compatibilism
                  Li
                                                                          ausal
                                                                           t-Ccan be
               Comprehensive compatibilists believe that Free
                                                                 A genWill
           reconciled both with adequate determinism (as David Hume and
           R.E. Hobart believed)aand     u     l indeterminism (as many think-
                                           sawith
           ers since E
                                    - C
                          vent James and I believe).
                       William
               Comprehensive compatibilists also believe in a free will modelusal
           that is compatible with biological evolution, a humanN              -Cthat
                                                                           onwill
                                                                         free
                                                                                     a
           could have evolved naturally from “behavioral freedom” in lower
                       m                    SFisAthus triply compatible.
         t i b i l i s
           animals. The two-stage model

     mpa
               Free will is not a metaphysical mystery or gift of God. Ityevolved
co         from a natural biophysical property of all organismsC a u salit
                                                            t
                                                      Sof that normally actions
               Comprehensive compatibilists believe
           are adequately       lism
                          tibidetermined      by deliberations prior to a decision,
           n  c o  m  p a
                        one’s character and values, one’s feelings andta         r i a n ism
         I including                                                          desires,
                                                                            r will is
  Broad in short, one’s reasons and motives. TheySbelieve            ibefree
                                                               oft Lthat
           “reasons responsive.” This is traditional self-determination.
                             a r i a n ism          put limits on both determinismination
                 L ib  e r t
               Comprehensive         compatibilists
                                                                               t erm
        e   s
           andt   indeterminism.                                      f - D
                                        Pure chance, irreducible randomness, e        or
   Mod quantum indeterminacy in the two-stage model              Sel of free will is
                                        C   gito alternative possibilities.
           limited in the first stage toogenerating
                                                                                        Chapter 28
          t i bBut    m note that sometimes we can “deliberately” choose to
                ilisalso
      p a
Incom uact             s) when there is no obvious reason to do one thing
                 randomly,
                  c ethan                                                n is        m
      eq     e n
                                                                   r m i
                                                              dete
           rather         another. This resembles the ancient “liberty of indif-
tive S ference,” which I call undetermined liberty.  In
                                             i t e d
                                      nd Lim
               Comprehensive compatibilists believe that humans are free

             ism                a
           from strict physical determinism - or pre-determinism, and all
     r m i n
Dete
           the other diverse forms of determinism.1
                They accept the existence of ontological chance, but believe
           that when chance is the direct and primary cause of actions, it
           precludes agent control and moral responsibility.
               1     See Chapter 9.
         362     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Note that for information philosophy and its theory of values,
               there is a critical separation of the question of free will from ques-
               tions about moral responsibility.2
                  The existence of free will is a scientific question for physics,
               biology, psychology, and neuroscience.
                  Moral responsibility, on the other hand, is a cultural ques-
               tion for ethicists and sociologists. Information philosophy also
               separates responsibility from the ideas of retributive punishment,
               which is still another social and cultural question.

                   Libertarians believe that determinism and freedom are incom-
               patible. Freedom requires some form of indeterminism.
                   But the two-stage models of free will favored by comprehen-
               sive compatibilists also require adequate determination of an
               action by the agent’s motives and reasons, following deliberation
               and evaluation of the alternative possibilities for action gener-
               ated by that indeterminism. This we call self-determination.
                   Critics of libertarianism (both determinists and compatibilists)
               attack the view of some extreme libertarians that chance is the
               direct cause of actions or even that actions are not caused at all. If
               an agent’s decisions are not connected in any way with character
               and other personal properties, they rightly claim that the agent
               can hardly be held responsible for them.
                   Robert Kane’s “torn decisions” and Self-Forming Actions
Chapter 28




               are an exception to this criticism, because the agent has excel-
               lent reasons and has put in great efforts for acting whichever way
               the ultimate decision goes. Kane’s SFAs are special cases of our
               undetermined liberties.3
                   Many determinists and perhaps most compatibilists now accept
               the idea that quantum physics requires real indeterminism in the
               universe. Comprehensive compatibilists can agree with them that
               if indeterministic chance were the direct and primary cause of our
               actions, that would not be freedom with responsibility.
                   Although any quantum event is probabilistic, quantum pro-
               cesses in macroscopic objects like biological organisms are highly
               regular, because of the statistical law of large numbers. Even in
                 2     See Chapter 20.
                 3     See Chapter 24. and page 365.
                          Comprehensive Compatibilism                     363

microscopic structures like atoms and molecules, it is quantum
mechanics that provides the phenomenal stability of such struc-
tures over cosmic lifetimes.
   I hope that determinists and compatibilists might also agree
that if chance is not a direct and primary cause of our actions,
such chance would do no harm to responsibility. In this case,
comprehensive compatibilists should be able to convince some
hard determinists of their position.
   In a personal communication, Galen Strawson agrees that
comprehensive compatibilism offers a “kind of freedom that is
available” to us. If chance is limited to providing real alternative
possibilities to be considered by the adequately determined will,
it provides an intelligible freedom and can explain both freedom
and creativity.
     Comprehensive compatibilists can give the determinists, at
least the compatibilists, the kind of freedom they say they want,
one that provides an adequately determined will and actions for
which we can take responsibility.
   As to the indeterminists, they should know that the model of
comprehensive compatibilism uses indeterminism in two places,
first in the generation of alternative possibilities in the first stage
of the two-stage model, and then, when the two-stage model does
not result in a single act of self-determination, in Robert Kane’s
cases of the “torn” decisions of Self-Forming Actions.
                                                                            Chapter 28
   I should note that Kane is concerned that my attempt to change
the terminology of the free will debates will only confuse issues
further. I am sensitive to that criticism. But in my opinion, the
emphasis on Peter van Inwagen’s “incompatibilism” (discussed
in Chapter 6) has set back understanding. In any case, my goal is
only to restore the traditional terminology, to reconcile liberty not
with necessity, but with self-determination.
   What could be simpler than a return to the traditional categories
of the free will debates, with the new insight that my two-stage
model can reconcile free will with both adequate determinism and
indeterministic libertarianism?
         364     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


               A Taxonomy for Comprehensive Compatibilism

                            Determinism                    Libertarianism


                                            Comprehensive
                                             Compatibilism
                 Figure 28-1. A simplified taxonomy of free will categories
                  You will recognize the traditional taxonomy of Chapter 6, but
               instead of the compatibilists being determinists who euphemisti-
               cally call their position “free will,” they now have an element of
               genuine, but limited, indeterminism, to provide them with origi-
               nation, creativity, and to make them the authors of their lives.
               How Comprehensive Compatibilism
               Does Otherwise in the Same Circumstances
                  The physical location of indeterminacy in the brain4 and the
               timing of chance mental events relative to the decision are the two
               most critical problems for any model of libertarian free will.
Chapter 28




                 Figure 28-2. Decisions considered as a point in time.
                  My two-stage Cogito model of free will expands the decision
               from a single point in time between the “fixed past” and the future.
                  It becomes a two-stage process, first a “free” stage, then a “will”
               stage.” Each of these takes some time.
                  Note that the two-stage model explains how an agent can be in
               exactly the “same circumstances,” and given the fixed past and the
               laws of nature, the agent can nevertheless act differently, that is to
               say, choose to do otherwise. 5
                 4     See informationphilosopher.com.freedom/location.html
                 5     See Chapter 13, p. 199 for more details.
                               Comprehensive Compatibilism              365




  Figure 28-3. Doing otherwise in the “same circumstances.”
   This is because the decision is at the end point of a temporal
process that begins with those “same” circumstances. The decision-
making process is not an instant in time.
   Note also that the decision is not determined as soon as possi-
bilities are generated and the alternatives evaluated. The agent may
decide that none of the options is good enough and, time permit-
ting, go back to “think again,” to generate more possibilities.
   The decision is adequately determined, but it is not pre-
determined from the “fixed past” just before the circumstances.
   We can now integrate Robert Kane’s Self-Forming Actions
(SFAs) into comprehensive compatibilism. My Two-Stage Model
and Kane’s Self-Forming Actions are connected seamlessly in a
temporal sequence. The sequence uses indeterminism at the start,
to generate alternative possibilities for action that could not have
been pre-determined, and it again uses indeterminism at the end,
in those cases where the second-stage of the two-stage model can
not narrow down the possibilities to a single self-determined action.     Chapter 28




  Figure 28-4. Undetermined liberties and self-determination.
  Undetermined liberties include Kane’s SFAs, which are “torn”
decisions that require effort to resolve conflicts between moral and
prudential choices. See Chapter 24.
         366      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m
                                                         So
                      patibil
                              ism
                                                        d a l
 H       ard In
                com
                         Th e icomp                Scan                  m
                                                                                        Inc
                  ndin g                                        atibilis
                E
               ionism
                             Sem
     Illus                                                              ism
                                                         m p a tibil
                                                 wI  nco
                     lism                  Narro
         p o s sibi
      Im                                                        a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                                   ft Inc
Chapter 29




                                               So                                       yI
                         M  odel                                                Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                      m i n i s m
                deter
                                                      Ending The Scandal           367
            In
            Ending The Scandal
                           nism    ar       ia
                            Libert
               The main goal of the Information Philosopher website has
           been to provide students everywhere with the resources they need
           to be more knowledgeable than their professors on some classical
                                                                         t - C  a  usal
           problems of philosophy that remain unsolvedAtoday.         n
                                                                  ge Free will is
           the most important of these problems.
                                        a      l
                                          usacan
                                    C
               I hope also thatt-professors        find some new information they
                        Evenon things they learned from their teachers.
           need to improve
               Our goal is to break the great causal chain of sophisticated
                                                                            n  - C  a usal
                                                                                    but
           unproductive arguments, sophistical and paradoxical        Nodialogues,
           logical puzzles and language games that are still worth teaching
                                              FAhopelessly inadequate as philo-
                                            Sare
         t i b i l i s m
           as history of philosophy, but

co   mpa   sophical principles for the free and creative young minds
           preparing for an open future in which they
                                                         oft C  a u
                                                             author s a
                                                                    their
                                                                            y we are
                                                                        litown   lives.
                                                      S
               We cannot solve the problem of free will with logical paradoxes,
                         a tibilisofmclever determinisms designed to limit athe
           despite centuries
                   m   p                                                             n ism
         I n  c o                                                         r t a r i
  Broad power of the laws of Nature and of Nature’s
           freedom      of our “finite”   minds  by  comparison  with the   “infinite”
                                                               ft Libe
                                                           SoGod.
               And we cannot dis-solve
                                i a n i s m the pseudo-problem of free will with tion
           languagee
                 L  i b   rtarthat dress old concepts in new jargon, that tchange
                        games
                                                                                e  r m  ina
            s t                                                             e
   Modethe debate from determinism to the impossibility         Selfof-D
           the subject from free will to moral responsibility,         that change
                                                                         alternative
           possibilities, and that C          i t o
                                           og the momentous contest between
                                         change
          t i b
           free ili s
                  willm and  determinism    to juggling words like compatibilism
                                                                                       Chapter 29
      p a
Incom uand        ces)
                 incompatibilism.
                                                                        n is        m
        q    e  n
                                                                  r m i
                                                             dete
      e
tive S Peter van Inwagen’s reframing the problem as “incompatibil-
               Compatibilism      is a “quagmire of evasion,” said William James.

                                       i t e d In
                                nd Lim
           ism” is a “tarpit of confusion,” I say, because it puts libertarians

             ism              a
           and hard determinists in the same category.
     r m i n
Dete
               One way to look at the moral scandal that concerns me is to
           focus on the actualism of compatibilist and determinist philoso-
           phers. They believe that there is but one possible actual future.
               This is not the message that academic philosophers should be
           delivering to students, especially because determinism cannot be
           proved, and current scientific evidence is to the contrary.
         368     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Aristotle made clear the essential difference between the
               actual and the possible. Something was actual for Aristotle when
               it happened, when it realized its end or purpose. Otherwise it had
               the power or potential to be otherwise. 1
                  The last thing we want to tell young people is that they have
               no potential, that their future is already determined. It’s not only
               poor philosophy and bad psychology, it’s terrible science.
                  Men are not machines, and minds are not computers.
                  As Martin Heisenberg has shown us, even the lowest organ-
               isms are autonomous and have the behavioral freedom to realize
               their goals, to go from the possible to the actual.
                     “A hallmark of biological organisms is their autonomy. In
                     evolutionary terms, their autonomy allowed them to invent
                     active locomotion (automobility = locomotion not caused from
                     the outside) and to explore space. For going multicellular, cells
                     had to give up behavioral autonomy and those new creatures
                     had to reinvent automobility via the nervous system and even-
                     tually the brain. Self-ness turned animals with brains into sub-
                     jects. In my view the Self is a decisive feature in the evolution of
                     freedom. This allows for strong ownership. Behavior has to be
                     our own to be well adaptive.” 2
                  How can determinist and compatibilist philosophers convince
               themselves that the causal laws of nature imply just one actual
               future, when causality is not provable and the laws only statistical?
               We must go back to David Hume to understand this.
Chapter 29




               Our Natural Belief in Free Will
                  David Hume’s skepticism showed the inability of logic to
               “prove” facts in the physical world. No number of regular succes-
               sions of event A followed by event B can prove that A causes B.
                  Hume the Skeptic thus denied causality. But Hume the Natu-
               ralist said that we have a natural belief in causality. Similarly, we
               have a natural belief in the uniformity of nature. The sun will rise
               tomorrow. The laws of nature are not changing, so the past is a
               reliable guide to the future. None of these beliefs is logically true.
               But they all are plausible and have significant practical value.
                 1       actual = entelechy (ἐν + τέλος + ἔχειν), possible = dynamis (δύναμις)
                 2       Personal communication (2011).
                                       Ending The Scandal             369


   Hume was an empiricist. He based his ideas on observed
experience. But he had a theoretical model for human nature. He
based it on Isaac Newton’s equations of motion that describe
the physical world. At that time, it appeared that Newton’s laws
were so perfect at explaining phenomena that they must be neces-
sary. Hume equated physical necessity with logical necessity, and
even with moral necessity, in which human volitions are caused by
motives, and motives are caused by prior events.
   The debates today as between free will and determinism were
then debates between “liberty” and “necessity.” Liberty was
thought to involve chance events or mental events (the “will”) not
caused by prior events. Hume denied the existence of chance and
any other uncaused events. Following Hobbes, he defined free-
dom as freedom from external coercion, e.g., being in chains or in
jail.
   Hume’s model of the mind as governed by physical laws “re-
duced” the mind, and indeed all living things, to material physical
systems. But as Aristotle first noted, biological systems are dif-
ferent. They have a purpose or goal. Aristotle called it telos.
   The simplest molecules that were precursors of life “learned”
to replicate themselves, at which point their elemental goal was to
maintain themselves (preserve their information, using negative
entropy from the sun) and replicate themselves. Chance errors in
the replication created different molecules, some of which were
better replicators, and the rest is biological history.                 Chapter 29
     Even very young children intuitively know Aristotle’s es-
sential difference between inanimate physical objects, which fol-
low natural laws, and living things, which can originate actions,
can behave differently in the same circumstances, and which can
make choices.
   To choose is to decide between alternative possibilities. That
these are real and not apparent is because chance, which Hume
and his contemporaries denied as absurd and atheistical, is the
source of novelty, creativity, and new information in the universe.
   Hume’s dream of a classical mechanical Newtonian Mind as his
explanation for human nature, following the same deterministic
         370     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               causal physical laws as freely falling apples and the orbiting plan-
               ets, is a philosophical failure. It fails for the same reason that Ein-
               stein’s dream of a deterministic and causal explanation for the
               merely statistical laws of quantum mechanics has failed. Nature
               does play dice.
                  And until the die is cast, until the mind decides, until the
               information about the decision is recorded, our choices are free.
                  Remember that the causal explanations that Hume and Einstein
               wanted are not provable logically or by sophisticated language
               claims. Causality is a natural belief, beyond logic and language.
                  But there is a competing and more vital natural belief, also un-
               provable, namely that we have free will and can take responsibility
               for our choices.
                  Without chances and possibilities, choices are not real. Without
               an initial chance stage, the choice stage would be pre-determined.
                  My two-stage model is not a monolithic “free will.” It is a pro-
               cess, first chance, then choice, first “free,” then “will.”
                  Our thoughts are free. Our actions are willed.
                  Most actions are “determined” by the “de-liberations” that we
               call self-determination. But these were not pre-determined from
               the “fixed past” just before our deliberations began.
                  Others of our actions are undetermined liberties. When our
               deliberations do not produce a single possible action, we can
               choose any of the equally attractive options remaining, and take
Chapter 29




               full responsibility for whichever one we finally choose. Closely
               related to the ancient liberum arbitrium, these undetermined
               liberties only become self-determined in the moment of choice.
                                                                             Undetermined
                                                                Decision       Liberties
                                  Generate           Evaluate
                Fixed Past       Possibilities      Alternatives
                                                                                  Future
                                                                              De-liberated
                                                 Think Again!
                                                                           Self-Determination
                 Figure 29-1. The Two-Stage Cogito Model of Free Will.
                                       Ending The Scandal                371


Two-Step Processes
   Why two steps, two-stages, two parts? You will need to know a
bit more about information philosophy than there was room for in
the introduction to this book on free will. I hope those of you with a
serious interest in philosophy will become information philosophers
and help me with I-Phi.
   For now, it’s enough to know three important two-step processes.
   1) The cosmic creation process requires two steps.3 The first is a
microscopic quantum (hence indeterministic) event that forms an
information structure. The second is a macroscopic thermodynamic
event, in which the entropy and energy that would destroy a new
information structure, if it stayed around, is carried away to a dark
corner of the universe.
   2) Biological evolution is a two-step process. The first is a
microscopic change in the genetic code of an organism, its central
information structure. The change is usually the result of a quantum
event, like a cosmic-ray collision with the DNA. The second step is
the natural selection of some changes because they are reproduc-
tively successful and propagate.
   3) The third two-step process to create information is free will.
The Two-Stage Cogito Model of Free Will
   The first step is random thoughts about alternative possibilities
for action that are generated in the mind, generated in part because       Chapter 29
of quantum-level noise in the brain’s information structure as it
recalls past experiences to help with its deliberations.
   The second step is normally an adequately determined decision
following an adequately determined evaluation of the options. It
includes the ability to “think again,” to go back and generate more
options as needed. And we can always “flip a coin” when there is no
clear best option.
   In such cases, the final decision itself can be undetermined. The
brain has access to quantum level events. It can see a single photon
and smell a single molecule. So when it makes an undetermined
  3    See the next chapter.
         372         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               decision, it may access quantum level indeterminacy. But a random
               decision does not necessarily imply lack of responsibility. 4
                  The two-stage model for free will explains how we “can do
               otherwise in exactly the same circumstances.” 5 And it shows how
               our decisions are not pre-determined, not even determined by the
               fixed past and the laws of nature at the moment the generation of
               alternative possibilities begins.
                  If you agree that this two-stage model deserves to be considered
               in philosophy classes today, I believe we need to formulate some
               brief ways for you to frame the problem historically in the context of
               past proposed solutions. And then some very simple explanations
               of the proposed new solution.
               How You Can Make the Best Case for Free Will
                   If you have read a significant part of this book, then you are
               well-equipped to discuss the two-stage model in depth. But can you
               explain it in a few lines to your friends and even to scholars like
               philosophy professors who may have fixed views on the subject?
                  I suggest that one way to start is to situate the problem and the
               solution historically as follows, in three parts.
               Part 1 - Reconciling Free Will with Adequate Determinism
                  David Hume, in his “Of Liberty and Necessity,” section VII of
               the 1748 Enquiries concerning Human Understanding, famously
               reconciled freedom with determinism.
Chapter 29




                     “For what is meant by liberty, when applied to voluntary actions?
                     We cannot surely mean that actions have so little connexion with
                     motives, inclinations, and circumstances, that one does not follow
                     with a certain degree of uniformity from the other”
                     “By liberty, then, we can only mean a power of acting or not act-
                     ing, according to the determinations of the will” 6
                  R. E. Hobart in 1934 clarified the fact that a free will involves
               determination of the will by reasons and motives. It requires neither
               logical necessity nor strict physical determinism.
                 4       Dennett and Kane have shown this. See p. 356-357
                 5       See p. 199 for details.
                 6       Hume (1975) p. 95.
                                                  Ending The Scandal    373

   Hume, as moderated by Hobart, provided the second, adequately
determined stage of the Cogito model, which we now give the
traditional name of de-liberated self-determination.
Part 2 - Reconciling Free Will with Indeterminism
   William James, in 1884, provided the critical first stage, by
reconciling free will with objective chance.
   My own work has refined James’ explanation, to make it consis-
tent with quantum indeterminism.
   So you can say that Hume and Hobart provided half the answer
to the problem of free will. Their adequate determination reconciled
a compatibilist free will with the laws of classical physics.
   James and the others in Chapter 12 who proposed two-stage
models found the second half of the answer. In particular, I hope to
be remembered as the information philosopher who reconciled
libertarian free will with the probabilistic laws of quantum physics.
Part 3 - Will Compatibilists Accept This Improvement and
Call Themselves Comprehensive Compatibilists?
  Compatibilists were right all these centuries to reject the radical
idea that freedom means an extreme libertarianism that denies
reasonable causes for human actions. Can we convince them that
our two-stage model simply adds creative and free elements to their
current thinking on self-determination?

                 Determinism               Libertarianism                 Chapter 29


                              Comprehensive
                               Compatibilism

  Figure 29-2. A comprehensive compatibilist taxonomy.
  Since most modern compatibilists are agnostics on the truth of
determinism (or indeterminism), we hope they will accept a free
will model that is triply compatible - with Hume’s definition, with
James’ definition, and with Martin Heisenberg’s evolution of
human free will from the behavioral freedom of lower animals.
         374      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                 m inis          m
                                        De t e r

                                                         a t i b i lism
                                                 C   omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                 e t e
                    De   t e r m                  Soft D
             Hard
                                                                       pati     bilism
                                                              ft C o m
                                                            So
                              ism
 Hard I
        n        com  patibil
                                 o s m i c                                               Inc
                            e  C
                        Th nSePmrico  omce
                                         p a t isb ils
                                                     ism


                       re at i o
     Ill u s i o n ism
                      C                  patibil
                                                   ism
                                                   o w Incom
                                           N a r r
             s sibi  lism
      Im p o                                                            ism
                                                             m p a tibil
                                                    ft Inc o
                                                So
Chapter 30




                                                                                         yI
                         M  odel                                                 Leewa t
                    an
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism             (Altern
                                                                                          a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                           i m i t e d
                                                      e lw           ith L
                                                  o d
                                - S t      a ge M
                           Tw o
                                                      This chapter on the web
                             informationphilosopher.com/introduction/creation
                        m i n i s m The Cosmic Creation Process 375
             In   deter
             The Cosmic Creation
                           nism Process
                                     ar        ia
                              Libert
                 Cosmic creation is horrendously wasteful. In the existential
             balance between the forces of destruction and the forces of con-
             struction, there is no contest. The dark side is overwhelming.
                                                                                 t - C  a  usal
             By quantitative physical measures of matter and        Agenergy  n
                                                                         e content,
             there is far more chaos than cosmos in our universe. But it is the
             cosmos that we prize.    - C a u  sal
                           veinnthe t
                 As we E saw            introduction, my philosophy focuses on the
             qualitatively valuable information structures in the universe. The
                                                                                    n  - C  a usal
             destructive forces are entropic, they increase the entropy     No and dis-
             order. The constructive forces are anti-entropic. They increase the
                       m                        SFA
         t i b i l i s
             order and information.

co   mpa         The fundamental question of information philosophy
                                                                    a  u s  a   lityis there-
                                                         Soft C
             fore cosmological and ultimately metaphysical.
                 What creates the information structures in the universe?
                 At thepa
                     m      tibilism
                          starting     point, the archē (ἡ ἀρχή), the origin of theism
                                                                                           an
        d  I n  c o                                                            e  r t a r ihigh
  Bro a      universe,   all  was   light - pure radiation, at an extraordinarily
                                                                     t Lib
             temperature. As the universe expanded,Sthe          oftemperature          of the
             radiation fell. When them       first material particles formed, they were
                               a r       is
                                   iabynenergetic   photons of light. But at low enoughination
                   L ib e  r t
             quickly destroyed
                                                                                      t    rm
                                                                                        ewere
          e   s t                                                           f - D   e
   Mod able to overcome the destructive non-materialSe                    l
             temperatures,      the   quantum     cooperative constructive      forces
                                                                        particles of light
             energy, the radiation field   C       ito
                                              oofgphotons.
        p a t i b ilism
                 The   great stability of the material world is thus the result
Inc o m               es) mechanics, which most philosophers and even                      m
                                                                               is
                                                                                              Chapter 30


           u
             of
               e nquantum
                    c
       eq scientists normally view as disruptive and uncertain. Quantumr m i n
tive S indeterminacy is involved in everything new, including our
                                              e d In              dete
                                          i t
                                   nd Lim
             creativity and free will. Let’s see how.

             ism                a
                 As the universe expands (see Figure 1-3), negative entropy
     r m i n
Dete
             is generated. Most of this degrades to normal thermodynamic
             entropy, which is known as the Boltzmann Entropy. But some sur-
             vives as what is often called the Shannon Entropy, a measure of the
             information content in the evolving universe.
         376     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  David Layzer showed how entropy and information can
               increase at the same time in the expanding universe.1 There are
               two information/entropy flows. In any process, the positive en-
               tropy increase is always at least equal to, and generally orders of
               magnitude larger than, the negative entropy in any created infor-
               mation structures, to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics.




                 Figure 30-1. Information flows into Boltzmann and Shannon Entropy.
                  Material particles are the first information structures to form
               in the universe. They are quarks, baryons, and atomic nuclei,
               which combine with electrons to form atoms and eventually mol-
               ecules, when the temperature is low enough. These particles are
               attracted by the force of universal gravitation to form the gigantic
               information structures of the galaxies, stars, and planets.
Chapter 30




                 Figure 30-2. Cosmological information flows.
                 Microscopic quantum mechanical particles and huge self-
               gravitating systems are stable and have extremely long lifetimes,
               thanks in large part to quantum stability.
                 1     See page 10 in the Introduction.
                                    The Cosmic Creation Process          377

  Stars are another source of radiation, after the original Big Bang
cosmic source, which has cooled down to 3 degrees Kelvin (3K)
and shines as the cosmic microwave background radiation.




  Figure 30-3. Sun to Earth information flow.
   Our solar radiation has a high color temperature (5000K) and
a low energy-content temperature (273K). It is out of equilibrium
and it is the source of all the information-generating negative
entropy that drives biological evolution on the Earth. Note that
the fraction of the light falling on Earth is less than a billionth of
that which passes by and is lost in space.
   A tiny fraction of the solar energy falling on the earth gets con-
verted into the information structures of plants and animals. Most
of it gets converted to heat and is radiated away as waste energy to
the night sky.
                                                                           Chapter 30




  Figure 30-4. Information flows into life.
         378     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Every biological structure is a quantum mechanical structure.
               DNA has maintained its stable information structure over billions
               of years in the constant presence of chaos and noise.




                 Figure 30-5. Information flows in a human being.
                  The stable information content of a human being survives many
               changes in the material content of the body during a person’s life-
               time. Only with death does the mental information (spirit, soul)
               dissipate - unless it is saved somewhere.
                  The total mental information in a living human is orders of
               magnitude less than the information content and information
               processing rate of the body. But the information structures created
               by humans outside the body, in the form of external knowledge
               like this book, and the enormous collection of human artifacts,
               rival the total biological information content.
               Man Is Not a Machine
Chapter 30




                  And the mind is not a computer, running evolved computer
               programs. The proper way to view man, indeed any organism, is
               as an incredible information processing system.
                  A biological information processor is vastly more powerful and
               efficient than any computing machine. We can divide the human
               body into layers, with the mind at the top. The amount of infor-
               mation processing going on in the lower layers is, like the other
               entropy/information flow diagrams above, vastly greater than the
               mental stream of consciousness.
                  We philosophers like to think that the mental activity is some-
               how most important, perhaps even prior in some essential sense.
                                    The Cosmic Creation Process          379

   Plato thought the ideas come first, the instances later, as did
the neo-Platonists and the Christian tradition. In the beginning,
was the logos. Έν ἀρχή, ἑν ό λόγος. But we shall see that the logos
is the end result of a vast layering of biological processes.
   From Aristotle to the Existentialists, some philosophers
knew that existence precedes essence. And if bare existence were
not organized into information structures, there would be no
intelligence to contemplate their essences.
   The information processing going on in a human body is over
a billion times the amount processed in the mind. To appreciate
this, let’s consider just one maintenance function. Every second a
significant fraction of our red blood cells die and must be replaced.




                                                                           Chapter 30


  Figure 30-6. Information processing to maintain our red blood cells.
  Chromosomal information is being processed from our DNA
to messenger RNA to transfer DNA to the ribosome factories
where a chaotic soup of randomly moving amino acids are sorted
out to select exactly the right one to add to the rapidly growing
polypeptide chain of a new protein.
  Quantum cooperative phenomena account for the phenomenal
speed and accuracy of creating new macromolecules.
         380     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  It is helpful to distinguish at least four levels of information
               processing, from the bottom physical layer of bodily maintenance
               to the top layer in the thinking mind.

                                                Thoughts

                                               Perceptions
                                      Bodily Motions - Actions

                                 Bodily Information Maintenance

                 Figure 30-7. Four levels of information processing.
                  Bodily motions consume a great deal of information processing.
               Perceptions somewhat less, but they are the subject of a great
               deal of psychological and philosophical speculation. There is lit-
               tle room in a work on free will to go into detail, but note that
               William James’ notion of focusing attention is easy to understand
               in information terms.
                  Consider a hawk flying over a field of waving grass, who can
               instantly pick out a field mouse by its unique pattern of motion.
               Consider our ability to distinguish the recognizable voice of a
               friend in a noisy party. Our brain can separate that voice from
               nine others of equal volume (a 10 decibel ratio of signal to noise).
               If we can see the lips, we can go down 20db, to understand sounds
               that are 1/100 of the crowd noise.
                  In Bernard Baars’ Theater of Consciousness, there are un-
Chapter 30




               told numbers of perceptions and conceptions that are vying for
               the attention of the decision-making executive function. Baars
               and Dennett picture these as individual agents or homunculi with
               special knowledge who are processing the information in parallel.
               The information data rate of this unconscious parallel perceptual
               level is thus orders of magnitude higher than the serial processing
               rate of the conscious mind.
                  James called the lower level a “blooming, buzzing, confu-
               sion” and the upper level a “stream of consciousness.” Thus our
                            The Cosmic Creation Process                 381

conscious ability to communicate information, with others in
speech, with ourselves in thoughts, is practically restricted to a
small amount of information per second, compared to the bodily
information at the lower levels being processed at rates compa-
rable to today’s best computers and communication systems.
Cosmic Creation and Free Will
   How does this picture of information processing levels relate to
the two-stage model of free will? The lower levels, driven in large
part by chaotic processes and always involving quantum coopera-
tive phenomena to create information, are the biological source
for the first stage that generates alternative possibilities.
   It was convenient to introduce the two-stage model as a
temporal sequence. And it is easy to teach it this way, drawing
heuristic diagrams on the white board to illustrate it for students.
   But as was mentioned in Chapter 13,2 the random generation
stage is going on constantly, driven by internal proprioceptions
and external environmental perceptions.
   Visualizing the information processing in layers provides a
deeper understanding of how behavioral freedom in lower animals
has evolved to become free will in higher animals and humans.
   Recall from Chapter 12 that Martin Heisenberg has found
evidence that the lowest animals and even bacteria have a kind of
behavioral freedom.3 They can originate stochastic actions and are
not simple Cartesian stimulus-response reactive machines.
   I propose that there are four levels in the evolutionary devel-
                                                                          Chapter 30


opment of free will. In all four levels, the source of the random
generation of alternative possibilities in the first stage of my two-
stage model is the same. It is the essential chaos and noise that is
characteristic of information processes at the lower levels of the
organism as shown in Figure 30-7.
   But in the second stage, I argue that new methods of selecting
the best possibility are added in the upper levels.
  2    p. 201.
  3    p. 184.
         382     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


                                                  Reflection

                                                  Projection
                                            Learned Knowledge

                                          Instinctual Information




                 Figure 30-8. The evolution of behavioral freedom to become free will.
                  At the lowest level, selection is instinctive. The selection criteria
               are transmitted genetically, shaped only by ancestral experiences.
                  At the second level are animals whose past experiences guide
               their current choices. Selection criteria are acquired through
               experience, including instruction by parents and peers.
                  Third-level animals use their imagination and foresight to
               estimate the future consequences of their choices.
                    At the highest level, selection is reflective and normative4
               Conscious deliberation about community values influences the
               choice of behaviors.
                  If we go back and compare the information-processing levels
               of Figure 30-8, we see that bodily maintenance uses only the low-
               est level of instinctual information to operate. Everything the cells
               know comes to them via DNA and inherited cell processes.
                  Bodily motions at the next level can be learned, muscle memory
Chapter 30




               for example. The parallels break down for the upper two levels.
                  But the highest level of information processing in humans
               helps us to see the essential difference between humans and other
               animals. Many animals have evolved mirror neurons that allow
               them to feel what other animals are feeling. And altruistic genes
               in many organisms may explain why some animals sacrifice them-
               selves for their communities.
                  But the ability to translate our thoughts into language and
               communicate that information to others is unique. We may not
               be the only species that has thoughts, but we are the only ones that
               can share our thoughts.
                 4     Compare Christine Korsgaard’s theory of normativity. Korsgaard (1996)
                             The Cosmic Creation Process                383

Information and Love
   We began Chapter 1 asking what is information?
   We have seen that the creation of information involves quantum
mechanics to form structures, followed by the transfer away of
entropy to allow those structures to be stable against the second
law of thermodynamics.
   We found that the un-pre-determined information created in a
decision is the basis of human freedom.
   We saw that information is immaterial and likened it to spirit,
the soul in the body, the ghost in the machine.
   We showed that information is the stuff of thought, and that it is
our thoughts that are the origin of human freedom and creativity.
   We found that humans are unique in that they can share their
thoughts with other human beings.
   I want to end by arguing that sharing information has an
astonishing resemblance to another human characteristic.
   Like love, information is not consumed when we give it to
others, but increased. Both love and information do not follow
the usual economic laws of scarcity.
   Charles Sanders Peirce made evolutionary love, his agapē,
the third and ultimate step in his philosophy. For Peirce, it was
sharing information with other thinkers in an open community of
inquirers that assured the advance of knowledge.
   For me, it is caring for the work of others that matters even more
                                                                          Chapter 30

for that advance of knowledge. I want to provide my forebears
with the maximum measure of information immortality.
   If we don’t remember the work of our colleagues in the past, we
don’t deserve to be remembered by future colleagues.
   Forgetting is entropic. The moral foundation of information
philosophy is very simple. All things being equal, choose the
option that preserves the most information.
         384      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                m inis        m
                                       De t e r

                                                        a t i b i lism
                                               C    omp       r min  m    is
                                 i n ism                e t e
                    De   t e r m                 Soft D
             Hard
                                                                      pati     bilism
                                                             ft C o m

                      patibil
                              ism
                                 b l e    m        s     So

         ard In
                com
                        e r Pro                 y                                       Inc
 H
                      h
                   Ot hiSleomsico ompp a h t i b ilism

                    i n P         y s i c      s
 Ill u s i o n ism
                         n d P h
                       a       Incom
                                     p a t i b ilism
                                                 w
                         m                 Narro
                 sibilis
      Impos                                                     a tibil ism
                                                          o m p
                                               So  ft Inc
                                                                                        yI
                            odel                                                Leewa t
Chapter 31




                    an   M
             Valeri                                      p a tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                         a
                                                       m
                                      o u r c e Inco uence)
                                    S               l Seq
                                       (A   c t u a
                                                                          i m i t e d
                                                     e lw           ith L
                                                 o d
                                - S t      age M
                           Tw o
                                                     This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/problems
                          m i n i s m
                    deter
                                                          Some Other Problems 385
             In
             I-Phi Philosophical
                             nismProblems
                                       ar         ia
                                Libert
              The fundamental question of information philosophy is cos-
             mological and ultimately metaphysical.
                    What is the process that creates information structures
                                                                   n t - C auinsal
                    the universe?                           Age
                                 - C a u sal a thermodynamic
            Given the second law of thermodynamics,           which says that any
         system will overntime
                   E  v  e     t     approach                      equilibrium of
         maximum disorder or entropy, in which all information is lost,
         and given the best current model for the origin of the universe,
                                                                         n  - C  a usal
         which says everything began in a state of equilibrium         o 13.75
                                                                    Nsome
         billion years ago, how can it be that     living beings are creating and
                       m                   SFA every day? Why are we not still
               i l i s
         communicating new information
         t i b
co   mpa in that state of equilibrium?
            The elucidation by information philosophy         a u s a lity
                                                      oft C of a two-part cos-
                                                   S
         mic creation process casts light on some classical problems in
                                  m because it is the same process that cre-
                        ibilinisphysics,
                      tand
         philosophy
         n c o m  p a
                                                                           a r i a n ism
       I                                                          iber   t
  Broad ity of the human mind.
         ates new  biological      species and explains the freedom  and   creativ-
                                                        Soft L
                      rta  nism
             Some OtherriaPhilosophical Problems
                                                                                 i n at    ion
           s   t Libe                                                   et e r m
   ModeThe Problem of Knowledge                             Self-D
                                            oof certain knowledge, when our
                                       ogitand
              Epistemology is the problem
           means of perception is C limited     fallible. Instead of logical lan-
             b i l i s m
            i debates about “justified true belief,” information philoso-
       patguage
Incom uphy         ces)to information structures in the brain that correspond    n ism
         q   e nlooks
                                                                        r m    i
                                                              dete
       e
                                                                                           Chapter 31



tive S     to structures  in the world and in other minds.
                                         i t e d  In
                                 L
             The Problem of Value1
                           n d      imthe source of ultimate value be-
            i n i s mouracreated Gods, beyond Life and the Earth, to its
          Information philosophy  moves

    eterm
        yond  man  and
D       origins in a Cosmic Providence, which creates stable information
             structures we call Ergo. Note that quantum mechanics, though
             normally thought of as adding only indeterminacy, is the source
             of the stability in most information structures.
                1      informationphilosopher.com/value
         386     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Note that the problem of freedom (in this book) and the
               problem of value are tightly linked.
                  Values without Freedom are Useless.
                  Freedom without Value is Absurd.
                  The first of these views was the position of the John Stuart
               Mill utilitarians and the early twentieth-century Anglo-Ameri-
               can philosophers, who argued for utilitarian value but accepted
               determinism.
                  The second view was that of the Continental Existentialists,
               from Nietzsche to Heidegger to Sartre, that we have freedom, but
               because God is dead there are no absolute values.
                 The Problem of Free Will2
                  A dozen thinkers since William James in 1884 have proposed
               “two-stage” models of free will - first “free,” then will,” - first
               chance, then choice, - first alternative possibilities, then one ac-
               tuality. The most plausible and practical solution to the 2400-year
               old problem of free will is our Cogito model. The critical random
               component of the first stage is provided by noise in the brain’s
               information processing. The second stage is determined, but not
               pre-determined.
               Consciousness3
                  Consciousness can be defined as the capacity of an entity, usu-
               ally a living thing but we can also include artificially conscious
               machines or computers, to react to the information, and particu-
               larly to changes in the information, in its environment. We call it
               information consciousness.
Chapter 31




               The Problem of Evil4
                 Theodicy - “If God is Good He is not God. If God is God He is
               not Good.” (from J.B., by Archibald MacLeish) The question is not
               “Does God exist?” The question is “Does Goodness exist?” The
                 2    informationphilosopher.com/freedom
                 3    informationphilosopher.com/problems/consciousness
                 4    informationphilosopher.com/problems/evil
                     Some Other Philosophical Problems                    387

solution lies in a dualist world with both bad and good. If ergodic
information is an objective good, then entropic destruction of in-
formation is “the devil incarnate,” as Norbert Wiener put it.
Immortality5
   Information philosophy implies two kinds of immortality, the
material survival of genetic information and the survival of ideas
in the Sum of all knowledge and human artifacts. The survival of
parts of the genetic code in DNA is the longest approximation to
immortality known in living things. The “immortals” among us
are those whose life’s work is remembered.
The Mind-Body Problem6
   Solved in part by our Sum model, which explains how abstract
information, an idea, or knowledge is incorporated into a human
mind, and how pure ideas act on the physical world. Information
is neither energy nor matter. But it needs matter for its embodi-
ment and energy for its communication.
   Information is the mind in the body, the ghost in the machine,
as close to a spirit or soul as science can get. When we die, it is our
information that is lost.
   Our ERR (experience recorder and reproducer) model for the
mind is simpler than, but superior to, cognitive science computa-
tional models of the mind.
   Man is not a machine. And the mind is not a computer.
                                                                            Chapter 31




  5     informationphilosopher.com/problems/immortality
  6     informationphilosopher.com/problems/mind_body
         388         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Some Other Physics Problems
                  It is of the deepest philosophical significance that information
               is based on the mathematics of probability. If all outcomes were
               certain, there would be no “surprises” in the universe. Informa-
               tion would be conserved and a universal constant, as some math-
               ematicians mistakenly believe it is.
                  Information philosophy requires the ontological uncertainty
               and probabilistic outcomes of modern quantum physics to pro-
               duce new information. But at the same time, without the extraor-
               dinary stability of quantized information structures over cosmo-
               logical time scales, life and the universe we know would not be
               possible.
                  Quantum mechanics reveals the architecture of the universe to
               be discrete rather than continuous, to be digital rather than ana-
               log.
                  Moreover, the “correspondence principle” of quantum mechan-
               ics and the “law of large numbers” of statistics ensures that mac-
               roscopic objects can normally average out microscopic uncertain-
               ties and probabilities to provide the “adequate determinism” that
               shows up in all our Laws of Nature.
               The Arrow of Time7
                  Arthur Stanley Eddington connected “Time’s Arrow” with the
               direction of increasing entropy and the second law of thermody-
               namics. We now show that it is also the direction of increasing
               information.
Chapter 31




               Entanglement/Nonlocality8
                  This is a mysterious phenomenon that seems capable of “trans-
               mitting” information over vast distances faster than the speed of
               light. Information physics shows that measurements change prob-
               abilities everywhere, faster than the speed of light, although no
               signaling is possible, since no matter or energy is transmitted.
               Macroscopic Recurrence9
                 Ernst Zermelo argued against Ludwig Boltzmann’s H-
               Theorem (his derivation of the second law of thermodynamics),
                 7      informationphilosopher.com/problems/arrow_of_time
                 8      informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/EPR
                 9      informationphilosopher.com/problems/recurrence
                             Some Other Physics Problems                  389

on the grounds that given enough time, any system would return
to the same starting conditions and thus entropy must decrease as
well as increase. Information physics shows that exactly the same
circumstances can never recur. Friedrich Nietzsche’s “Eternal
Return of the Same” is a physical impossibility, because of the in-
creasing information in the universe.
Microscopic Reversibility10
  Joseph Loschmidt also argued against Ludwig Boltzmann
on the grounds that if time were reversed the entropy would
decrease. Boltzmann agreed that it would, according to his initial
version of the H-Theorem which was derived from classical
dynamical physics. He then defended his case for entropy increase
on the basis of probabilities and an assumption of “molecular dis-
order.” A quantum-mechanical treatment of binary (two-particle)
collisions validates Boltzmann’s “molecular disorder” assumption.
The Problem of Measurement11
   We explain how our measuring instruments, which are usually
macroscopic objects and treatable with classical physics, can give
us information about the microscopic world of atoms and sub-
atomic particles like electrons and photons, which are described
with quantum physics. The so-called “cut” (John Bell called it the
“shifty split”) between the classical and quantum worlds occurs at
the moment that stable observable information enters the world.
It does not require the consciousness of an observer.
Schrödinger’s Cat12
                                                                            Chapter 31


   Erwin Schrödinger’s paradox of simultaneous live and dead
cats is solved by noting that the wave function probabilities refer
to the proportions of live and dead cats that would be found in
many identical experiments. In every particular case, the wave
functions collapse at the instant the random quantum event pro-
duces stable information in the world. No “conscious observer” is
needed. The cat is its own observer.


  10   informationphilosopher.com/problems/reversibility
  11   informationphilosopher.com/problems/measurement
  12   informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/schrodingerscat
       390      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                              m inis        m
                                     De t e r

                                                      a t i b i lism
                                             C    omp       r min  m    is
                               i n ism                e t e
                  De   t e r m                 Soft D
           Hard
                                                                    pati     bilism
                                                           ft C o m

                    patibil
                            ism
                                             Te r m s  So

 Ha        rd Inc
                  om
                            a        r y o f                                          In
                  G l o s s                  Se m i
                                                   ilism
                                                    c o mp    atib

            n   ism
    Illusio
                                                            p atibilism
                                                   In c o m
                                               w
                       m                 Narro
               sibilis
     Impos                                                    a tibil ism
                                                        o m p
                                             So  ft Inc
                                                                                      a yI
                  an   M  odel                                                L e e w
           Valeri                                          tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                        a
Glossary




                                                     m p a
                                    o u r c e Inco uence)
                                  S               l Seq
                                     (A   c t u a
                                                                        i m i t e d
                                                   e lw           ith L
                                               o d
                              - S t      age M
                         Tw o
                                                   This chapter on the web
                       www.informationphilosopher.com/afterwords/glossary
                        m i n i s m
                  deter
                                                           Glossary of Terms - A             391
              In
              Glossary of Terms
                                         a  r i a  n ism
                On the Information e  rt
                                 ibunderlines)
              hyperlinks (with L
                                    Philosopher   website, our glossary of terms uses
                               blue             to provide recursive definitions from

                                                                                       sal
              within each entry. We cannot do this in print, of course.
                                                                            t - C a u
              such as the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy and       en where
                 Hyperlinks go to other pages in the I-Phi website and to external
                                                                  AgWikipedia,
                                                                                    sites

              available.
                                       a u     l
                                           sa“Search
                             e nt
                 The web version
                           v       - C
                                  also offers         I-Phi” links to find all the pages
                         E
              on the I-Phi website that refer to the given term. In this print version
              we provide an index. Some glosses also offer a click on “I-Phi Page”atousal
                                                                                 -C
                                                                         NonConcepts
              get a much more detailed description of the term in the Core
              sections of the website.

                        m                    SFAonline glossaries of relevant philo-
          t i b i l i s
                 The website also links to other

      mpa
              sophical terms, such as:
                                                                       sality
nco                                                               a u
                 • Ted Honderich’s Determinism and FreedomCTerminology
                                                            t
                                                       Sof in Free Will Project
                 • Alfred Mele’s Lexicon for the Big Questions

                    atibili       sm
          A c o m p                                                              r ian      ism
         In                                                                r t a
   Broad                                                     Soft    Lib e
              Actualism
                                 nithat
                             iaidea      m
                                    s the events that do happen are the only pos- ation
                   e  r    r
            Actualism isathe
                        t                                                     min
        e s t
         sible L ib that could possibly have happened. Actualism
               events
                                                                    - D e t erthe
                                                                       denies
     Mod existence of alternative possibilities.            Sel   f
                                        Cogito
                 Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Sequences, Conse-
              quence Argument, Direct Argument, Frankfurt-style cases, Indirect Argument,
        p a t i b ilism
              Standard Argument
 Incom uActual        s)
                 nceSequence                                                       n ism
      S e q    e
                                                                         r  m    i
                                                                     tethat lead up
ative                                                            de
                                                              nthe
                The Actual Sequence is the sequence of eventsIin
                                                           d
                                           ite
                                                                                                  Glossary



                                                                   past

                                     L i m
              to the current moment of deliberation and decision. The term is used in

                          m      and
              Direct Arguments, such as Peter van Inwagen’s Consequence Argument,
                is
      e r m i n
              Frankfurt-style cases and John Martin Fischer’s Semicompatibilism.

  Det            It is contrasted with the Alternative Sequences that result from
              Alternative Possibilities. Arguments for incompatibilism that consider
              alternative possibilities are called Indirect Arguments.
       392        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Sequences, Conse-
             quence Argument, Direct Argument, Frankfurt-style cases, Indirect Argument,
             Standard Argument, Tracing, Transfer Principle

             Adequate Determinism
                Adequate Determinism is the kind of determinism we have in the
             world. It is also called “near determinism” (Ted Honderich), “almost
             causal determinism” (John Fischer), and “micro-indeterminism” (John
             Searle). Macroscopic objects are adequately determined in their mo-
             tions, giving rise to the appearance of strict causal determinism.
                Microscopic objects, on the other hand, show the probabilistic con-
             sequences of indeterminism, due to quantum mechanics. These proba-
             bilistic effects usually average out in large objects, leading to the illusion
             of strict causal physical determinism, including the powerful and very
             productive idea of deterministic laws of nature.
                Other glosses -- Determination, Determinism, Indeterminism, Laws of Na-
             ture, Quantum Mechanics

             Agent Causal
                Agent-causal libertarianism is the idea that an agent can originate
             new causal chains, actions that are not predetermined to happen by
             events prior to the agent’s deliberation (between alternative possibilities
             perhaps) and decision. Some agent-causal theories are metaphysical, as-
             suming that the agent’s mind is not bound by the physical laws that gov-
             ern the body. Some philosophers claim mental events are “non-causal.”
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Causality, Causa Sui, Event Causal,
             Indeterminism, Origination

             Agnostic
                Most modern philosophers claim to be agnostic on the “truth” of de-
             terminism or indeterminism. For example, Alfred Mele claims his argu-
Glossary




             ments for “Agnostic Autonomy” are valid whether or not determinism
             is true. John Fischer says semicompatibilists are agnostic. And Derk
             Pereboom has renamed “hard determinism” to “hard incompatibilism”
             to remain agnostic.
                Agnosticism ignores the great asymmetry between determinism and
             indeterminism. Determinism is congenial to claims that freedom con-
             sists of following the laws of nature and that God has foreknowledge of
             our actions. Indeterminism is much more difficult to reconcile with a
                                           Glossary of Terms - A                   393

responsible freedom, since it has such negative implications - random-
ness, chance, uncertainty, and contingency - leading to the randomness
objection to free will.
  Other glosses - Determinism, Foreknowledge, Indeterminism, Standard Ar-
gument

Akrasia
   Akrasia, from the Greek a-kratos (no power), describes “weak-willed”
actions taken against one’s better judgment. Rationalism assumes there
is always a single best way to evaluate an agent’s options or alternative
possibilities, so that weakness of will is fundamentally irrational.
   Other glosses - Strongest Motive, Weakness of Will

Alternative Possibilities
   Alternative Possibilities for thought and action were thought to be a
requirement for free will and moral responsibility until Harry Frankfurt
extended John Locke’s “locked room” example of a person who freely
chose to stay in a room, unaware that the doors had been locked, so that
alternative possibilities did not exist for him.
   Note that alternative possibilities should not be interpreted as prob-
abilities for actions. This is a mistake made by many prominent philoso-
phers who assume that indeterminism makes chance the direct cause of
action.
   Other glosses - Determination, Direct Argument, Frankfurt Examples, In-
determinism, Indirect Argument, Undetermined Liberty

Alternative Sequences
   Alternative Sequences are hypothetical counterfactual sequences of
events in the past that lead up to the current moment of deliberation
and decision. They result from Alternative Possibilities. Arguments for
incompatibilism that consider alternative possibilities are called Indi-
                                                                                     Glossary




rect Arguments.
   Alternative Sequences are contrasted with the Actual Sequence that
leads up to the current moment of deliberation and decision. The term
is used in Frankfurt-style cases and John Fischer’s Semicompatibilism.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt-style cases, Indirect Ar-
gument
       394        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Asymmetry
                There are two important uses of this term in free will and moral re-
             sponsibility.
                The first is the great asymmetry between determinism and indeter-
             minism in the standard argument against free will. Determinism is much
             easier to reconcile with the will than is indeterminism (pure chance).
                Susan Wolf has pointed out the strange asymmetry between praise
             and blame. Those opposed to punishment for retributive reasons (as op-
             posed to practical consequentialist reasons) are often in favor of praise
             for good deeds. This reflects the ancient Platonic view that we are re-
             sponsible only for the good we do. Our errors we blame on our igno-
             rance, which is, unfortunately, no excuse before the law.
               Other glosses - Illusion, Consequentialism, Determinism, Indeterminism,
             Moral Responsibility, Revisionism, Retributivism

             Authenticity
                Authenticity (from Greek authentes, author) suggests that we are the
             author of our actions, that we originate actions which are “up to us.”
             But various forms of determinism claim other authors for many or all
             actions.
               Other glosses - Autonomy, Control, Determinism, Origination, Up To Us

             Autonomy
                Autonomy, (from auto + nomos) is literally self-lawful, self-govern-
             ing, or self-rule, is often used in the free will debates as an alternative to
             free will, freedom of choice, freedom of action, etc.
                Like the term authentic, autonomy suggests that we are the author of
             our actions, that our actions are “up to us.”
                Other glosses - Authenticity, Control, Freedom, Free Will, Origination, Up
             To Us
Glossary




             Avoidability
                Avoidability is a synonym for “could have done otherwise.”
                It is the libertarian condition that the agent has alternative possibili-
             ties for action. Daniel Dennett defends avoidability as an evolved free-
             dom even in a deterministic universe.
               Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Done Otherwise, Yes-No Objection
                                         Glossary of Terms - A                  395


B
Basic Argument
   Galen Strawson developed a Basic Argument that denies the exis-
tence of free will and moral responsibility. It is based on an infinite re-
gress and denial of any causa sui or uncaused cause. Briefly stated, the
regress says that you do what you do because of your character. To be
responsible for your character, you must have done something to form
that character. But that something was done by your character at an ear-
lier time, and so on ad infinitum, or at least to when you were too young
to be responsible.
   Although Strawson is agnostic and says his argument works whether
determinism or indeterminism is true, his denial of any causa sui ef-
fectively cancels indeterminism and the Basic Argument resembles the
Consequence Argument.
  Other glosses - Agnostic, Consequence Argument, Direct Argument, Moral
Responsibility, Standard Argument, Ultimacy

Broad Incompatibilism
   Broad Incompatibilism is Randolph Clarke’s synonym for traditional
compatibilism. Clarke distinguishes it from his Narrow Incompatibil-
ism, which is a synonym for John Martin Fischer’s concept of Semicom-
patibilism.
   Broad Incompatibilism is incompatible with both free will and moral
responsibility.
   Other glosses - Compatibilism, Incompatibilism, Moral Responsibility, Nar-
row Incompatibilism, Semicompatibilism

C
                                                                                  Glossary




Causality
   Causality is the basic idea that all events have causes. When every
event is caused completely by prior events and their causes, it leads to
the idea of determinism. A causal chain links all events to earlier events
in a limitless sequence. Theologians inconsistently imagine the chain to
break with an uncaused cause (causa sui) which they identify with God
and miracles.
       396        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Quantum indeterminacy produces uncaused causes. There is still a
             causal chain, but it no longer permits complete predictability. Events are
             now merely probable, no longer certain, though the probability can be
             arbitrarily close to certainty. Most macroscopic events are, for practical
             purposes, as predictable as perfect determinism would have allowed.
             Nevertheless, a break in the causal chain is a requirement for free will.
               Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Causa Sui, Determinism, Indeter-
             minism

             Causa Sui
                Causa Sui describes an event that is self-caused or uncaused. The event
             might be the product of an agent with metaphysical power. It might be a
             random accident with only probabilistic outcomes. Theologians identify
             the causa sui with miracles, saying that only God is a causa sui. Friedrich
             Nietzsche famously called it “the best self-contradiction that has been
             conceived so far, it is a sort of rape and perversion of logic “
               Other glosses - Agent Causation, Causality, Indeterminism

             Chance
                Chance has been called an illusion by philosophers who argued that
             probability is only the result of human ignorance. William James saw an
             “antipathy to chance” in most philosophers.
                Chance has historically been seen as a negative idea, associated with
             gambling, for example. Chance has been regarded as atheistic, since it
             appears to deny Foreknowledge.
               Other glosses - Causa Sui, Randomness Objection, Undetermined Liberty

             CNC
               CNC is Robert Kane’s term for the Covert and Non-constraining
             Control of the kind in Frankfurt-style cases and manipulation of agents.
Glossary




               Other glosses - Frankfurt-style cases, Manipulation Argument

             Compatibilism
                Classical compatibilism is the idea that free will exists in a world that
             is deterministic. It was invented by the Stoic Chrysippus and developed
             by Thomas Hobbes and David Hume.
                Classical compatibilists are determinists. Immanuel Kant called com-
             patibilism a “wretched subterfuge.” William James called compatibilism
                                              Glossary of Terms - C                 397

a “quagmire of evasion.” He called compatibilists “soft determinists,”
who evade the fact of their “antipathy to chance.”
   Most modern compatibilists, aware of modern quantum physics,
avoid the determinist label, claiming to be agnostic about the “truth”
of determinism or indeterminism. Alfred Mele defines “soft compati-
bilism” as admitting that some indeterminism might be useful, since it
breaks the causal chain beck to the Big Bang.
   After P. F. Strawson, philosophers have changed the debate from free
will to moral responsibility. Many now conflate free will and moral re-
sponsibility.
   Semicompatibilists, following John Martin Fischer, argue for the
compatibilism of moral responsibility and determinism (or indeter-
minism). Like Strawson, they say that even if determinism were true,
we would not surrender the idea of moral responsibility implicit in our
natural attitudes toward blame and praise, punishment and reward.
  Other glosses - Agnostic, Determinism, Incompatibilism, Indeterminism,
Semicompatibilism

Consequence Argument
   If our current actions are caused directly by and traceable to events
long before our birth, we can not be morally responsible for them. Peter
van Inwagen coined this term for his argument, which is simply a varia-
tion on the standard Determinism Objection to free will. He developed
this argument as an improvement on the Traditional Argument that had
depended on avoidability or the ability to do otherwise, which implied
the agent had alternative possibilities for action. Van Inwagen accepted
the idea that Frankfurt-style cases had called alternative possibilities
into question.
   Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities,, Causality, Direct Argument, Frank-
furt Examples, Moral Responsibility, Tracing, Traditional Argument
                                                                                      Glossary




Consequentialism
   Consequentialism is a theory of moral responsibility that makes mor-
al judgments based on the consequences of an action. Moritz Schlick
argued that it is acceptable to punish agents despite their lack of free will
because of the beneficial effects on behavior that result.
   Consequentialism also describes theories of punishment that are
justified because of the consequences, e.g., the deterrence of a certain
       398         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             crime, as opposed to a retributivist theory, that punishes because the
             agent simply deserves the blame.
               Other glosses - Consequence Argument, Moral Luck, Moral Responsibility,
             Retributivism

             Control
                Control is what is needed for an agent to feel an action originates
             with and is “up to her.”
                Some (e.g, Harry Frankfurt) say control is found in a hierarchy of
             desires. Some (e.g, John Fischer) say control is being “responsive to rea-
             sons.” Fischer divides control into “guidance control” and “regulative
             control,” the latter involving alternative possibilities.
                Determinism undermines control, as do various manipulation
             schemes including behavioral conditioning, hypnosis, brainwashing,
             and the like, as well as physiological problems like addictions, obses-
             sions, and other mental disorders. External coercion denies even the
             freedom claimed by classical compatibilism.
                In Frankfurt-style cases, hypothetical interveners exert control over
             decisions if and only if the actions appear to be ones the intervener does
             not want.
               Other glosses - Agent Causation, Alternative Possibilities, Compatibilism,
             Determinism, Frankfurt Examples, Guidance Control, Hierarchy Of Desires,
             Origination, Reasons-Responsive, Up To Us



             D
             Degrees of Freedom
                Degrees of Freedom is the idea that freedom is not an all-or-nothing
             true/false question. Freedom is always limited by constraints on action,
Glossary




             whether simply physical constraints, external coercion, or internal dis-
             abilities. Fewer constraints mean more degrees of freedom.
                When freedom depends on the existence of viable alternative pos-
             sibilities, an agent with greater intelligence, education, or experience is
             qualitatively more free because she is more likely to generate workable
             options, more ways to do otherwise. More alternatives mean more free-
             dom.
                 Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Done Otherwise
                                         Glossary of Terms - C                 399


Deliberation
   Deliberation is the consideration of alternative possibilities and their
evaluation according to the agent’s character, values, desires, and beliefs,
with the aim of choosing one of the alternatives as a course of action.
   Note that even determinists appear to believe they have alternative
courses of action when they deliberate. That is, they must practically
consider that their alternatives are undetermined before their choice is
made, and that they are free to choose any of them. If the agent knew
with certainty that only one alternative existed, she could no longer de-
liberate.
   Randolph Clarke uses “deliberative” to describe two-stage models of
free will, which locate indeterminism in the first stage, to distinguish
them from “centered” free will models like that of Robert Kane, that
locate indeterminism in the decision stage. Clarke also calls deliberative
freedom “indirect” freedom.
   Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Determinism, Determined Delib-
eration, Indeterminism

Determination
  Determination is the act of deciding, ending a process of deliberation
and evaluation. It can include undetermined liberties, in which there is
chance “centered” in the decision itself and determined deliberations, in
which there is no chance in the decision.
  Other glosses - Deliberation, Determined Deliberation, Determinism, Self-
Determination

Determined Deliberation
  A decision that is adequately determined by the available alternative
possibilities. There is no randomness in the decision itself. These are
examples of Hobart determination. But they are not necessarily pre-
                                                                                 Glossary




determined before the generation of alternative possibilities began.
  Other glosses - Deliberation, Determinism, Self-Determination, Undeter-
mined Liberty

Determinism
   Determinism is the idea that there is but one possible future, and
that it is determined by the “fixed” past and the (mistakenly presumed
deterministic) Laws of Nature.
       400        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                There are many kinds of determinism. None of them are based on
             sufficient evidence. Most have become mere dogmatic truths. Deter-
             minism remains a hypothesis that is very popular among philosophers,
             but it is entirely unjustified. Determinism is an illusion.
                Aware of modern quantum physics, most philosophers admit the
             world is indeterministic, but they say that free will would be compatible
             with determinism, if determinism were true.
                Other glosses - Causality, Compatibilism, Determination, Indeterminism,
             Pre-Determinism

             Determinism Objection
                The Determinism Objection is the first horn in the traditional di-
             lemma of free will. Either determinism is true or indeterminism is true.
             In neither case can there be any moral responsibility. Note that the great
             asymmetry between determinism and indeterminism has led philoso-
             phers to favor the kind of deterministic or causal explanations that are
             the apparent basis for laws of nature. But determinism is an illusion.
             Many philosophers declare themselves agnostic on this objection to free
             will. The determinism objection is the core idea behind Peter van Inwa-
             gen’s Consequence Argument.
                Other glosses - Agnostic, Consequence Argument, Determinism, Luck Ob-
             jection, Illusion, Standard Argument, Randomness Objection


             Direct Argument
                The Direct Argument for the incompatibility of determinism and
             moral responsibility does not depend on avoidability or the ability to do
             otherwise. John Fischer developed it as an improvement on Peter van
             Inwagen’s Consequence Argument, using a Transfer Principle of Non-
             Responsibility which traces the causes of current decisions and actions
             back in the causal chain of the “actual sequence.”
Glossary




                Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Alternative Possibilities, Consequence Ar-
             gument, Indirect Argument, Done Otherwise, Standard Argument, Tracing,
             Transfer Principle

             Do Otherwise
                The idea that an agent could have done otherwise was historically
             seen as a requirement for free will. This idea is in clear conflict with the
             deterministic idea that the past allows but one possible future.
                                          Glossary of Terms - D                   401

   G. E. Moore and others say that “could have done otherwise” sim-
ply means “if the agent had chosen to, he could have done otherwise.”
This obviously requires a different past (which implies past alternative
possibilities). Some philosophers call this the “if-then” hypothetical or
conditional analysis.
   Harry Frankfurt developed sophisticated arguments to show that al-
ternative possibilities need not exist to claim that an agent is free.
   Nevertheless, if in the present an agent has alternative possibilities,
she can say “I can do otherwise.” Change that to the past tense once the
agent has chosen and she can say “I could have done otherwise.”
   Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Fixed Past, Frankfurt Examples

Downward Causation
   Downward Causation is the idea that higher-level processes can exert
a “downward” influence on lower levels. Examples include the dualist
immaterial mind influencing the body, and macroscopic systems, such
as the brain, influencing quantum-mechanical wave functions at the
level of the atoms. Where reductionism assumes all causation is from
the bottom up., downward causation works from the top down.
   Other glosses - Quantum Mechanics

Dual Control
   Dual Control is the power of an agent to act or not to act, in exactly
the same circumstances. That is given the Fixed Past and the Laws of
Nature just before the action (or the lack thereof), the agent can either
act or avoid performing the act.
   Robert Kane and Richard Double call this “dual (or plural) rational
control.” Double suggests that it may be impossible to act rationally in
two different ways, given the same reasons to act. Kane also called it the
“plurality condition” when there are many alternative possibilities for
                                                                                    Glossary



action, each of which has comparable good reasons.
   Actions that have dual or plural rational control are Undetermined
Liberties.
   Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Compatibilism, Control, Determin-
ism, Done Otherwise, Laws of Nature, Undetermined Liberty, Yes-No Objec-
tion
       402         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


             E
             Epistemic Freedom
                Epistemic Freedom is the idea that since we cannot know the future,
             we have a kind of freedom even in a deterministic world.
                It is closely related to epistemic probability, which says there is no
             real (or ontological) chance. There is only human ignorance about the
             complete details that would allow us to predict the future exactly. Reli-
             gious thinkers credit this to our finite minds, whereas the infinite mind
             of God has complete Foreknowledge.
                 Other glosses - Foreknowledge, Ontological, Probability

             Event Causal
               Event-causal libertarianism denies strict causality, the idea that every
             event has antecedent physical causes which completely determine all
             subsequent events. Some causes must be uncaused to break the causal
             chain of determinism. Uncaused causes include quantum events, whose
             outcomes are only probable. Event-causal theories raise the randomness
             objection in the standard argument against free will.
                Other glosses - Agent Causal, Causality, Determinism, Indeterminism,
             Standard Argument

             F
             Fixed Past
                The Fixed Past refers primarily to the obvious fact that past events
             are not changeable. But it appears often in determinist/compatibilist ac-
             counts of whether an agent could have done otherwise. “One could only
             have done otherwise if either the Fixed Past or the Laws of Nature had
Glossary




             been different,” goes the argument.
                The conclusion is “There is but one possible future, and it is deter-
             mined at each moment by the Fixed Past and the (deterministic) Laws
             of Nature.”
                G. E. Moore and others say that “could have done otherwise” sim-
             ply means “if the agent had chosen to, he could have done otherwise.”
             This obviously would have been a different past, one of the alternative
             possibilities. Some philosophers call this the “if-then” hypothetical or
             conditional analysis.
                                         Glossary of Terms - E                 403

  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Compatibilism, Determinism, Do
Otherwise, Laws of Nature

Foreknowledge
   Foreknowledge is the idea that the future is already known, usually to
a supernatural being.
   In classical Newtonian physics, a Laplacian super intelligence could
in principle predict the future from the classical laws of physics, given
knowledge of the positions and velocities of all the atoms in the uni-
verse.
  Other glosses - Determinism, Free Will, Laws of Nature

Frankfurt Cases
    Frankfurt-style case or examples claim that an agent can be respon-
sible, can be said to act freely, even though no alternative possibilities
exist. Harry Frankfurt attacked what he called the Principle of Alternate
Possibilities (PAP). Alternative possibilities for thought and action were
considered to be a requirement for free will and moral responsibility
until Frankfurt extended John Locke’s “locked room” example of a per-
son who freely chose to stay in a room, unaware that the doors had been
locked, so that an alternative possibility did not exist. In Frankfurt-style
thought experiments a hypothetical demon blocks all possibilities ex-
cept the one that he wants the agent to choose.
    Note that Frankfurt assumes that alternative possibilities do in fact
exist, or there would be nothing for his hypothetical intervening demon
to block. Since information about the agent’s decision does not exist un-
til she makes her decision, Frankfurt’s hypothetical intervening demon
(much like the similar Laplacian demon or God’s Foreknowledge) does
not exist. This is the Information Objection to Frankfurt-style examples.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Indirect Argument, Information
Objection, Kane-Widerker Objection, Leeway Incompatibilism
                                                                                 Glossary




Freedom of Action
   Freedom of Action must be carefully distinguished from Freedom of
the Will.
   An action is said to be free by classical compatibilists like Thomas
Hobbes and David Hume if the agent is not coerced by external forces.
       404        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                The action may be completely determined by causal chains going
             back in time before the agent’s birth, but they are nevertheless free in
             the compatibilist sense.
                In his essay, Two Concepts of Liberty, Isaiah Berlin defined freedom
             of action as “negative freedom,” and free will as “positive freedom.” It
             is also known as Voluntarism, in contrast to Origination. And it is the
             Liberty of Spontaneity rather than Liberty of Indifference.
                 Other glosses - Causality, Compatibilism, Determinism, Free Will, Liberty
             of Indifference, Liberty of Spontaneity, Origination, Voluntarism

             Free Will
                Free Will is sometimes called Freedom of Action. Libertarian Free
             Will includes the availability of Alternative Possibilities and the ability
             to Done Otherwise.
                John Locke encouraged the separation of the adjective free, which
             describes deliberation, from the (adequate) determination of the will.
                Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Alternative Possibilities, Delibera-
             tion, Done Otherwise

             Future Contingency
                 The most famous Future Contingent is Aristotle’s Sea Battle (De
             interpretatione 9). The Principle of Bivalence says that the statement
             “There will be a sea battle tomorrow” is either true or false. And either
             way necessarily binds the truth of the future contingent event.
                 Diodorus Cronus’ “Master Argument” denied any future contingen-
             cy.
                 Aristotle, ever sensible, decided that there was no present truth or
             falsity to a future contingent statement. He denied that the truth of a
             proposition is a necessary truth, and thus denied Logical Determinism.
             Indeed, contingency means that the event depends on the future, and so
Glossary




             does its truth.
                 Many Stoics appear to have regarded the truth of future contingent
             statements as predetermining all future events. But Chrysippus denied
             necessity even as he affirmed fate and physical causal determinism.
                 Modern philosophers (especially J. Łukasiewicz) have developed a
             three-valued logic to handle such statements, but not with complete
             success.
                Other glosses - Determinism, Principle of Bivalence, Master Argument,
             Standard Argument
                                         Glossary of Terms - F                  405


G
Guidance Control
    John Martin Fischer separates an agent’s control into two kinds. The
first he calls “guidance control” - the kind of control needed to initiate
or originate an action, by being “reasons-responsive” and taking owner-
ship of the action, meaning the agent can say the action was “up to me.”
For Fischer, this includes steering a vehicle which is on a fixed track and
actually can only make determined turns.
    Another kind of control is “regulative control” - the kind needed to
choose between “alternative possibilities.” Fischer describes guidance
control as happening in the “actual sequence,” where regulative control
refers to “alternative sequences” of events. Derk Pereboom uses the re-
lated terms source and leeway incompatibilism.
  Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Se-
quences, Control, Direct Argument, Leeway Incompatibilism, Origination,
Reasons-Responsive, Source Incompatibilism

H
Hard Determinism
   Hard Determinism was coined by William James to describe deter-
minists who fully accept the negative implications of determinism. They
reject any free will. They deny the voluntarism of Thomas Hobbes, the
negative “freedom from” external constraints on our actions. They also
deny any positive “freedom to” originate our actions, to be the authors
of our lives, the claim that things “depend on us” (in Greek ἐφ ἡμῖν).
   Other glosses - Compatibilism, Determinism, Hard Incompatibilism, Origi-
nation, Up To Us, Voluntarism
                                                                                  Glossary




Hard Incompatibilism
   Hard incompatibilists deny any indeterminism in the “actual se-
quence” of events. No event “originates” in the agent. Since nothing is
“up to us,” they argue for the incompatibility of determinism and moral
responsibility.
       406         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Hard incompatibilists deny both free will and moral responsibility.
             They call free will an “illusion” and some call for revisionism. William
             James called such thinkers “hard determinists.” Derk Pereboom coined
             the new term for those who are agnostic on indeterminism and deny
             free will and moral responsibility, whether determinism is true or not.
                Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Agnostic, Illusion, Indeterminism, Origi-
             nation, Revisionism, Source Incompatibilism, Up To Us

             Hierarchy Of Desires
                Harry Frankfurt formulated the idea of a Hierarchy Of Desires. First-
             order desires or volitions are desires to act. Second-order desires are
             desires to desire, for example, to want to act. The theory invites a regress
             of willings, and recalls the comments of John Locke and Arthur Scho-
             penhauer. “We are free to will, but can we will what we will?”
                Frankfurt says moral responsibility requires a first-order desire with
             which the agent “identifies,” which means she has a second-order desire
             that is consistent with the first-order desire that moves her to action.
                 Other glosses - Moral Responsibility

             I
             Illusion
                 It is now common among hard incompatibilists to call free will an
             illusion. this may be because of Frankfurt Examples that claim to prove
             that Alternative Possibilities do not exist. Or it may be because of the
             standard argument against free will. In any case, the real illusion is de-
             terminism, in its many forms.
                 Illusionists are often revisionists calling for an end to retributive pun-
             ishment.
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt Examples, Hard Incom-
Glossary




             patibilism, Standard Argument, Retributivism, Revisionism

             Incompatibilism
                Incompatibilists come in two kinds. Both claim that determinism is
             incompatible with free will. One kind were called “hard determinists”
             by William James. They deny free will. The other are libertarians. They
             deny determinism.
                Today many incompatibilists declare themselves agnostic about the
             “truth” of determinism and say the incompatibilities extend to indeter-
             minism as well.
                                         Glossary of Terms - H                   407

   Derk Pereboom coined “hard incompatibilism” to describe agnostics
on determinism who deny both free will and moral responsibility. They
call free will an “illusion” and some call for revisionism.
   The traditional argument for incompatibilism assumes alternative
possibilities and the ability to do otherwise. The Consequence Argu-
ment and Direct Argument do not.
   Other glosses - Agnostic, Alternative Possibilities, Broad Incompatibilism,
Consequence Argument, Determinism, Done Otherwise, Direct Argument,
Hard Incompatibilism, Indeterminism, Illusion, Indeterminism, Illusion, Lee-
way Incompatibilism, Semicompatibilism, Source Incompatibilism, Tradition-
al Argument

Indeterminism
   Indeterminism is the idea that some events are uncaused, specifically
that they are random accidents with only probabilistic outcomes. In an-
cient times, Epicurus proposed that atoms occasionally swerve at ran-
dom, breaking the causal chain of determinism and allowing for moral
responsibility. In modern physics, we now know that atoms constantly
swerve, or move indeterministically, whenever they are in the presence
of other atoms. The universe is irreducibly random on the atomic scale.
Laws of Nature are therefore probabilistic or statistical. Although for
large objects, the departure from classical laws of motion is usually en-
tirely insignificant, indeterministic quantum noise plays a role in the
two-stage model of free will.
  Other glosses - Causality, Causa Sui, Determinism, Laws of Nature, Moral
Responsibility, Probability

Indirect Argument
   The Indirect Argument for the incompatibility of determinism and
moral responsibility depends on avoidability or the ability to do other-
wise. If the agent does not have alternative possibilities, she cannot do
                                                                                   Glossary



otherwise, and she cannot be morally responsible.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Basic Argument, Consequence Ar-
gument, Direct Argument, Standard Argument

Information Objection
  The Information Objection claims that Frankfurt examples can not
prove that Alternative Possibilities do not exist, because the information
needed by an intervener to block alternatives does not exist until the
moment of an agent’s decision.
       408        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt Examples, Kane-Widerk-
             er Objection, Standard Argument, Yes-No Objection

             Intellect
                Intellect is often contrasted with Will, when the latter is identified
             with the desires and passions and the former identified with reason.
             From Aquinas to Hume, some philosophers argued that acts of will are
             always based on emotions and desires, not the pure intellect that gener-
             ates, evaluates, and deliberates the alternative possibilities.
               Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Deliberation, Evaluation, Reasons-
             Responsive

             K
             Kane-Widerker Objection
                Robert Kane and later David Widerker objected to Frankfurt-style
             examples that posit a demon or intervener who allows the agent to do
             “freely” whatever the intervener wants her to do. The objection notes
             that the intervener can not know what an agent is going to do without
             assuming the agent is determined and the intervener has Foreknowl-
             edge. This is an epistemic objection.
                The intervener needs a “prior sign” of the causal chain. Such a sign is
             an event that leads causally to the decision, and thus Frankfurt examples
             “beg the question” by assuming determinism. Information about the
             agent’s decision does not exist until she makes her decision (the onto-
             logical Information Objection), so Frankfurt’s hypothetical intervening
             demon (much like the similar Laplacian demon or God’s Foreknowl-
             edge) can not exist.
               Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt Examples, Information
             Objection, Yes-No Objection
Glossary




             L
             Laws of Nature
               The “Laws of Nature” are often cited in compatibilist arguments as
             controlling events, together with the “Fixed Past.”
               The idea appears often in determinist/compatibilist accounts of
             whether an agent could have done otherwise. “One could only have
                                           Glossary of Terms - K              409

done otherwise if either the Fixed Past or the Laws of Nature had been
different,” goes the argument. The Fixed Past refers primarily to the ob-
vious fact that past events are not changeable.
   The usual conclusion is “There is but one possible future, and it is
determined at each moment by the Fixed Past and the (deterministic)
Laws of Nature.”
   However, the real Laws of Nature, beginning with the most funda-
mental laws of physics, are indeterministic and probabilistic, reflecting
the availability of alternative possibilities..
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Compatibilism, Determinism,
Done Otherwise, Fixed Past

Leeway Incompatibilism
   Leeway Incompatibilism requires indeterminism in the “alternative
sequences” provided by alternative possibilities, to establish incompat-
ibility of determinism and moral responsibility. By contrast, Source In-
compatibilism depends on actions that originate within the agent in the
“actual sequence.” Derk Pereboom coined this term, which is a variation
on the Principle of Alternative Possibilities (PAP).
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Source Incompatibilism

Liberty of Indifference
   Liberty of Indifference (liberum arbitrium indifferentiae) is an an-
cient case of two options so similar that only a miniscule effort is needed
to choose one over the other. This seemed to be a case where even an
immaterial mind might move a material body. It was also argued that
where options are identical, randomness would suffice to choose one.
Some philosophers argued that this randomness was at the heart of free
will, showing its absurdity and unintelligibility. In a famous example
typical of philosophical test cases, the scholastic teacher Jean Buridan
                                                                                Glossary



placed an ass equidistant between identical bales of hay. Since animals
lack our God-given liberty, Buridan argued, the ass would starve to
death.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities,

Liberty of Spontaneity
  Liberty of Spontaneity was Descartes’ (and the Scholastics’) term for
what Thomas Hobbes called Voluntarism. Spontaneity translates the
Greek automaton (αủτóματον).
       410        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Descartes contrasted it with Liberty of Indifference, but they are
             not proper opposites. It is more properly contrasted with Libertarian
             “Free Will” and with Berlin’s Positive Freedom, which is the “freedom
             to” choose or act that comes with genuine Alternative Possibilities and
             results in actions that are “up to us.,”that we originate.
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Liberty of Indifference, Self-Real-
             ization, Voluntarism

             Logical Fallacy
                The Logical Fallacy is to assume that purely logical (and linguistic)
             analysis can yield “truths” about the world. Logical positivism was in
             practical terms a logical fallacy. The hundreds of papers published on
             Harry Frankfurt’s attacks on the idea of alternative possibilities are a
             prime example. Nothing is logically true of the physical world. Modal
             analyses using the idea of possible worlds shows that anything that is
             not internally contradictory can be postulated of some possible world.
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt-style Examples,

             Luck Objection
                The Luck Objection to free will and moral responsibility arises be-
             cause the world contains irreducible indeterminism and chance. As a
             result, many unintended consequences of our actions are out of our
             control.
                We are often held responsible for actions that were intended as good,
             but that had bad consequences. Similarly, we occasionally are praised
             for actions that were either neutral or possibly blameworthy, but which
             had good consequences.
                In a deterministic world, it is hard to see how we can be held re-
             sponsible for any of our actions. Counterintuitively, semicompatibilist
             philosophers hold that whether determinism or indeterminism is true,
Glossary




             we can still have moral responsibility.
                At the other end of the spectrum, some libertarians are critical of any
             free will model that involves chance, because the apparent randomness
             of outcomes would make such free will unintelligible, because it would
             be a matter of luck.
                Unfortunately, much of what happens in the real world contains a
             good deal of luck, giving rise to many of the moral dilemmas that lead
             to moral skepticism.
                Whether determinist, compatibilist, semicompatibilist, or libertar-
             ian, it seems unreasonable to hold persons responsible for the unin-
                                        Glossary of Terms - L                411

tended consequences of their actions, good or bad. In many moral and
legal systems, it the person’s intentions that matter first and foremost.
   And in any case, actions need not have moral consequences to be
free, that would commit the moral restrictivism of restricting free deci-
sions to moral decisions.
   Other glosses - Agnostic, Consequentialism, Control, Determinism Objec-
tion, Moral restrictivism, Indeterminism, Mind Argument, Moral Luck, Stan-
dard Argument, Randomness Objection

M
Manipulation Argument
   The Manipulation Argument grows out of the accepted loss of con-
trol and moral responsibility for agents who are addicted or induced
to act by hypnosis and the like. As with the hypothetical interveners
in Frankfurt-style cases, these arguments often postulate counterfactual
manipulators - such as evil neuroscientists who control the develop-
ment of persons from the egg (as in Brave New World) or condition
them in their formative years (like a “Skinner box” reinforcing selected
behaviors). The argument says that if we deny responsibility when such
manipulators have control, why not deny it when causal determinism
(or random indeterminism) is in control?
   The Manipulation Argument is only meant to enhance the intuition
of lost control, in order to support the Consequence Argument and
similar Determinism Objections in the standard argument against free
will. Derk Pereboom’s Four-Case Argument is a well-known example of
a Manipulation Argument.
   Other glosses - Consequence Argument, Control, Moral Responsibility,
Standard Argument

Master Argument
                                                                               Glossary




   The Master Argument was first formulated by Diodorus Cronus, a
late 4th-century philosopher of the Megarian School, who argued that
the actual is the only possible and that some true statements about the
future imply that the future is already determined. He formulated a
“Master Argument” to show that if something in the future is not going
to happen, it was true in the past that it would not happen.
       412        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                This is related to the problem of future contingency, made famous in
             the example of Aristotle’s Sea-Battle in De Interpretatione 9. Aristotle
             thought statements about the future lacked any truth value.
                Note that the truth value of a statement made in the past can “actu-
             ally” be changed if an event does or does not happen, showing that the
             “fixed past” has some changeability.
                Other glosses - Actualism, Basic Argument, Consequence Argument, Fu-
             ture Contingency, Principle of Bivalence, Standard Argument

             Mind Argument
                The Mind Argument is Peter van Inwagen’s name for the Random-
             ness Objection in the standard argument against free will. Alfred Mele
             calls it the “Luck Objection.”
                Van Inwagen named the Mind Argument for the journal Mind,
             where most of the randomness objections were published, especially R.
             E. Hobart’s 1934 classic “Free Will As Involving Determination And In-
             conceivable Without It.”
               Other glosses - Luck Objection, Randomness Objection, Standard Argu-
             ment

             Modal Fallacy
                The Modal Fallacy usually involves possible or contingent statements
             that are falsely claimed to be necessary. For example:
                   This proposition is true. (contingent)
                   If it is true, it cannot be false. (contingent)
                   If it cannot be false, then it is true and necessarily true (modal fal-
             lacy).
                Ted Warfield clams that his colleague Peter van Inwagen’s Conse-
             quence Argument contains contingent premises that make it a modal
             fallacy. Warfield has reformulated a purely necessary form of the argu-
Glossary




             ment. Unfortunately, necessary arguments do not apply to the world.
               Other glosses - Consequence Argument

             Modest Libertarianism
                Modest Libertarianism is a concept proposed by Alfred Mele for con-
             sideration by Libertarians. It is a two-stage model of free will in which
             indeterminism is limited to the early stages of the deliberation process
                                         Glossary of Terms - M                   413

which consider alternative possibilities that may or may not “come to
mind.” Modest libertarianism is a variation of Daniel Dennett’s 1978
two-stage “Valerian” decision model, in his provocative essay “Giving
Libertarians What They Say They Want.”
   Mele feels that randomness anywhere in the causal chain leads to his
Luck Objection, a variation on the standard Randomness Objection.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Indeterminism, Luck Objection,
Randomness Objection

Moral Luck
   Moral Luck is Thomas Nagel’s notion that since an action’s conse-
quences are beyond the agent’s control, randomness makes moral re-
sponsibility a matter of chance. This is often framed as the Luck Objec-
tion, a variation on the randomness objection Since there is irreducible
randomness in the universe, there are no doubt many cases where luck
enters into moral situations, but not universally. Many actions are ad-
equately determined and have reliable and predictable consequences,
enough to establish the general concept of moral responsibility.
  Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Consequentialism, Control, Luck
Objection, Moral Responsibility, Standard Argument, Randomness Objection

Moral Restrictivism
   Moral Restrictivism is to assume that free choices are restricted to
moral decisions. Robert Kane does this, as did Plato and the Scholastics.
This is not to deny that moral responsibility is historically intimately
connected with free will and even dependent on the existence of free
will (for libertarians and broad compatibilists). Any decision can be
free. Our freedom to act also includes merely practical, financial, and
fiduciary judgments, as well as occasional non-rational flip-of-the-coin
decisions and even misjudgments.
  Other glosses - Moral Responsibility, Restrictivism
                                                                                   Glossary




Moral Responsibility
   Moral Responsibility is historically tightly connected to the problem
of free will, but it is an moral restrictivism to require that free choices be
moral decisions.
  Other glosses - Moral Restrictivism
       414         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Moral Sentiments
                Moral Sentiments arguably would exist whether or not determin-
             ism is “true.” David Hume first made this argument, but Peter Strawson
             made it famous in current debates, with his agnosticism about deter-
             minism vs. free will, in favor of a Humean Naturalism that takes our
             moral sentiments as givens that are beyond the skepticism of logic and
             critical thought.
                Note that Hume the Naturalist had no problem “Deriving Ought
             from Is” - something shown logically impossible by Hume the Skeptic.
                 Other glosses - Agnostic, Moral restrictivism, Naturalism

             Moral Skepticism
                Moral Skepticism challenges the idea that there are always rational
             and best answers to moral questions. Because there are various theories
             of morality - deontic, pragmatic, utilitarian, etc, it is easy to construct
             moral dilemmas and paradoxes. Moral skeptics like Walter Sinnott-
             Armstrong believe these are real problems in life and cannot be ex-
             plained away by clever arguments.
                Note that moral skepticism tends to lead to relativism and moral ni-
             hilism in the absence of objective values.
                 Other glosses - Moral Responsibility

             N
             Narrow Incompatibilism
                Narrow Incompatibilism is Randolph Clarke’s synonym for John
             Martin Fischer’s concept of Semicompatibilism. Clarke distinguishes it
             from his term Broad Incompatibilism.
                Narrow Incompatibilism is incompatible with free will, but not with
Glossary




             moral responsibility.
               Other glosses - Broad Incompatibilism, Compatibilism, Incompatibilism,
             Moral Responsibility, Semicompatibilism

             Naturalism
                Naturalism is the position that the Laws of Nature (assumed to be de-
             terministic) apply to human beings and their actions, because humans
             are natural things, continuous with animals and other things that lack
                                        Glossary of Terms - M                415

free will. The position originated with David Hume and has been devel-
oped in the moral responsibility debates by Paul Russell.
   Naturalists tend to be revisionists on retributive punishment.
   Assuming that free will is restricted to morally responsible agents is
an example of the Moral restrictivism. One way of seeing the continu-
ous nature between animals and humans is to recognize that animals,
like children, have a will and freedom of action, they just lack moral
responsibility.
  Other glosses - Determinism, Moral restrictivism, Laws of Nature, Moral
Responsibility, Restrictivism, Revisionism

Naturalistic Fallacy
   G. E. Moore in Principia Ethica claimed that ethics is human, not
natural. So ethical claims can not be supported by appeals to natural
properties, like pleasure or utility. Moore thinks “good” cannot be de-
fined. It is an elemental essential property.
   Moore’s ethical non-naturalism resembles David Hume”s denial that
“ought” (human ethics) can be derived from “is” (nature).
   Note the conflict with Naturalists for whom natural behaviors are
moral behaviors, and “un-natural” behaviors are bad.
  Other glosses - Moral restrictivism, Moral Responsibility, Naturalism

O
Ontological
   Ontology is the study of real things existing in the world. A crisis in
philosophy emerged when Locke and Hume, and later Kant, observed
that all our knowledge comes to us through our perceptions. We cannot
know the “things themselves” behind the perceptions. Moreover, our
perceptions may be illusions.
                                                                               Glossary




   The existence of real ontological chance is often denied by those who
claim that randomness and probability are merely the result of human
ignorance. Chance, they say is an epistemic problem, not an ontological
one.
  Other glosses - Epistemic, Illusion, Probability, Randomness
       416         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Origination
                Origination is the idea that new causal chains can begin with an
             agent, something that is not predetermined to happen by events prior to
             the agent’s deliberation (between alternative possibilities) and decision.
             Origination accounts for creativity.
                Ted Honderich is “dismayed” because the truth of determinism re-
             quires that we give up “origination” with its promise of an open future.
             For him, limiting freedom to classical compatibilist voluntarism means
             we are not the authors of our own actions. They are not up to us.
               Other glosses - Agent Causal, Alternative Possibilities, Causa Sui, Up To Us,
             Voluntarism

             Ought From Is
               David Hume famously criticized philosophers for talking about the
             way things are and suddenly describing the way they ought (or ought
             not) to be, as if the ought had been deduced from the is.
               Moore’s naturalistic fallacy similarly denies that ethical rules can de-
             pend on natural facts.
               Other glosses - Moral restrictivism, Naturalistic Fallacy
             Ought Implies Can
                Ought Implies Can (sometimes abbreviated K) is the deontic prin-
             ciple, usually attributed to Immanuel Kant, that an agent ought to do a
             moral act only if she actually can do it, if she has control.
                 Other glosses - Control, Done Otherwise, Voluntarism

             P
             Possible Worlds
Glossary




                 Gottfried Leibniz argued that necessary truths are true in all possible
             worlds. David Lewis appears to have believed that the truth of his coun-
             terfactuals was a result of believing that for every non-contradictory
             statement there is a possible world in which that statement is true. This
             is called modal realism. It implies the existence of infinitely many paral-
             lel universes, an idea similar to the contraversial many-world interpre-
             tations of quantum mechanics.
                                         Glossary of Terms - O                 417

   The astronomer David Layzer analyzes questions of free will in terms
of many possible worlds.
   It is a bit ironic that philosophers, who are skeptical about our abil-
ity to obtain knowledge of the real external world, are optimistic about
many possible worlds.
Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Modal Fallacy, Quantum Mechanics

Pre-Determinism
   Pre-Determinism is the idea that a strict causal determinism is true,
with a causal chain of events back to the origin of the universe, and one
possible future.
   It is what most philosophers mean when they say that free will is
compatible with determinism, and when they use determinism in the
standard argument against free will.
  Other glosses - Causality, Compatibilism, Determinism, Standard Argu-
ment

Principle of Alternate Possibilities
   The Principle of Alternate (sic) Possibilities (or PAP) was formulated
as follows in 1961 by Harry Frankfurt in order to defend compatibilism
from the apparent lack of alternative possibilities in the deterministic
world of classical compatibilism.
      PAP: A person is morally responsible for what he has done only if
he could have done otherwise.
   Frankfurt maintained that PAP was false, and that agents could be
free and morally responsible without alternative possibilities and the ca-
pability to do otherwise in the same circumstances.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Determinism, Done Otherwise,
Moral Responsibility, Same Circumstances
                                                                                 Glossary



Principle of Bivalence
    The Principle of Bivalence is that for any proposition p, either p is
true or p is false. It is the reason the standard argument against free will
is framed as two horns of a dilemma. Either determinism is true or false.
Most philosophers do not want to give up the idea of causal determin-
ism, so opt to be compatibilists.
       418        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Bivalence is also known as “the law of the excluded middle.” There is
             no middle term between true and false. This becomes the basis for the
             idea that there is no tertium quid or middle between chance and neces-
             sity, perceived as logical opposites.
                The Principle of Bivalence is also the basis for Logical Determinism,
             in which the present truth of a statement implies its truth in the future.
                Other glosses - Determinism, Future Contingency, Standard Argument

             Probability
                 Probability has often been a way to deny real chance. The great math-
             ematicians who invented the calculus of probabilities, which governs
             games of chance, thought that there was nothing random really going
             on. For them probability was merely a result of human ignorance. The
             problem was epistemic, not ontological.
                 Deterministic Laws of Nature guarantee we could predict the future,
             if only we had all the information needed. Laplace’s demon, a supreme
             intelligence, could know the future, as God foreknows it, if he knew the
             positions and velocities of all the particles in the universe.
                 Today we know that the Laws of Nature are not deterministic. Not
             only are they probabilistic, but irreducibly random, due to the under-
             lying quantum mechanics that has replaced classical mechanics as the
             proper description of the universe’s fundamental particles.
                 The laws become arbitrarily close to certain in the limit of large num-
             bers of particles (billiard balls, planets), leading to the illusion of per-
             fectly deterministic laws.
                 Probability is the explanation for alternative possibilities and unpre-
             dictable “uncaused” causes (causa sui) that are the “free” part of “free
             will.”
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Causa Sui, Determinism, Epistemic,
             Foreknowledge, Illusion, Laws of Nature, Ontological, Quantum Mechanics
Glossary




             Q
             Quantum Mechanics
                The development of Quantum Mechanics in the late 1920’s marked
             the end of physical determinism.
                Quantum mechanics has replaced classical mechanics as the proper
             description of the universe’s fundamental particles. But note that in the
                                        Glossary of Terms - Q                  419

limit of macroscopic objects with large numbers of particles, the quan-
tum laws correspond exactly to (i.e., become the same as) the classical
laws. This is Neils Bohr’s correspondence principle.
   Deterministic Laws of Nature have been replaced with probabilistic
laws. Quantum events can start new “causal chains” with events that are
unpredictable from prior events, self-caused events that are causa sui.
   Quantum phenomena are behind the generation of alternative pos-
sibilities that are the “free” part of “free will.”
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Causa Sui, Determinism, Laws of
Nature, Probability



R
Randomness Objection
   The Randomness Objection is the second horn in the traditional di-
lemma of free will. Either determinism is true or indeterminism is true.
In neither case can there be any moral responsibility. Note that the great
asymmetry between determinism and indeterminism has led philoso-
phers to favor the kind of deterministic or causal explanations that are
the apparent basis for laws of nature. But determinism is an illusion.
   Indeterminism is a greater threat to moral responsibility than deter-
minism, since it is associated with many negative ideas, such as chance.
Nevertheless, many philosophers declare themselves agnostic on this
objection to free will. The randomness objection is the core idea behind
Peter van Inwagen’s Mind Argument.
  Other glosses - Agnostic, Determinism Objection, Illusion, Indeterminism,
Luck Objection, Mind Argument, Standard Argument

Reactive Attitudes
                                                                                 Glossary




   Reactive Attitudes were identified by Peter Strawson as feelings that
we would naturally have even if we were convinced of the truth of deter-
minism (or indeterminism). Strawson was an early agnostic, claiming
he could not make sense of either). Reactive Attitudes include gratitude
and resentment, and our normal tendency to praise or blame, punish or
reward. Strawson modeled his naturalist claims in the face of skepticism
about free will after David Hume, who overcame his own famous skepti-
cal views to claim ethical truths could be found in naturalism.
    Other glosses - Naturalism
       420        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Reasons-Responsive
                Reasons-Responsiveness describes an agent who has the kind of con-
             trol needed to initiate or originate an action. Being “reasons-respon-
             sive” and taking ownership of the action means the agent can say the
             action was “up to me.” John Martin Fischer calls this “guidance control”
             in the “actual sequence” of events that figure in the “Direct Argument”
             for source incompatibilism. Fischer’s account of moral responsibility is
             like Thomas Aquinas’ and Susan Wolf ’s account of free actions as those
             guided by reasons.
               Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Control, Direct Argument, Origination,
             Source Incompatibilism, Up To Us

             Regulative Control
                 John Martin Fischer separates an agent’s control into two kinds. The
             first he calls “guidance control” - the kind of control needed to initiate
             or originate an action, by being “reasons-responsive” and taking owner-
             ship of the action, meaning the agent can say the action was “up to me.”
             The other kind of control is “regulative control” - the kind needed to
             choose between “alternative possibilities.” Fischer describes these op-
             tions as happening in the “actual sequence” or “alternative sequences”
             of events. Derk Pereboom uses the related terms source and leeway in-
             compatibilism.
                Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Se-
             quences, Control, Direct Argument, Guidance Control, Leeway Incompatibil-
             ism, Origination, Reasons-Responsive, Source Incompatibilism

             Restrictivism
                Restrictivist theories claim that the number of “free” actions is a tiny
             fraction of all actions. Robert Kane, for example limits them to rare “self-
             forming actions” (SFAs) in which weighty and difficult moral decisions
Glossary




             are made. Limiting freedom to moral decisions is the moral restrictiv-
             ism. Peter van Inwagen restricts free will to cases where the reasons that
             favor either alternative are not clearly stronger. This is the ancient liberty
             of indifference. Susan Wolf restricts free decisions to those made ratio-
             nally according to “the True and the Good.”
               Other glosses - Liberty of Indifference, Self-Forming Action

             Retributivism
               Retributivism describes punishment that is deserved because the
             agent was morally responsible for the crime. Many hard incompatibilists
                                            Glossary of Terms - R                 421

who think free will is an illusion, and many naturalists, are revisionists
calling for an end to retributive punishment.
   Susan Wolf has pointed out the strange asymmetry between praise
and blame. Those opposed to punishment for retributive reasons (as op-
posed to practical consequentialist reasons) are often in favor of praise
for good deeds. This reflects the ancient Platonic view that we are re-
sponsible only for the good we do. Our errors we blame on our igno-
rance, which is, unfortunately, no excuse before the law.
    Other glosses - Illusion, Moral Responsibility, Naturalism, Revisionism

Revisionism
   Revisionists hope to change popular attitudes about free will and
moral responsibility, bringing them more into line with the views of
modern philosophy. A leading issue is the widely held view among
current philosophers that free will is an illusion. Revisionists conclude
there should be an end to retributive punishment.
    Other glosses - Illusion, Moral Responsibility, Retributivism

Rule Beta
   Rule Beta is Peter van Inwagen’s “Third Argument” for incompatibil-
ism. Van Inwagen argues against the compatibilism of determinism and
moral responsibility. It is a Transfer Principle of unavoidability (one has
no choices and can not do otherwise ).
      p, and no one has, or ever had, any choice about that. If p then q,
and no one has, or ever had, any choice about that. Hence, q, and no one
has, or ever had, any choice about that.
   Rule Beta wraps the ancient and physical dilemma of determinism
in analytical logical window dressing. It is identical to the Determinist
Objection in the standard argument against free will.
   Other glosses - Done Otherwise, Logical Fallacy, Moral Responsibility, Stan-
                                                                                    Glossary



dard Argument, Transfer Principle

S
Same Circumstances
    Determinists argue that, given the Laws of Nature and the Fixed Past,
it is impossible for an agent to act differently in Exactly the Same Cir-
cumstances. Libertarians demand such Dual Rational Control and the
ability to Do Otherwise as a freedom condition.
    Other glosses - Done Otherwise, Fixed Past, Laws of Nature
       422        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Self-Determination
                Self-Determination is the idea of a positive freedom, a freedom for
             actions that we originate, actions that are “up to us.” Such acts constitute
             the essence of Free Will. This is Mortimer Adler’s term, adopted also by
             Robert Kane. Adler called it the Natural Freedom of Self-Determination.
             to indicate it is a universal property. It is a Determined De-Liberation.
                Other glosses - Determination, Determined De-Liberation, Origination,
             Self-Perfection, Self-Realization, Up to Us

             Self-Forming Action
                Self-Forming Actions (SFAs) are Robert Kane’s idea of free actions in
             the distant past that contribute to our character and values. When we act
             out of habit today, we trace the Ultimate Responsibility (UR) for those
             actions back to those SFAs. Although current habitual actions may seem
             (adequately) determined, they are still self-determined and thus free.
                We can be responsible for current actions that are essentially (viz. ad-
             equately) determined by our character and values, as long as we formed
             that character ourselves by earlier free Self-Forming Actions. For Kane,
             SFAs in turn require brains that are not deterministically caused by any-
             thing outside the agent.
               Other glosses - Self-Determination, Tracing, Ultimate Responsibility

             Self-Perfection
                Self-Perfection is the idea from Plato to Kant that we are only free
             when our decisions are for reasons and we are not slaves to our passions.
             Mortimer Adler’ called it the Acquired Freedom of Self-Perfection. to
             indicate it is acquired in moral development. It is also used by Robert
             Kane. Adler cites many theologically minded philosophers who argue
             that man is only perfect and free when following a divine moral law
             (the moral restrictivism). Sinners, they say, do not have free will, which
Glossary




             is odd because on their account sinners are presumably responsible for
             evil in the world despite an omniscient, omnipotent, and benevolent
             God.
                Other glosses - Moral Restrictivism, Restrictivism, Self-Determination,
             Self-Realization

             Self-Realization
                Self-Realization is the idea of freedom as freedom from coercions
             that make our actions not up to us. It is known as Freedom of Action.
                                         Glossary of Terms - S                  423

Mortimer Adler’ called it the Circumstantial Freedom of Self-Realiza-
tion. to indicate it depends on external circumstances. Today this nega-
tive freedom recognizes internal coercions as well, such as addictions or
mental disabilities. This is the classical compatibilist definition of free-
dom, also known as voluntarism. It is also used by Robert Kane.
   Other glosses - Compatibilism, Self-Determination, Self-Perfection, Volun-
tarism

Semicompatibilism
   Semicompatibilism is John Martin Fischer’s name for the compatibil-
ism of moral responsibility and determinism (or indeterminism). It is
contrasted with classical compatibilism, the broader idea that free will is
compatible with determinism.
   Randolph Clarke calls these respectively Narrow and Broad Incom-
patibilism.
   Classical compatibilists are determinists. Semicompatibilists avoid
the determinist label, claiming to be agnostic about the “truth” of deter-
minism or indeterminism. Semicompatibilism grew out of the apparent
success of Harry Frankfurt’s attacks on the Principle of Alternate Pos-
sibilities.
   Other glosses - Agnostic, Compatibilism, Determinism, Frankfurt Exam-
ples, Indeterminism, Narrow Incompatibilism

Soft Causality
   Soft Causality is the idea that most events are adequately determined
by normal causes, but that some events are not precisely predictable
from prior events.
   Soft Causality includes occasional quantum events, which are only
probabilistic and statistical. This means that they are not strictly caused
by prior events, although they may be causes of subsequent events. They
                                                                                  Glossary



depend on chance in the form of irreducible quantum indeterminacy
   Their unpredictability leads us to call them uncaused events, which
in turn become uncaused causes (causa sui) that start new causal chains.
   Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Causality, Causa Sui, Determinism,
Indeterminacy, Indeterminism

Soft Compatibilism
   Soft Compatibilism is one of Alfred Mele’s terms. Soft compatibilists
know, as a result of quantum physics, that determinism is not true. They
think that some indeterminism, in the right places, might be useful. For
       424        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             soft compatibilists, the right place is in what John Martin Fischer calls
             the Actual Sequence, where it breaks the causal chain of determinism
             back to the Big Bang. This position is also known as Source Incompati-
             bilism.
                Note that soft compatibilists accept the traditional Voluntarism of
             Thomas Hobbes and David Hume. Even if determinism were true, they
             say, there would still be Freedom of Action.
               Other glosses - Compatibilism, Determinism, Freedom of Action, Free Will,
             Hard Compatibilism, Origination, Source Incompatibilism, Voluntarism

             Soft Determinism
                Soft Determinism was coined by William James to describe compati-
             bilists, who accepted the truth of determinism. They claimed free will
             was the voluntarism of Thomas Hobbes, the negative “freedom from”
             external constraints on our actions. This is called “Freedom of Action”
             to distinguish it from Freedom of the Will
               Other glosses - Compatibilism, Determinism, Freedom of Action, Free Will,
             Hard Determinism, Origination, Voluntarism

             Soft Incompatibilism
                 Soft Incompatibilism says that free will is incompatible with pre-de-
             terminism, and that pre-determinism is not true. It is preferable to the
             loose usage of the plain “incompatibilist” to describe a libertarian, since
             it is ambiguous and also used for determinists.
                 Soft Incompatibilism stands in contrast to Hard Incompatibilism,
             which maintains that pre-determinism is true and free will does not ex-
             ist. It is not incompatible with an adequate determinism.
                 Soft Incompatibilism involves Soft Causality. Soft Incompatibilists
             accept occasional quantum events, which are only probabilistic and sta-
             tistical, since they break strict causal chains back to the Big Bang with
Glossary




             uncaused causes (causa sui) that start new causal chains. It resembles Al
             Mele’s Soft Libertarianism.
                Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Causa Sui, Soft Causality, Soft Lib-
             ertarianism, Pre-Determinism

             Soft Libertarianism
                Soft Libertarianism is one of Alfred Mele’s terms. Soft libertarians
             think that some indeterminism, in the right place is useful. For soft lib-
                                         Glossary of Terms - S                 425

ertarians , the right place is in what John Martin Fischer calls the Actual
Sequence, where it breaks the causal chain of determinism back to the
Big Bang. This position is also known as Source Incompatibilism.
   Soft libertarianism differs from Mele’s modest libertarianism in that
it does not require robust alternative possibilities (APs). APs produce
what John Martin Fischer calls the Alternative Sequences.
   Mele also develops a model for “Daring Soft Libertarians.” Daring
soft libertarians, he says, especially value a power to make decisions that
are not deterministically caused - a certain initiatory power. This model
reaches out to Robert Kane’s idea of Ultimate Responsibility, in which
we can be responsible for current actions, ones that are essentially de-
termined by our character and values, as long as we formed that char-
acter ourselves by earlier free actions that he calls Self-Forming Actions
(SFA). SFA’s in turn require brains that are not deterministically caused
by anything outside the agent.
  Other glosses - Compatibilism, Determinism, Freedom of Action, Free Will,
Hard Compatibilism, Origination, Source Incompatibilism, Voluntarism

Source Incompatibilism
    Source Incompatibilism or “Sourcehood” focuses on indeterminism
in the “actual sequence” of events, an event that “originates” in the agent,
to establish the incompatibility of determinism and moral responsibil-
ity.
    Hard incompatibilists deny this indeterminism. By contrast, Leeway
Incompatibilism depends on the ability to do otherwise in “alternative
sequences.”
   Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Alternative Sequences, Consequence Ar-
gument, Direct Argument, Hard Incompatibilism, Indirect Argument, Leeway
Incompatibilism, Origination

Standard Argument
                                                                                 Glossary




   The Standard Argument against Free Will is a dilemma with two
horns, the Determinism Objection and the Randomness Objection.
   If determinism is “true” all our actions are determined and we lack
free will and moral responsibility. If indeterminism is “true” all our ac-
tions are random and we are equally unfree and not responsible.
   A subtle combination of randomness and adequate determinism is
required for a two-stage model of free will.
       426       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Other glosses - Basic Argument, Consequence Argument, Determinism
             Objection, Direct Argument, Indirect Argument, Randomness Objection

             Strongest Motive
                Given the alternative possibilities for action, the agent might appear
             to be determined to select the strongest motive. But given the complex-
             ity of an agent’s character and values, motives and reasons, feelings and
             desires, the idea of idea of an obvious “strongest motive” has been dis-
             credited. Some philosophers say that the strongest motive was, after the
             fact, whatever the agent chose, reducing it to a tautology.
               Other glosses - Akrasia, Alternative Possibilities, Self-Forming Action,
             Weakness of Will

             Tracing
                Tracing is the idea that an agent’s responsibility (or non-responsibil-
             ity) for some action or the consequence of an action is not limited to
             the agent’s thoughts or actions at the moment immediately prior to the
             action or consequence, but can be traced back to earlier actions, from
             which responsibility can be transferred. Difficulties arise establishing
             that the consequences could reasonably have been foreseen by the agent.
                Other glosses - Consequence Argument, Consequentialism, Moral Respon-
             sibility, Transfer Principle

             Traditional Argument
                The Traditional Argument for the incompatibility of determinism
             and moral responsibility has three steps:
                 1. If determinism is true, no agent could have avoided acting as she
             did act - could have done otherwise.
                  2. An agent is only responsible for actions if she could have done
             otherwise (the Principle of Alternative Possibilities).
Glossary




                  3. Thus, if determinism is true, no agent is morally responsible.
               Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Consequence Argument, Done
             Otherwise, Direct Argument, Incompatibilism, Moral Responsibility

             Transfer Principle
                A Transfer Principle says that an agent’s responsibility or non-
             responsibility (or avoidability or unavoidability) for an action can be
                                           Glossary of Terms - T            427

transferred to the consequences of that action, or to the probable con-
sequences (strong transfer), or to consequences that could reasonably
have been foreseen by the agent (weak transfer). John Martin Fischer
developed the Principle of Transfer of Non-Responsibility as a variation
on Peter van Inwagen’s “Third Argument” or Rule Beta. Robert Kane’s
Ultimate Responsibility is Transfer of Responsibility from Self-Forming
Actions long ago to current actions, however automatic and habitual.
   Other glosses - Consequence Argument, Moral Responsibility, Rule Beta,
Self-Forming Actions, Ultimate Responsibility

U
Ultimacy
   Ultimacy or the Ultimacy Condition is often used by determinists,
hard incompatibilists, and illusionists to deny moral responsibility. Ga-
len Strawson’s Basic Argument is a good example of denying Ultimacy
by an infinite regress of responsibility for our character.
   Other glosses - Basic Argument, Consequence Argument, Responsibility,
Ultimate Responsibility

Ultimate Responsibility
   Ultimate Responsibility (UR) is Robert Kane’s concept that we can be
responsible for current actions, ones that are essentially determined by
our character and values, as long as we formed that character ourselves
by earlier free actions that he calls Self-Forming Actions (SFA).
    Other glosses - Responsibility, Self-Forming Action

Undetermined Liberty
   A decision that involves chance, which selects at random from a
number of alternative possibilities that appear equally valuable or use-
                                                                              Glossary



ful. When the second stage of evaluation does not produce a Determined
Deliberation, the agent can “flip a coin” and yet take responsibility for
the decision, however it comes out.
   Note that an undetermined liberty is not random in the absolute
sense of having no connection with character, values, motives, feelings,
       428       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             desires, etc. It is randomly chosen from within a subset of alternative
             possibilities that all are rational. An undetermined liberty is a liberty of
             indifference, but it is still a determination that is adequately determined.
             Robert Kane’s SFAs are undetermined liberties.
                Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Determination, Determined Delib-
             eration, Liberty of Indifference, Up To Us

             Up To Us
                The idea that we are the originators of our actions was first described
             by Aristotle in his Metaphysics and Nichomachean Ethics with the
             Greek phrase ἐφ’ ἡμῖν, “up to us,’ or “depends on us.”
                Agent causal libertarians insist that our actions begin with some-
             thing inside our minds. (Aristotle had also said some actions begin ἐν
             ἡμῖν - “in us”.) They describe this variously as non-occurrent causation,
             contra-causal freedom, metaphysical freedom, a causa sui, or simply
             non-causal freedom.
                If our actions are not “up to us,” if we feel they “happen to us,” then we
             cannot feel morally responsible for them.
                 Other glosses - Agent Causal, Moral Responsibility, Origination,

             V
             Volition
                Volition is another word for Will. It implies the moment of decision
             or choice and commitment to a course of action, as distinguished from
             earlier moments of deliberation and evaluation of alternative possibili-
             ties. Aquinas, who identified five or more stages, called this moment the
             electio or choice.
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Deliberation, Free Will, Volun-
             tarism
Glossary




             Voluntarism
                Voluntarism is the classical compatibilist definition of freedom as
             freedom from coercions that make our actions not up to us. Today this
             negative freedom includes internal constraints as well, such as addic-
             tions or mental disabilities.
                                            Glossary of Terms - U                429

   Mortimer Adler and Robert Kane call this self-realization, contrast-
ing it with the libertarian positive freedom of self-determination. Hon-
derich calls it voluntariness, contrasting it with the libertarian freedom
of origination, without which, he says, we are not the authors of our own
actions.
   Other glosses - Liberty of Spontaneity, Origination, Self-Determination,
Self-Realization, Up To Us

W
Weakness of Will
   Weakness of Will (akrasia) describes actions taken against one’s bet-
ter judgment. Rationalism assumes there is always a single best way to
evaluate an agent’s options or alternative possibilities, so that weakness
of will is fundamentally irrational.
    Other glosses - Akrasia, Alternative Possibilities, Strongest Motive

Y
Yes-No Objection
   The Yes-No Objection claims that Frankfurt examples can not prove
that alternative possibilities do not exist, because the agent’s decision to
act or not to act, to do or not to do, can always wait until the last possible
moment, so a hypothetical intervener would have to block alternatives
ahead of time and thus constitute an external coercion that denies the
agent’s compatibilist voluntarism or negative freedom.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt Examples, Information
Objection, Kane-Widerker Objection, Voluntarism
                                                                                   Glossary
           430      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                  m inis        m
                                         De t e r

                                                          a t i b i lism
                                                 C    omp       r min  m    is
                                   i n ism                e t e
                      De   t e r m                 Soft D
               Hard
                                                                        pati     bilism
                                                               ft C o m
                                                           So
                                ism
  Hard I
         n         com  patibil
                                         ra p h y                                         Inc
                               ib l i o g                 bilism
                           B                 icom p
                                                 Sem
                                                    a t i

              n     ism
      Illusio                                                             ism
                                                           m p a tibil
                                                   wI  nco
                       lism                  Narro
          p o s sibi
       Im                                                         a tibil ism
                                                            o m p
                                                 So  ft Inc
                                                                                          yI
                           M  odel                                                Leewa t
                      an
               Valeri                                          tibilism            (Altern
                                                                                           a
Bibliography




                                                         m p a
                                        o u r c e Inco uence)
                                      S               l Seq
                                         (A   c t u a
                                                                            i m i t e d
                                                       e lw           ith L
                                                   o d
                                  - S t      age M
                             Tw o
                                                      This chapter on the web
                           informationphilosopher.com/afterwords/bibliography
                          m i n i s m
                    deter
                                                                        Bibliography              431
               In
               References                           n ism
                                           a  r i a
                                       ertof Freedom; a dialectical examination of the
                                L  i
               Adler, M.J., 1958. ThebIdea
                 conceptions of freedom, Garden City, N. Y.,: Doubleday.
             ________, 1961. The Idea of Freedom; vol. II, Garden City, N.uY.,:
                                                                                n  t - C  a sal
               Doubleday.
                                                                       Age
             Alberts, Bruce, et al., 2003. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 4th ed. New
               York, Garland Science,
                                        - C a u  sal
                                              2003.
             Annas, J., E1992.   nt
                           veHellenistic        Philosophy of Mind, Berkeley: University of
               California Press.
                                                                                      n  - C  a usal
             Anscombe, G. E. M., 1971. Causality and Determination: an
               lecture, London: Cambridge University Press.
                                                                              No       inaugural


                        m                         SFA Mass.: Loeb Library 255, Harvard
             Aristotle, 1934. Physics II. Cambridge,

          t i b i l i s
      mpa
               University Press.
                                                                                  lity271, Har-
co           _______, 1935. Metaphysics. Cambridge, Mass.: LoebuLibrary
               vard University Press.                       Soft C
                                                                       a   s  a
             Augustine. 1935. Them
                            t i b i l is City of God. Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb Library 287,

             n c o mp
               Harvard   a University      Press.
                                                                                        a r i a n ism
           I                                                                          t
                                                                                    r of the
  Broad ________,                                                Soft L
                          Benjamin, A.S. & Hackstaff, L.H., 1964. On Free
               Will, Indianapolis,: Bobbs-Merrill.
                                                                           ibeChoice
             Ayer, A.J., 1946. Language,
                               a r   i a n ism Truth, and Logic, London,: V. Gollancz.
                                                                                                      a tion
                        e  r t                                                                 m  i n
             st Lib 1984. Freedom and Morality and Other Essays,                             r
             ________,    1954.    Philosophical   Essays, New  York, St. Martin’s   Press.
      o d e                                                               e l f - D   ete[Ox-
   M         ________,
               fordshire]: Clarendon Press.
                                                                       S          Oxford

                                             C
             Ayers, M.R., 1968. The Refutation  ogito  of Determinism, London: Methuen &
                ili
            tibCo.  s m
    o m p a
Inc          Baer, c
              e n J.,ands)
                     eJ.C.Kaufman,                                                i n is
                                          and R.F.Baumeister., 2008. Are We Free?: Psychol-         m
       e q u
                                                                         dete
tive S Bailey, C., 1964. The Greek Atomists and Epicurus: A Study, New York:
               ogy        Free   Will,   Oxford:  Oxford University Press.    r m
                                                  e d In
                                                                                                       Bibliography




                                              i t
                                       nd Lim
               Russell & Russell.

             ism                   a
             Balaguer, Mark. 2004. ‘A Coherent, Naturalistic, and Plausible Formula-

     r m i n
Dete
               tion of Libertarian Free Will.’ Noûs, 38, 3, 379-406)
             ________, 2009. Free Will as an Open Scientific Problem, The MIT Press.
             Baars, B.J., 1997. In the Theater of Consciousness: The Workspace of the
               Mind, New York: Oxford University Press.
             ________, and Nicole M. Gage 2007: Cognition, Brain, and Consciousness:
               Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience. London: Academic Press.
           432        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Baumeister, Roy F. , Alfred Mele , and Kathleen Vohs, 2010. Free Will
                   and Consciousness, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                 Bell, J. 1987. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics .
                   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                 Belsham, William, 1789. Essays: Philosophical and Literary, London:
                   Dilly
                 Bergson, H., 2001. Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data
                   of Consciousness, Mineola, N.Y: Dover Publications.
                 Berlin, S.I., 1990. Four Essays on Liberty, Oxford University Press, USA.
                 Bernstein, M.H., 1992. Fatalism, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
                 Berofsky, B., 1971. Determinism., Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
                   Press.
                 ________, 1966. Free Will and Determinism, New York: Harper & Row
                 ________, 1988. Freedom from Necessity: The Metaphysical Basis of
                   Responsibility, Routledge & Kegan Paul Books Ltd.
                 Bobzien, Susanne, 1998. Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy,
                   Oxford: Clarendon Press.
                 Born, M., 1964. Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance, New York:
                   Dover Publications.
                 Brembs, Björn, 2010, ‘Towards a scientific concept of free will as
                   a biological trait,’ Proceedings of the Royal Society, B (Biology),
                   December 10.
                 Bremmer, Jan, 1983. The Early Greek Concept of the Soul, Princeton:
                   Princeton University Press.
                 Broad, C. D. 1934. Determinism, Indeterminism, and Libertarianism.
                   London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
                 Campbell, C.A., 1967. In Defense of Free Will, Prometheus Books.
                 Campbell, Joseph Keim , M. O’Rourke , and D. Shier, 2004. Freedom and
                   Determinism. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Bibliography




                 Cassirer, Ernst. 1956. Determinism and Indeterminism in Modern
                   Physics. New Haven: Yale University Press.
                 Chisholm, Roderick. 1964: ‘Freedom and Action,’ reprinted in Freedom
                   and Determinism. Keith Lehrer, ed., 1966 New York: Random House
                 Chomsky, N., 1971. Problems of Knowledge and Freedom, New York:
                   Pantheon Books.
                 Cicero, 1951. De Natura Deorum, Cambridge, MA, Harvard. Loeb
                   Library, H. Rackham, trans
                                                     Bibliography             433

_____, 2004: De Fato. Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb Library 349, Harvard
  University Press
Clarke, R., 2003. Libertarian Accounts of Free Will, Oxford University
  Press, USA.
Clarke, S. & Vailati, E., 1998. A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes
  of God and other writings, Cambridge, U.K., Cambridge University
  Press.
Compton, Arthur Holly. 1931: ‘The Uncertainty Principle and Free Will’.
  Science, 74, 1911.
Compton, Arthur Holly 1935: The Freedom of Man. New Haven: Yale
  University Press
Compton, Arthur Holly 1967: The Cosmos of Arthur Holly Compton,
  chapter 8,‘Science and Man’s Freedom.’ New York: Knopf; originally
  published in The Atlantic Monthly, October 1957.
Conway, J. , and S. Kochen . 2006. “The free will theorem.” Foundations
  of Physics 36 (10): 1441–73.
Darwin, C. G. 1931: ‘Free Will as Involving Determinism’. Science, 73,
  653.
Davidson, M., 1937. Free Will or Determinism, London: Watts & Co.
________, 1942. The Free Will Controversy, London: Watts & Co.
De Moivre, Abraham. 1756. The Doctrine of Chances, London.
Dennett, D.C., 1978. Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and
  Psychology, The MIT Press.
________, 1985. Elbow Room, Oxford University Press.
________, 2004. Freedom Evolves, Penguin (Non-Classics).
Dihle, Albrecht, 1982. The Theory of the Will in Classical Antiquity,
  Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dilman, İ., 1999. Free Will: An Historical and Philosophical Introduction,
  London: Routledge.
                                                                                Bibliography




Dirac, P.A.M., 2001. Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Dover Publica-
  tions.
Dobzhansky, T. G., 1956. The Biological Basis of Human Freedom, New
  York: Columbia University Press.
Dodds, E.R., 1951. The Greeks and the Irrational, Berkeley: University of
  California Press.
Double, R., 1991. The Non-Reality of Free Will, New York: Oxford
  University Press.
           434        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Doyle, Robert O., 2009. ‘Free Will: it’s a normal biological property, not
                    a gift or a mystery,’ Nature, 459 (June 2009): 1052.
                 ________, 2010. ‘Jamesian Free Will,’ William James Studies, Vol. 5, p. 1
                 Dudley, J., 2011. Aristotle’s Concept of Chance, SUNY Press.
                 Dworkin, G., 1970. Determinism, Free Will, and Moral Responsibility,
                    Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
                 Earman, John . 1986. A Primer on Determinism. Dordrecht, The Neth-
                    erlands: D. Reidel.
                 Eccles, John C. 1953. The Neurophysiological Basis of Mind. Oxford:
                    Oxford University Press, 271-86.
                 ________. 1970. Facing Reality . New York: Springer.
                 Eccles, John C., 1994. How the Self Controls Its Brain, Springer-Verlag
                    Telos.
                 Eddington, A.S., 2005 (1927). The Nature of the Physical World,
                    Kessinger Publishing, LLC.
                 ________, 2007 (1936). New Pathways In Science, Frazer Press.
                 ________, 1939. The Philosophy of Physical Science : Tarner Lectures,
                    Macmillan Co.
                 Edwards, Jonathan. 1969. Freedom of the Will. Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-
                    Merrill.
                 Einstein, A. , B. Podolsky , and N. Rosen . 1935. “Can quantum-
                    mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete?”
                    Physical Review 47: 777–80.
                 Ekstrom, L.W., 1999. Free Will: A Philosophical Study, Westview Press.
                 Erasmus, D., and M. Luther, 1988. Discourse on Free Will, New York:
                    Continuum.
                 Farrer, A.M., 1958. The Freedom of the Will, London: Adam & Charles
                    Black.
                 Feynman, R., 1994. The Character of Physical Law, Modern Library.
Bibliography




                 Fischer, John M., 1989. God, Foreknowledge, and Freedom, Stanford,
                    Calif: Stanford University Press.
                 ________, 1994. The Metaphysics of Free Will : an essay on control,
                    Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell.
                 ________, 1995. “Libertarianism and Avoidability: A Reply to Widerker,”
                    Faith and Philosophy 12: 122-25.
                                                    Bibliography               435

________, 2005. Free Will: Critical Concepts in Philosophy, London:
   Routledge.
________, & Ravizza, M., 1999. Responsibility and Control: A Theory of
   Moral Responsibility, Cambridge University Press.
________, et al., 2007. Four Views on Free Will, Wiley-Blackwell.
Flanagan, O., 2003. The Problem Of The Soul, Basic Books.
Foot, Philippa. 1957: ‘Free Will as Involving Determinism’. Philosophical
   Review, 76, pp. 439-50
Frank, J., 1945. Fate and Freedom : a philosophy for free Americans, New
   York: Simon and Schuster.
Franklin, R., 1969. Freewill and Determinism: A Study of Rival Concepts
   of Man, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Frankfurt, Harry . 1969. “Alternate possibilities and moral responsibility.”
   Journal of Philosophy 66: 829–39.
Frede, Michael. 2011. A Free Will: Origins of the Notion in Ancient
   Thought, U. of California Press.
Freeman, A., 2006. Radical Externalism: Honderich’s Theory of
   Consciousness Discussed, Imprint Academic.
Furley, D.J., 1967. Two Studies in the Greek Atomists: Study II, Aristo-
   tle and Epicurus on Voluntary Action, Princeton, N.J: Princeton
   University Press.
Gazzaniga, Michael . 2005. “Neuroscience and the law.” Scientific
   American Mind 16(1): 42–49.
Ginet, Carl . 1966. “Might we have no choice?” in Freedom and
   Determinism, ed. Keith Lehrer , 87–104. New York: Random House.
Gisin, N. “Quantum nonlocality: How does nature do it?” Science 326:
   1357–58.
Glimcher, Paul W., 2003. Decisions, Uncertainty, and the Brain,
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                                                                 Bibliography




________. et al. 2009. Neuroeconomics: Decision Making and the Brain,
   Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Greene, Joshua and Jonathan Cohen. 1990: ‘For the law, neuroscience
   changes nothing and everything.’ Philosophical Transactions of the
   Royal Society of London B, 359, 1776.
Grice, H. Paul, 1989. Studies in the Ways of Words, Cambridge: Harvard
   University Press.
           436        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Hacking, Ian, 1990. The Taming of Chance, Cambridge: Cambridge
                   University Press.
                 ________, 2006. The Emergence of Probability. Cambridge: Cambridge
                   University Press.
                 Hadamard, J., 1945. An Essay on the Psychology of Invention in the Math-
                   ematical Field, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
                 Haji, Ishtiyaque. 1998. Moral Appraisability. Oxford: Oxford University
                   Press.
                 Hamon, A.F., 1899. The Universal Illusion of Free Will and Criminal
                   Responsibility, London: The University Press, ltd.
                 Hampshire, S., 1959. Thought and Action, London: Chatto and Windus.
                 ________, 1965. Freedom of the Individual, New York: Harper & Row.
                 Hardie, W.F.R., 1980. Aristotle’s Ethical Theory, Oxford: Oxford Univer-
                   sity Press.
                 Hare, R.M., 1963. Freedom and Reason., Oxford,: Clarendon Press.
                 Harris, James A., 2005. Of Liberty and Necessity: The Free Will Debate
                   in Eighteenth-Century British Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University
                   Press.
                 Hegel, G.W.F., 1967. Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, London: Oxford
                   University Press.
                 Heidegger, M., 1962. Being and Time Revised, HarperCollins Publishers.
                 Heil, J. & Mele, A.R., 1993. Mental Causation, Oxford, England: Clar-
                   endon.
                 Heisenberg, Martin. 2009: ‘Is Free Will an Illusion?’ Nature, 459, pp.
                   164-5.
                 Heisenberg, Werner. 1972: Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conver-
                   sations. New York: Harper & Row.
                 Hobart, R. E. 1934. ‘Free Will as Involving Determination and Incon-
                   ceivable Without It’. Mind, Vol. 43, No. 169, pp.1-27.
Bibliography




                 Hobbes, T., Bramhall, J. & Chappell, V.C., 1999. Hobbes and Bramhall
                   on Liberty and Necessity, Cambridge, U.K. ;: Cambridge University
                   Press.
                 Hodgson, D., 1993. The Mind Matters: Consciousness and Choice in a
                   Quantum World, Oxford University Press, USA.
                 Hodgson, S. 1891. “Free-Will: An Analysis,” Mind, Vol. 16, No. 62, pp.
                   161-180
                 Honderich, T., 1973. Essays on Freedom of Action, London: Routledge.
                                                  Bibliography               437

________, 1990a. Mind and Brain, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
________, 1990b. The Consequences of Determinism, Oxford: Clarendon
  Press.
________, 2002. How Free Are You?: The Determinism Problem, Oxford
  University Press, USA.
________, 2004. On Consciousness, University of Pittsburgh Press.
________, 2005. On Determinism and Freedom, Edinburgh University
  Press..
________, 2011. ‘Effects, Determinism, Neither Compatibilism Nor In-
  compatibilism, Consciousness,’ in Kane 2nd ed. (2011)
Hook, S., 1958. Determinism and Freedom in the Age of Modern Science,
  Collier-Macmillan.
_______, 1960. Dimensions of Mind; a symposium, New York: New York
  University Press.
Huby, P., 1967. ‘The First Discovery of the Freewill Problem,’ Philosophy,
  42, pp. 353-62
Hume, David, 1975. Enquiries concerning Human Understanding,
  Oxford, Clarendon Press.
_______, 1978. A Treatise of Human Nature 2nd ed., Oxford: Clarendon
  Press.
_______, & Popkin, R.H., 1998. Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion,
  Hackett Publishing Co.
Hunt, H.A.K., 1954. The Humanism of Cicero, Melbourne: Melbourne
  University Press.
Huoranszki, Ferenc, 2011. Freedom of the Will: A Conditional Analysis,
  New York: Routledge.
James, William, 1880. ‘Great Men, Great Thoughts, and the Environment,’
  Atlantic Monthly 46 (October 1880): 441-459.
________, 1956. The Will to Believe. New York: Dover Publications;
                                                                               Bibliography




  original publication 1884: ‘The Dilemma of Determinism.’ Unitarian
  Review.
________, 2007. The Principles of Psychology, vol.2.’ New York: Cosimo;
  original publication 1890: New York: Henry Holt.
________ 2010. The Heart of William James, ed. Robert Richardson,
  Cambridge, Harvard University Press.
Kandel, Eric, James H. Schwarz, and Thomas M. Jessell. 2000: Principles
           438        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   of Neuroscience. New York: McGraw-Hill.
                 Kane, G. Stanley, 1981 Anselm’s Doctrine of Freedom and the Will,
                   Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mullen Press.
                 Kane, R., 1985. Free Will and Values, SUNY.
                 _______, 1996. The Significance of Free Will, Oxford University Press.
                 _______, 1999: “Responsibility, Luck, and Chance,” Journal of Philosophy,
                   96, 5 p.225.
                 _______, 2001. Free Will, Wiley-Blackwell.
                 _______, 2002. The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, Oxford University
                   Press, USA.
                 _______, 2005. A Contemporary Introduction to Free Will, Oxford
                   University Press, USA.
                 _______, 2011. The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, 2nd ed., Oxford Uni-
                   versity Press, USA.
                 Kant, Immanuel. 1952: Great Books of the Western World, vol.42.
                   Chicago: Encyclopedia Britannica
                 Kirk, G.S., J.E.Raven, and M.Schofield. 1983: The Presocratic Philosophers.
                   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                 Knobe, Joshua , and Shaun Nichols . 2008. “An experimental philosophy
                   manifesto.” In Experimental Philosophy , ed. Shaun Nichols and Josh-
                   ua Knobe , 1–23. New York:
                 Korsgaard, Christine, 1996. The Sources of Normativity. Columbia
                   University Press.
                 Koshland, Daniel E., Jr., 1980. Bacterial Chemotaxis as a Model Behav-
                   ioural System. New York: Raven Press.
                 Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 1995. Philosophical Essay on Probabilities.’ New
                   York: Springer-Verlag.
                 Layzer, David, 1975. “The Arrow of Time,” Scientific American 233, 6
                   (1975) pp.56-69.
Bibliography




                 Layzer, David, 1991. Cosmogenesis: The Growth of Order in the Universe,
                   Oxford University Press, USA.
                 Lehrer, Keith. 1966. Freedom and Determinism. New York: Random
                   House. Oxford University Press.
                 Lestienne, R. & Neher, E.C., 1998. The Creative Power of Chance. Uni-
                   versity of Illinois Press.
                 Levin, Michael . 2007. ‘Compatibilism and Special Relativity.’ Journal of
                                                   Bibliography               439

   Philosophy 104: 433–63.
Libet, B., 1999: ‘Do We Have Free Will? ’ Journal of Consciousness
   Studies, 6, No. 8-9, pp. 47-57.
_______, 2004. Mind Time, Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.
Liddell, Henry George and Robert Scott. 1968: A Greek-English Lexicon,
   Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lipton, P. 2004. ‘Genetic and generic determinism: a new threat to free
   will?,’ in The New Brain Sciences: Perils and Prospects, ed. D. Rees and
   S. Rose. Cambridge University Press, 2004, p. 89.
Locke, John., 1959 (1690). Essay Concerning Human Understanding,
   Book II, Chapter XXI, Of Power, sections 14-21 (New York, Dover,
   1959), pp.319-324
Lockwood, M., 1989. Mind, Brain and the Quantum, Oxford: Blackwell.
_______, 2005. The Labyrinth of Time. New York: Oxford University
   Press.
Long, A. A. 1986: Hellenistic Philosophy, Berkeley: U. California Press,.
_______, and D. Sedley. 1987. The Hellenistic Philosophers, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
_______, 2000. Problems in Stoicism, New York: Continuum.
Lucas, J.R., 1970. The Freedom of the Will, Oxford: Clarendon.
Lucretius. 1982: De Rerum Natura. Cambridge, MA.: Loeb Library 181,
   Harvard University Press.
Mackay, D.M., 1967. Freedom of Action in a Mechanistic Universe,
   London: Cambridge University Press
Margenau, Henry. 1968. Scientific Indeterminism and Human
   Freedom.,Wimmer Lecture XX’ Latrobe, Pennsylvania.: The
   Archabbey Press
__________, and Lawrence LeShan. 1982. Einstein’s Space and Van
   Gogh’s Sky, New York: Macmillan.
                                                                                Bibliography




Mayr, Ernst., 1988. Toward a New Philosophy of Biology, Cambridge,
   MA, Harvard Belknap Press.
McFee, G., 2000. Free Will, Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
McGinn, Colin. 1995: Problems in Philosophy: The Limits of Inquiry,
   New York: Wiley-Blackwell
Mele, A.R., 1995. Autonomous Agents: From Self-Control to Autonomy,
           440        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   New York: Oxford University Press.
                 _______, 2006. Free Will and Luck, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                 _______, 2010. Effective Intentions: The Power of Conscious Will, Oxford
                   University Press, USA.
                 Mill, John Stuart. 2006 (1843). A System of Logic, Rationative and Induc-
                   tive, vols. 7 and 8, Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Indianapolis:
                   Liberty Fund.
                 Moore, G. E. 1912. Ethics . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                 Morgenbesser, S., 1962. Free Will, Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
                 Munn, A.M., 1960. Free-Will and Determinism, Toronto: University of
                   Toronto Press.
                 Murphy, Nancey , and Warren S. Brown . 2007. Did My Neurons Make
                   Me Do It? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                 Nagel, T., 1979. Mortal Questions, Cambridge: Cambridge University
                   Press.
                 Nagel, T., 1986. The View from Nowhere, New York: Oxford University
                   Press.
                 Nahmias, Eddy. 2006. ‘Folk fears about freedom and responsibility: De-
                   terminism vs. reductionism.’ Journal of Cognition and Culture 6(1–2):
                   215–37.
                 Neuringer, Allen and Greg Jensen, 2010, ‘Operant Variability and Vol-
                   untary Action,’ Psychological Review, Vol. 117, No. 3, p. 991
                 Nichols, Shaun, 2006. ‘Folk intuitions on free will,’ Journal of Cognition
                   and Culture 6(1–2): 57–86.
                 Nietzsche, Friedrich, 1999. Also sprach Zarathustra I–IV, ed. by G. Colli
                   & M. Montinari .
                 Nowell-Smith, P, 1948. ‘Freewill and Moral Responsibility.’ Mind, 57, pp.
                   45-61.
                 Nozick, Robert, 1981. Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge: Harvard
Bibliography




                   University Press
                 O’Connor, D., 1971. Free Will, Anchor Books.
                 O’Connor, T., 1995. Agents, Causes, and Events: Essays on Indeterminism
                   and Free Will, Oxford University Press, USA.
                 O’Connor, T., 2002. Persons and Causes: The Metaphysics of Free Will,
                   Oxford University Press, USA.
                 O’Hear, A, 2003. Minds and Persons, New York: Cambridge University
                   Press.
                 O’Keefe, T., 2005. Epicurus on Freedom, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
                                                  Bibliography               441

   University Press.
Pears, D.F., 1963. Freedom and the Will, London: Macmillan.
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 1892. ‘The Doctrine of Necessity Examined.’
   The Monist, vol. 2, pp. 321-337
_______, 1893. The Monist, vol. 3, pp. 176-200.
_______, 1958. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol VI.
Penrose, R., 1989. The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers,
   Minds, and the Laws of Physics, Oxford University Press, USA.
_______, Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Con-
   sciousness, Oxford University Press, USA.
Pereboom, D., 1995. ‘Determinism al Dente,’ Noûs 29.
_______, 1997. Free Will, Hackett Publishing Company.
_______, 2001. Living Without Free Will, Cambridge, U.K: Cambridge
   University Press.
Pink, T., 2004. Free Will: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
   versity Press.
_______, 1996. The Psychology of Freedom, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
   versity Press.
Pinker, Steven. 1997: How The Mind Works, New York: Norton.
Planck, M., 1981. Where Is Science Going?, Ox Bow Press.
Poincare, H., 1952. Science and Hypothesis, Dover Publications.
_______, 2003. Science and Method, Dover Publications.
_______, 2001. The Value of Science: Essential Writings of Henri Poin-
   care, Modern Library.
Popper, K.R., 1972. Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach,
   Oxford University Press, USA.
_______, 1977b: Natural Selection and the Emergence of Mind, Cam-
   bridge, Darwin College, (lecture)
                                                                               Bibliography



_______, 2002. Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific
   Knowledge 5th ed., Routledge.
_______, & Eccles, J.C., 1977. The Self and Its Brain, Springer.
Porter, T.M., 1988. The Rise of Statistical Thinking, 1820-1900, Princeton
   University Press.
Rescher, Nicholas, 1995. Luck, Farrar Strauss, New York.
_______, 2009. Free Will: A Philosophical Reappraisal,
   Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, New Jersey
Russell, B., 1960 (1914). Our Knowledge of the External World, New
           442        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                    York, Mentor.
                 _______, 1936. Determinism and Physics, repr. in The Collected Papers
                    of Bertrand Russell, Volume 10
                 Russell, P., 1995. Freedom and Moral Sentiment: Hume’s Way of
                    Naturalizing Responsibility, New York: Oxford University Press.
                 Rychlak, J.F., 1979. Discovering Free will and Personal Responsibility,
                    New York: Oxford University Press.
                 Ryle, G., 1949. The Concept of Mind, New York: Barnes & Noble.
                 Sambursky, S., 1988. Physics of the Stoics, Princeton Univ Press.
                 Satinover, J., 2001. The Quantum Brain: The Search for Freedom and the
                    Next Generation of Man, New York: J. Wiley.
                 Scanlon, T. M. 1988. ‘The significance of choice,’ in The Tanner Lectures
                    on Human Values, ed. Sterling M. McMurrin, 1–35. Cambridge:
                    Cambridge University Press.
                 Schelling, F.W.J.V., 1936. Of Human Freedom, Chicago: The Open Court
                    Publishing Company.
                 Schlick, M., 2008. Problems Of Ethics, Nielsen Press.
                 Schopenhauer, A. & Kolenda, K., 1995. On the Freedom of the Will, Wi-
                    ley-Blackwell.
                 Schrödinger, E., 1992. What Is Life?, with “Mind and Matter” and “Auto-
                    biographical Sketches”, Cambridge University Press.
                 Schwartz, S.P., 1977. Naming, Necessity, and Natural Kinds, Ithaca [N.Y.]:
                    Cornell University Press.
                 Searle, J. R., 1986. Minds, Brains and Science, Harvard University Press.
                 _______, 2007. Freedom and Neurobiology: Reflections on Free Will,
                    Language, and Political Power, New York: Columbia University Press.
                 _______, 1990. The Mystery of Consciousness, New York Review Books.
                 Sharples, R., 2007. Alexander of Aphrodisias On Fate, Duckworth Pub-
                    lishers.
Bibliography




                 Simon, Herbert A. 1981: The Sciences of the Artificial, Cambridge, Mass:
                    MIT Press.
                 Simonton, D.K., 2004. Creativity in Science: Chance, Logic, Genius, and
                    Zeitgeist, Cambridge University Press.
                 Skinner, B.F., 1971. Beyond Freedom and Dignity, New York: Knopf.
                 Skyrms, B., 1980. Causal Necessity : a Pragmatic Investigation of the Ne-
                    cessity of Laws, New Haven: Yale University Press.
                 Smart, J. J. C. 1961: ‘Free-Will, Praise and Blame’. Mind, 70, pp. 291–306.
                                                   Bibliography               443

_______, and John Haldane. 2003: Atheism and Theism, Malden, MA:
   Wiley-Blackwell
Smilansky, S., 2000. Free Will and Illusion, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Snell, Bruno, 1953. The Discovery of the Mind, New York: Dover
   Publications
Sobel, J.H., 1998. Puzzles for the Will: Fatalism, Newcomb and Samarra,
   Determinism and Omniscience, Toronto: U. of Toronto Press.
Sorabji, R., 1980. Necessity, Cause, and Blame: Perspectives on Aristotle’s
   Theory, Ithaca, N.Y: Cornell University Press.
Stapp, H.P., 2004. Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics, Berlin:
   Springer.
Stebbing, L.S., 1937. Philosophy & the Physicists, Dover.
Sternberg, E.J. 2007, Are You A Machine?, Amherst, NY: Humanity
   Books.
_______, 2010. My Brain Made Me Do It, Prometheus Books
Strawson, Galen, 1986. Freedom and Belief, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
_______, 1989. The Secret Connexion, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
_______, 1994. ‘The Impossibility of Moral Responsibility.’ Philosophical
   Studies, 75/1-2, 5-24.
Strawson, P. F., 1962. Freedom and Resentment, and other essays, London:
   Methuen ;.
_______, 1985. Skepticism and Naturalism: some varieties, New York:
   Columbia University Press.
Taylor, Christopher, and Daniel Dennett, 2002. “Who’s afraid of
   determinism.” In Kane 2002, 257–79. Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
Taylor, Richard . 1962. “Fatalism.” Philosophical Review 71(1): 56–66.
_______,1963. Metaphysics, Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
_______, 1973. Action and Purpose, Humanities Press.
                                                                                Bibliography




Thorp, J., 1980. Free Will : a Defence against Neurophysiological
   Determinism, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Timpe, K., 2008. Free Will: Sourcehood and Its Alternatives, Continuum.
Trusted, J., 1984. Free Will and Responsibility, Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
Van Inwagen, P., 1983. An Essay on Free Will, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
_______, 2004: ‘Van Inwagen on Free Will.’ in Campbell 2004
           444        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Vannevar, A.H.., 1967. Cosmos of Arthur Holly Compton, Knopf.
                 Vargas, Manuel. 2007. 2007. “Revisionism.” In Fischer et al. 2007
                 Vihvelin, Kadri. 2007. ‘Arguments for incompatibilism.’ The Stanford
                   Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/incompatibil-
                   ism-arguments/
                 Vohs, K. D., & Schooler, J. W. (2008). ‘The Value of Believing in Free
                   Will,’ Psychological Science, Vol.19, No.1
                 Wallace, D.F., 2010. Fate, Time, and Language: An Essay on Free Will,
                   Columbia University Press.
                 Waller, B.N., 1990. Freedom Without Responsibility, Philadelphia:
                   Temple University Press.
                 _______, 1998. The Natural Selection of Autonomy, Albany, N.Y.: State
                   University of New York Press.
                 Walter, H., 2001. Neurophilosophy of Free Will: From Libertarian Illusions
                   to a Concept of Natural Autonomy, Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
                 Watson, Gary . 1975. “Free agency.” Journal of Philosophy 72: 205–20.
                 _______, 1982. Free Will . New York: Oxford University Press.
                 Wegner, Daniel. 2002: The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, Mass.:
                   MIT Press.
                 Weiss, P., 1950. Man’s Freedom, Yale University Press.
                 Wheeler, J. A., and W. H. Zurek, 1983. Quantum Theory and Measurement,
                   Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
                 Widerker, D. and M. McKenna., 2003. Moral Responsibility and Alterna-
                   tive Possibilities, Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate.
                 Wiener, N., 1965. Cybernetics: or the Control and Communication in the
                   Animal and the Machine 2nd ed., The MIT Press.
                 Wiggins, David., 1973: ‘Towards a Reasonable Libertarianism,’ in Essays
                   on Freedom of Action, ed. Ted Honderich, London, Routledge &
                   Kegan Paul.
Bibliography




                 Williams, B.A.O., 1981. Moral Luck: Philosophical Papers, 1973-1980,
                   Cambridge [Cambridgeshire]: Cambridge University Press.
                 Williams, C., 1980. Free Will and Determinism: A Dialogue, Indianapolis:
                   Hackett Publishing Co.
                 Wittgenstein, L., 1993. Philosophical Occasions, 1912-1951, Indianapolis:
                   Hackett Publishing Co.
                 Wolf, S., 1993. Freedom within Reason, Oxford University Press.
                                                 Bibliography           445


Free Will Anthologies
Some anthologies on free will, with contributing authors:

Hook, S. and New York University. (1958). Determinism and Freedom
  in the Age of Modern Science; a philosophical symposium. New York,
  New York University Press.
     [Blanshard, Black, Barrett, Bridgman, Munitz, Landé, Sciama,
   Hart, Edwards, Hospers,Beardsley, Brandt, Chisholm, Ducasse,
   Hempel, Hintz, Hook, Lerner, E. Nagel, Northrop, Pap, Schultz,
   R. Taylor, Weiss, Wilson.]
Morgenbesser, S. and J. J. Walsh (1962). Free Will. Englewood Cliffs,
 N.J., Prentice-Hall.
       [Augustine, Aquinas, Scotus, Hobbes, Mill, Foot, R.Taylor,
   Sartre, Broad, Aristotle, Hart.]
Berofsky, B. (1966). Free Will and Determinism. New York,, Harper &
  Row.
        [Hospers, Hook, Schlick, Hobart, Foot, Campbell. Broad,
   Mill, Sartre, Melden, Davidson, MacIntyre, Bradley, Augustine,
   R. Taylor, Austin, Nowell Smith, Chisholm, Campbell, Nowell
   Smith.]
Lehrer, K. (1966). Freedom and Determinism. New York,, Random
  House.
       [Chisholm, Danto, R.Taylor, Ginet, Sellars, Lehrer.]
Dworkin, G. (1970). Determinism, Free Will, and Moral Responsibility.
  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.,, Prentice-Hall.
       [Hume, Peirce, Nagel, Reid, Campbell, De Valla, Ginet,
   Moore, Thomas, Broad, Lehrer, Smart.]
                                                                          Bibliography




Honderich, T. (1973). Essays on Freedom of Action. London, Boston,,
  Routledge and Kegan Paul.
        [Warnock, Watling, Wiggins, Frankfurt, Kenny, Pears,
   Davidson, Dennett, Honderich.]
Watson, G. (1982). Free Will. Oxford Oxfordshire ; New York, Oxford
  University Press.
           446        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                         [Ayer, Chisholm, Aune, Lehrer, van Inwagen, P. F. Strawson,
                     Frankfurt, Watson, C.Taylor, Malcolm, T.Nagel.]
                 O’Connor, T. (1995). Agents, Causes, and Events: Essays on Indeterminism
                   and Free Will. New York/Oxford , Oxford University Press.
                          [G.Strawson, T.Nagel, Dennett, Double, Ginet, Chisholm,
                     Nozick, Kane, Rowe, O’Connor, Clarke, van Inwagen, Fischer,
                     Ravizza.]
                 Pereboom, D. (1997). Free Will. Indianapolis/Cambridge, Hackett
                   Publishing
                         [Aristotle, Stoics, Lucretius,Augustine, Aquinas, Hume, Kant,
                     Ayer, P. F. Strawson, Chisholm, Frankfurt, van Inwagen, Wolf,
                     Fischer, Pereboom, Clarke.]
                 Ekstrom, L. W. (2001). Agency and Responsibility : essays on the metaphysics
                   of freedom. Boulder, Colo., Westview Press.
                          [Van Inwagen, Lewis, Fischer, Anscombe, Frankfurt, Wat-
                     son, Bratman, Chisholm, Ekstrom, Kane, P. F. Strawson, Wolf,
                     Widerker, Mele and Robb.]
                 Kane, R. (2002). The Oxford Handbook of Free Will. Oxford ; New York,
                   Oxford University Press.
                         [Kane, Zagzebski, Bernstein, Hodgson, Bishop, Kapitan, van
                     Inwagen, Berofsky, Haji, Russell, C.Taylor and Dennett, Fisch-
                     er, Ekstrom, Widerker, O’Connor, Clarke, Ginet, G. Strawson,
                     Honderich, Pereboom, Smilansky, Double, Mele, Libet, Walter.]
                 Kane, R. (2002). Free Will. Malden, MA, Blackwell Publishers.
                        [Skinner, Nielsen, Chisholm, Edwards, van Inwagen, Dennett,
                     Fischer, Pereboom, Frankfurt, Wolf, Watson, O’Connor, Ginet,
                     Kane, Hodgson, Augustine, Hasker.]
Bibliography




                 Watson, G. (2003). Free Will. Oxford/New York, Oxford University Press.
                           [Chisholm, van Inwagen, Smart, P. F. Strawson, Wiggins,
                     Lewis, Bok, Frankfurt, Widerker, Fischer, G. Strawson, T.Nagel,
                     O’Connor, Clarke, Kane, Watson, Scanlon, Wolf, Pettit and Smith,
                     Albritton, Wallace.]
                                                                          447

Campbell, J. K., M. O’Rourke, and D Shier. (2004). Freedom and
  Determinism. MIT Press.
        [Earman, Lehrer, Kane, Ginet, Nelkin, Haji, Long, Arpaly,
   Fischer, van Inwagen, Perry, Feldman, Gier, Kjellberg, Honderich.]


Web References

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP) article on Free Will (Timothy
   O’Connor)
SEP on Incompatibilist Free Will (Randolph Clarke)
SEP on Causal Determinism (Carl Hoefer)
SEP on Incompatibilism (Kadri Vihvelin)
SEP on Compatibilism (Michael McKenna)
SEP on Moral Responsibility (Andrew Eshleman)
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy (IEP) article on Free Will
   (Kevin Timpe)
IEP on Moral Responsibility (Garrath Williams)
Online Papers on Free Will, compiled by David Chalmers (Australian
   National University)
Free Will Bibliography (David Chalmers and David Bourget)



                                                                            Bibliography
    448          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

        Index                                             basic argument 23n, 147, 395
                                                          behavioral determinism, 147
                                                          behavioral freedom, 252, 261, 391-392
        A                                                 being, great chain of, 92
        actual sequence, 381                              Bell, John, 141, 228, 389
        actualism, 132-143, 371                           Bell’s theorem, 141, 228, 231, 293
        adequate determinism, xviii, 56, 57, 187,         Berlin, Isaiah, 19, 403
            391                                           Bernoulli, Daniel, 89; Bernoullis, 137
        acquired freedom, 253,                            Bergson, Henri, 100
        Adler, Mortimer, 112, 253, 256, 260               Berkeley, George, 15, 59, 85-86
        agent-causal, 65, 153, 382                        Bernoulli, Daniel, 86
        agnostic, 392                                     Berofsky, Bernard, 40-41
        akrasia 393                                       Big Bang, 397
        Alexander of Aphrodisias, 75, 80, 372             binomial expansion, 138
        alternative possibilities, 3, 4, 393              biological determinism, 147
        alternative sequences, 65, 393                    biology, 12, 184, 234-239,
        amplifier, 107, 113, 121, 167-168, 206, 220,      block universe, 150, 225,
            233, 282, 298                                 Bohr, Neils, 103, 105, 151, 205, 408, 418
        Anaximander, 134, 224                             Boltzmann, Ludwig, 6-8, 92-93, 104, 106,
        Annas, Julia, 82, 177                                139, 223, 388-389
        Anscombe, Elizabeth, 115, 123                     Boltzmann entropy, 375-378
        Aquinas, Thomas, 4, 83, 250, 405, 428             Bolzano, Bernard, 97
        argument, basic, 23n, 147, 385: conse-            Borges, Jorge Luis, 128
            quence, 23n, 34, 36, 120, 347, 397; di-       Born, Max, 93, 102-104, 106, 223
            rect, 400; indirect, 407; master. 117, 134,   Bramhall, John, 84
            147-8, 411, 414; standard 16, 20-22,          broad incompatibilism, 127, 215-216, 395
            26-53, 55, 60, 66-68, 114, 312, 425           Bruno, Giordano, 84
        Aristotle, ix, 4, 30, 49-52, 71-72, 74-75,        Buckle, Henry Thomas, 6, 97, 139, 277n
            78-80, 82-83, 93, 95, 98, 117, 121, 133,      Buridan, Jean, 409
            135, 146-148, 187-188, 190, 194, 200,         C
            251, 275, 299, 312, 316, 329, 317, 379,
                                                          Campbell, Donald, 276
            404, 411, 427,
                                                          Carneades, 51-52
        arrow of time, 10-11, 388
                                                          Cassirer, Ernst, 106, 108, 205
        asymmetry, 34, 45, 382, 384, 390, 408, 410
                                                          causal determinism, 147
        Augustine, 74n, 76, 83, 355
                                                          causality, 31, 38, 57, 66, 69, 85-88, 90-92,
        authenticity, 384
                                                             94, 100-106, 145, 153, 157, 201, 205,
        autonomy, 25, 108, 125, 337-339, 344, 392,
                                                             252, 263, 279, 289, 319, 395
Index




            394
                                                          causa sui, 28, 66, 86, 127, 133, 145, 147,
        avoidability 394
                                                             181-183, 192, 396
        Ayer, A. J. 32, 86, 123
                                                          Chalmers, David, xvii
        B                                                 chain, causal, 22, 25, 28, 44, 47-53, 55-57,
        Baars, Bernard, 188-190, 246, 380                    65-73, 89, 96, 112, 117, 119, 126, 146-
        bacterial chemotaxis, 237                            150, 154, 157, 174, 178, 187-195, 202,
        Bailey, Cyril, 77-78                                 233, 252, 257-258, 283-284, 326-330,
        Balaguer, Mark, 42, 47, 202, 209                     347-348, 367
                                                          Chaitin, Gregory, 328, 331
                                                                          Index            449
chance, xxii, 4-6, 9, 16, 23-27, 29, 31-33,        348, 387
   36, 38, 48-49, 53, 55-57, 65-67, 69-75,      consequentialism, 256, 387
   79, 82-114, 124, 130-139, 143-146, 150,      consciousness, xix-xxi, 12, 96, 109-110,
   154-155, 161-174, 177-179, 184, 187,            124, 131, 140, 183-184, 188, 197, 200,
   194-197, 208-210, 214, 216-217, 221,            227, 237, 244-247, 288-291, 299, 386 ;
   223-224, 232, 236, 256-258, 265, 271,           four levels of, 247
   276-277, 279, 288-289, 297-299, 302-         control, 27-29, 36, 39-50, 66, 69-71,
   304, 307-315, 318, 329-332, 343-344,            117, 122-128, 147-148, 169, 173-175,
   350, 355, 361-364, 370, 386, 393-397,           178-179, 195, 206-220, 249-259, 297,
   401, 410, 413, 415, 417, 419, 423; is           307-323, 332, 339-343, 398; dual plural,
   atheistic, 4, 136, 146, 355; as a fifth         297, 302, 391; Frankfurt controller, 332;
   cause, 52, 71; doctrine of, 136-137             guidance 398
chaos, 6,-7, 11, 46-48, 70, 134, 174, 223,      control condition, 128-129, 210, 249-256,
   296, 307, 316-317, 322-324                      323, 350
Chaplin, Charlie, iii                           Conway, John, 230
Chisholm, Roderick, 33, 34n, 189, 242           cosmic creation process, 12, 374-383
Chrysippus, 7, 46, 55, 74, 80, 86, 99, 133,     creation myths, 69
   134n, 396, 404                               creativity, xvi, xvii, 12, 66, 163, 165, 188,
Cicero, 21, 30, 73, 76, 79, 89, 99, 176            192-193, 231, 236, 274-277, 363-364
Clark, Tom, 273
                                                D
Clarke, Randolph, 41, 62, 126, 208, 211-
   216, 297, 303, 317, 337, 345, 395, 399,      daring soft libertarianism, 348
   414, 422                                     Darwin, Charles, 92-93, 98-101, 113-114,
CNC, 385                                           119, 164, 205, 220-223, 236-237, 358
Cogito model, 66-67, 91, 161, 186-203,          Dawkins, Richard, 277, 333
   207-215, 220-221, 225, 233, 236, 253,        degrees of freedom 193, 398
   275-276, 282, 286, 289, 296, 306-309,        deliberation, 23, 28, 47-48, 119, 125, 154,
   316-319, 344, 351, 354-355, 364, 368-           172, 175, 179, 202-215, 306-308, 326-
   370, 386; objections to, 204-221                328, 354-362, 368-369, 373, 399
cognitive science determinism, 147              Democritus, 6, 30, 49-50, 70-74, 77-80
Cohen, Jonathan, 43                             De Moivre, Abraham, 88-89, 137-138
collapse of the wave function, 4, 12, 111,      Dennett, Daniel, xviii- xxi, 3, 47, 66,
   140-143, 228-230, 233, 331-333, 379             118-126, 136, 148, 154, 158, 161, 166,
compatibilism, 45, 52, 60-64, 67, 69, 76, 86,      171-172, 178-181, 188, 202, 205-206,
   90, 94, 112, 115, 118, 120, 124, 127, 130,      210-214, 220-221, 233, 247, 279, 296-
   143, 150, 201, 250, 156-159, 396; P. F.         298, 306-308, 316, 320-321 324-335,
   Strawson and, 250;                              338, 341, 346, 353-359, 394, 412
compatibilist, 94; the first 51                 Descartes, René, 84, 90, 149, 153, 231, 399
                                                                                                Index




comprehensive compatibilism, xviii, 67,         determination, 23-28, 46-47, 66-67, 158,
   158, 203, 359, 360-365, 373                     196-201, 257, 287, 317, 341, 346, 356-
Compton, Arthur Holly, 66, 107-108, 113-           359, 362-370, 399; Hobart’s, 23, 66-67
   115, 121, 166-168, 172, 205-206, 221,        determinism, 15-18, 21-25, 27-53, 399
   282                                          determinism objection, 27, 28, 368, 371,
Comte, Auguste, 97                                 394, 404, 411, 412
consequence argument, 23n, 34, 36, 120,         determinism requirement, 56, 243
    450          Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

        determinisms, 144-151                            F
        determinist, the first, 49                       faster than light, 140-143
        Diodorus Cronus, 3, 117, 134-136, 147-           fatalism, 17, 69, 82, 117-118, 134, 148, 323
           148, 226, 394, 401, 411                       Feynman, Richard, 115
        Dirac, Paul, 225                                 Fichte, Johann, 95
        direct argument, 159, 400                        first, compatibilist, 51; determinist, 49;
        do otherwise, 32, 38, 40, 57, 116-117, 122-          indeterminist, 49; libertarian, 49-51
           123, 173, 190, 195-199, 208-221, 232,         Fischer, John Martin, 43, 66, 123, 127-
           279, 303, 317-319, 332-335, 364, 400              128, 147, 179-181, 249, 253, 256, 259,
        Double, Richard, 123, 209, 303, 337, 401             270-273, 302, 337, 346-350, 393-400,
        Doyle, Bob, 66, 320-321, 330                         419-426
        dual control, see control, dual                  Fiske, John, 30
        Dudley, John, 82                                 fixed past, 28, 123, 135, 188, 196-199, 275,
        Duns Scotus, John, 4, 83                             296, 318, 219, 373, 384-402, 398, 401,
        E                                                    411
        Eccles, John, 107, 109-114, 169-172, 205,        Flanagan, Owen, 41
           239-241, 282, 299, 305                        flickers of freedom, 117, 128, 147
        Eddington, Arthur Stanley, xvii, 4, 10, 31,      Foot, Philippa, 23, 28
           105-107, 110, 119, 151, 298, 304, 388         foreknowledge, 9, 52, 69, 73-79, 83-84, 146-
        Einstein, Albert, 104-105, 108, 140-151,             150, 153, 157, 331, 392, 396, 401-403
           225-231, 293, 333                             Fouillée, Alfred, 97-98
        Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen, 140, 228                Fourier, Joseph, 96
        Ekstrom, Laura Waddell, 47, 48n, 126, 202,       Fowler, Don, 80
           209-214                                       Frankfurt, Harry, 116-117, 120, 127, 130,
        empiricists, 85                                      159, 180, 383, 386, 401, 406-407; cases,
        energeia, 135                                        13n, 147, 179, 252, 340, 347-348, 428
        entanglement, xix, 227-230, 241, 293, 388        Frege, Gottlob, 93
        entelechy, 135                                   freedom of action, 19, 84, 86, 157-158, 253,
        entropy, 7-12, 92, 331, 368, 375-378, 385,           279, 285, 310, 318, 332, 347, 403
           388; flows, 375-378                           free will, 393; axiom, 231; in antiquity, 68-
        Epicurus, ix, 5- 7, 24, 30, 50-52, 72-82, 105,       75; theorem, 230; argument against, 26
           118, 124, 154, 176-177, 220, 298              Furley, David, 78
        epistemic freedom, 391                           future contingency, 82, 117-118, 134, 404
        Epictetus, 74, 372                               G
        Erasmus, 84                                      garden of forking paths, 128-130
        error correction, 238                            Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 89, 137
Index




        error law, 138                                   Ginet, Carl, 60, 126
        ethical restrictivism, 391                       Gisin, Nicolas, 227, 232
        event-causal, 52, 66, 153,-154, 201-202,         Giussani, Carlo, 76-78
           211-216, 295-297,, 317, 338-349, 402          God, 48-50, 71-77, 83-96, 104, 112-114,
        evil, problem of, 386                               135-136, 146-150, 153, 157, 199, 224,
        Exner, Franz, 97                                    228-231, 251, 259-260, 269, 279, 297,
        Exner, Franz Serafin, 104                           355, 367, 395
        experience recorder reproducer, 245              Gödel, Kurt, 93
        experimental philosophy, 128-129
                                                                           Index             451

Gomes, A.O., 299                                 incompatibilism, 22, 36, 43-44, 60-65, 120,
Greene, Joshua, 43, 44n                             124-130, 143, 159, 280, 284-286, 323,
Grice, H. Paul, 115n                                363, 396; broad, 216; hard, 395 ; leeway,
guidance control, 394, 419                          65, 399 ; narrow 215; source, 66, 159;
                                                    van Inwagen’s new definition of, 60-62,
H
                                                    113, 135
Hadamard, Jacques, 101-102, 119, 161,            incompatibilist mountain, 22-23, 44, 310
   165-166, 171, 206, 221, 355                   indeterminacy, xxi, 4, 7, 24, 31, 37, 39, 46,
Haggard, Patrick, 149, 242                          81, 93, 102-103, 110-114, 131, 136, 146,
Haji, Ishtiyaque, 40                                149, 154, 158, 168-174, 179-184, 187-
Hameroff, Stuart, 241                               188, 205, 220, 225, 228, 232-233, 295,
hard determinism, 1, 43, 59, 61-64, 99,             298, 303-305, 311, 328-335, 339, 358,
   121, 124, 159, 279, 405                          361-363, 369, 385
hard incompatibilism, 65, 128, 395               indeterminism xxii, 17, 21-28, 32-38, 41-
Harvard, xvii, 5, 10, 161, 322, 350                 47, 51-57, 59, 64-69, 71, 85, 95, 99, 105,
Hegel, G.W.F., 95                                   107-131, 133, 143, 146, 153-161, 170-
Heidegger, Martin, 16                               171, 175-176, 179-184, 187, 194-195,
Heisenberg, Martin, xix, 66, 111, 141, 161,         202-205, 209-215, 223, 228, 232, 251,
   184-186, 219, 237-238, 261, 321, 381             256, 260, 279-282, 287, 293, 295, 303,
Heisenberg, Werner, xvii, 31, 93, 102-105,          306-19, 323, 325-335, 338-350, 357-364,
   111, 151, 223, 228                               370-371, 407
Heraclitus, 70, 134                              indirect argument, 407
hierarchy of desires, 398, 405                   inevitability, 84
historical determinism, 148                      information, xvii, 3-4, 7-13, 47, 57, 70,
history of free will, 68-131                        92, 104, 107, 117, 122, 137-143, 147,
Hobart, R. E., xxii, 23-25 28, 36, 60, 66-67,       163, 182, 187, 190-193, 198-203, 208,
   88, 287, 346, 356, 359, 370, 412                 218-219, 223-224, 229-233, 235-238,
Hobbes, Thomas, 59, 84-89, 120, 157, 253,           245-247, 275-276, 282, 287-291, 303,
   263, 265, 284-285, 386, 393, 395, 399,           314-315, 319, 328-335, 361-362 , 368;
   424                                              flows, 385; and love, 393; what is it?, 4
Hodgson, David, 109, 342                         information objection, 407
Honderich, Ted, xviii, xxi,, 124-125, 128,       Information Philosopher, xvii, xxii, 1, 3,
   233, 278-295, 337, 353, 391-392, 415,            20, 322, 367
   428                                           information philosophy, xxii, 3. 7-8, 134,
Huby, Pamela, 79                                    229, 368-371, 385-389
Hume, David, ix, xxii, 15-17, 45, 59-60, 67,     intellect, 275, 397
   85-91, 100-102, 105, 115, 120, 130, 145,      I-Phi website, xvii, 456
                                                                                                 Index




   157-158, 168-169, 253, 263-273, 279,
   284, 290, 327, 347, 359, 361, 369-370,        J
   372; skeptic vs. naturalist, 115, 264         James, William, ix, xix, 5, 6, 13, 23-25, 30,
                                                    43, 46-47, 59-67, 93-94, 99-105, 114,
I
                                                    118-120, 130, 139, 157, 161-165, 170-
illusion, xviii, xxii, 4, 16-17, 65, 128, 170,      171, 185, 187, 197, 199, 208, 220-221,
    201, 211, 217, 232, 237, 241, 271, 273,         223-224, 231, 236, 247, 319, 329, 347,
    279, 337, 345, 350, 406                         361, 367, 370, 372, 380, 386, 396, 405-
immortality, 386                                    406, 423
immune system, 236
    452           Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy
        Jevons, William S., 231                            Lipton, Peter, 43
        Johnson, Samuel, 91                                Locke, John, 15, 59, 85-86, 197, 255-257,
        Jordan, Pascual, 102                                  302, 393, 403-405, 415
        K                                                  locked room, 393
                                                           Lockwood, Michael, 226
        Kane, Robert, xviii-xxi, 13n, 21-22, 41, 44-       logical determinism, 148
           45, 47-49, 55, 66, 121-123, 126-128, 154,       logical fallacy, 410
           161, 172-175, 178, 187-188, 202, 206-211,       logos, 70, 134, 379
           213, 215-216, 232-233, 251, 256, 280-282,       Long, Anthony, 81, 124, 161, 176
           292-293n, 294-323, 330-332, 338, 346-           Loschmidt, Joseph, 389
           359, 362-363, 369n, 396, 399, 401-403,          Love, 382
           407-408, 420-428                                luck, 44, 216-219, 340-349, 372-373 ; moral,
        Kane-Widerker objection, 408                          217-218, 403; objection, 216, 410, prob-
        Kant, Immanuel, 3, 15-16, 27, 59, 83, 90-91,          lem, 179, 211
           138, 153, 251, 255, 263-265, 269, 289,          Lucretius, 39, 73, 77-80, 178, 257, 355
           302, 347, 350, 396: shocks after, 92            Lukasiewicz, J., 404
        karma, 72                                          Luther, Martin, 84
        Kelvin, Lord (William Thomson), 9, 10
        knowledge problem, 385                             M
        Kochen, Simon, 230                                 Mach, Ernst, 86
        Korsgaard, Christine, 382                          MacLeish, Archibald, 5, 386
        Kosslyn, Stephen, 66, 161, 181-182                 macro mind, 191-198
        L                                                  Maimonides, 83
                                                           manipulation argument, 401
        Laplace, Pierre Simon, 5, 85-89, 137; demon        Margenau, Henry, 66, 107-110, 161, 170,
           5, 9, 86, 117, 145, 149, 224, 227, 329-331,       205, 221
           357, 402, 417                                   master argument, 117, 134, 147-8, 394, 401
        Layzer, David, 10-12, 331, 376, 416                Maxwell, James Clerk, 6, 139, 298
        laws of nature, 3-7, 19, 28, 33, 36, 47, 52, 70,   McGinn, Colin, 38
           74, 77, 98, 134, 138, 151, 157, 188, 198,       measurement problem, 389
           208, 213, 223-224, 275, 296-297, 318,           mechanical determinism, 149
           341-342, 364, 367-369, 388, 408                 Mele, Alfred, xviii-xix, xxi, 47, 66, 125-126,
        laws of physics, 106, 124, 139, 149, 151, 223        154, 161, 178-179, 202, 210-216, 219-221,
        Legendre, A-M, 137                                   241-243, 253, 306-309, 320-321, 330,
        leeway incompatibilism, 65, 409                      336-351, 355, 391-392, 397, 412-424
        Leibniz, Gottfried, 84, 416                        Melville, Herman, 131
        Leucippus, 70-71, 133, 149                         Mill, John Stuart, 60, 86, 100, 280
        Levin, Michael, 226                                Miller, Dickinson, 23; see Hobart, R.E.
Index




        Lewis, David, 143, 416                             mind argument, 120, 402
        libertarianism, 152-155; modest, 178-179,          mind-body problem, 386
           336-351                                         mind model, 197, 246, 305
        liberty of indifference, 174, 194, 198, 203,       Minkowsi, Germann, 150
           208, 251, 296, 302, 311, 320, 361, 409          Mirandola, Pico della, 83
        liberty of spontaneity, 399                        modest libertarianism, 210-211, 336-351
        Libet, Benjamin, 181; experiments, 149, 197,       Monod, Jacques, 329, 333
           241-243, 350-351                                Moore, G. E., 86, 117
        Lillie, Ralph, 107, 113                            moral fallacy, 412
        linguistic determinism, 148
                                                                                           453
moral luck, see luck                             open future, 13, 82, 118, 125, 130, 143, 279-
moral responsibility, xx-xxi, 17, 22, 27-28,        280, 291, 301, 307-308, 367
  33, 39-40, 49-51, 56-57, 65-69, 74-75, 98,     origination, 66, 124-127, 190, 201, 215, 237,
  115-130, 174, 179-180, 197, 200-202, 211-         253, 261, 273, 279-291, 320, 364, 415
  219, 233,248-253, 255-263, 269-273, 281-       ought from is, 115, 406
  285, 297, 302, 310, 317-323, 332, 337-350,     ought implies can, 406
  361-362, 367, 413                              P
moral scandal, 17
                                                 Parmenides, 134
moral sentiments, 87, 91. 115, 250, 265, 272,
                                                 Peirce, Charles Sanders, ix, 5-6, 93, 98-99,
  413
                                                    137, 224, 272
moral skepticism, 217, 265, 413
                                                 Pelagius (Morgan) 76, 100
Murphy, Nancey, iii
                                                 Penrose, Roger, 109-110, 161, 177, 191, 221,
mysteries, xx, 79, 109, 140, 153, 227-230
                                                    226-227, 241
N                                                Pereboom, Derk, 39, 128, 256, 337
Nagel, Thomas, 216-218, 413                      physical determinism, 149
Nahmias, Eddy, 129                               physics, 222-233
narrow incompatibilism, 65, 404                  Pinker, Steven, 40
naturalism xvii, 218, 252, 262-273, 414          Pink, Thomas, 42
naturalistic fallacy, 414                        Planck, Max, 31, 103-104, 112, 146, 228
necessitarianism, 149                            Plato, 71, 75, 90, 92, 95, 112, 134, 256
negative freedom, 19, 157                        plural control, see control, plural
neuroscience, 17, 124, 197, 240-243, 279         Podolsky, Boris, 140
neuroscientific determinism, 149                 Poincaré, Henri, 66, 101-102, 105, 114, 118-
neurotransmitter, 238                               119, 165-166, 177, 206, 221, 236, 311, 355
Newell, Allan, 188, 277                          Pomponazzi, Pietro, 84
Newton, Isaac, 9, 37, 112, 136, 146-151, 224,    Popper, Karl, ix, 66, 108, 112-114, 118, 121,
   264, 372                                         141, 161, 168-172, 184, 205-206, 221, 224,
Nichols, Shaun, 129                                 298, 306, 316, 358
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 95, 101, 396               positive freedom, 19, 157
nomological determinism, 149                     possibilism, 143-144, 371
non-causal, 66, 153, 202,                        possible worlds, 143, 416
nonlocality, xix, 141, 227-230, 293, 388         potential, 135
normal distribution, 138                         predetermination,, 84
Nowell-Smith, P. H., 46                          pre-determinism, 5, 13, 17, 19, 23, 28, 47,
Nozick, Robert, 35                                  65-69, 89, 119, 145, 148-151, 207, 230,
                                                    251, 253, 259, 261, 275, 284, 291, 296,
O                                                   302, 317, 328, 330, 346, 351, 358, 361,
                                                                                                 Index




objection, determinism, 27-28, 55; random-          369, 386, 416
   ness, 27-29, 36. 39, 44, 52, 55-56, 114,      presocratics, 70
   194, 210, 309; responsibility 27, 39, 52,     principle of alternate possibilities (PAP),
   55; to two-stage models, 204-221                 403, 416
O’Connor, Timothy, 121, 192, 326, 338            principle of bivalence, 148, 417
O’Keefe, Timothy, 82                             probabilism, 143, 292
omniscience, 5, 9, 74, 76, 83, 112, 136, 150,    probability. 5-8, 12, 48, 88-89, 92, 97, 100,
   157                                              101, 106, 108, 121, 134-143, 189, 225,
ontological, 4, 5, 8, 104, 133, 136, 146, 169,      228-230, 292, 298-304, 333, 340, 344, 388,
   263, 265, 277, 328, 378, 415                     396, 417
    454           Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy
        probabilities, 6, 9, 36, 48, 88-89, 93, 103, 114,   Rietdijk, C.W., 226
           137-143, 229, 289, 340, 349-350                  Rosen, Nathan, 140
        problems, 384-389                                   rule beta, 411
        psychological determinism, 149                      Russell, Bertrand, 16, 86, 93, 100, 119, 145,
        punishment, 125, 129, 197, 250-252, 255-               272,
           256, 260-261                                     Russell, Paul, 39, 126, 414
        Putnam, Hilary, 226                                 Ryle, Gilbert, 325n
        Q                                                   S
        quagmire of evasion, 60-65, 347
                                                            same circumstances, see do otherwise
        quantum mechanics, xvii, xix, 4, 7-8, 11-13,
                                                            Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 148
          24, 28-32, 37-39, 41, 45-46, 52, 56, 64, 66,
                                                            scandal, 14-17, 102, 130, 366-373
          93, 95, 102-114, 119-121, 124, 130-134,
                                                            Schelling, Friedrich, 95
          139-141, 146, 151, 154, 157-158, 166-170,
                                                            Schlick, Moritx, 16, 86, 102, 397
          183, 187-195, 202-203, 205-206, 211-212,
                                                            scholastics, 83-84, 90, 264, 409, 413
          220-1, 223-233, 235-236, 239, 241, 257,
                                                            Schopenhauer, Arthur, 96, 406
          279-282, 288-293, 295-299, 303-305, 313,
                                                            Schrödinger, Erwin, 103-104, 112, 146, 167,
          320-321, 328-335, 339-342, 347, 354-359,
                                                                388-389
          361-2, 368-371, 385, 388-389, 418
                                                            Schrödinger’s cat, 389
        quantum mysteries, 109
                                                            Searle, John, 15, 17, 21, 37, 131, 161, 183
        Quételet, Adolph, 6, 96-97, 139
                                                                221, 232, 392
        Quine, W. V. O., 272
                                                            Sedley, David, 81, 124, 161, 176-177, 221
        R                                                   selection, four levels, 239
        radical libertarians, 154, 203, 361                 self-determination, 112, 253, 412
        randomness objection, 27, 29, 36, 418               self-forming action (SFA), 45, 66, 122, 154,
        randomness requirement, 55, 243                         173, 209, 295-321, 365, 422
        reactive attitudes, 116, 125, 200, 250, 253,        self-perfection, 253, 421
            270-272, 281, 419                               self-realization, 112, 123n, 253, 422
        reasons-responsive, 419                             semicompatibilism, 64, 421
        reconcile free will and determinism, 7, 17,         separability, 254-261
            45, 60-61, 67, 69, 71, 86, 88, 91-92, 100,      Shannon, Claude, 333
            109, 115, 120, 205, 223, 250, 270, 285,         Shannon entropy, 375-378
            307, 327-328, 356, 359, 361, 363, 369-370       Sharples, R.W., 80
        recurrence, 388                                     Sidgwick, Henry, 37-38
        regulative control, 419                             Simon, Herbert, 119, 188, 206, 247, 277
        relativity, special, 105, 140, 150-151, 188,        Simonton, Dean Keith, 276-277
            225-230                                         Skinner, B. F., 147
        religious determinism, 150                          Smart, J. J. C. 33, 42, 46, 150, 226
Index




        Renouvier, Charles, 92, 93                          Smilansky, Saul, 128, 337
        requirements for free will, xx, 22-23, 41, 46,      Social Trends Institute, xix
            53, 54-57, 125, 183, 194, 210, 212, 256-        Socrates, 71
            257, 310, 341                                   soft causality, 57, 66, 145, 153, 292, 423
        responsibility requirement, 56, 57                  soft compatibilism, 423
        restrictivism, 127, 169, 302, 413, 420              soft determinism, 59, 64 , 423
        retributivism, 127, 420                             soft incompatibilism, 424
        reversibility, 389                                  soft libertarianism, 424
        revisionism, 127, 421                               solution to free-will problem, 373
                                                                                               455
Sorabji, Richard, 79                               U
source incompatibilism, 66, 159, 425               ultimacy, 126, 212, 216, 297, 343, 427
spatio-temporal determinism, 150                   ultimate responsibility (UR), 55, 123, 173-
Spencer, Herbert, 98                                  174, 216, 273, 295-298, 302, 310, 319-320,
Spinoza, Baruch, 84                                   348, 357, 427
standard argument against free will, 16-17,        uncertainty principle, xvii, 103-109, 223
   20-22, 26-53, 55, 60, 66-67, 69, 75, 114,       undetermined liberties, 45, 49, 185, 194-5,
   120, 270, 309-310, 425                             200, 214, 220, 318, 370, 417
Stapp, Henry, 110                                  up to us, 4, 23, 36, 48, 57, 77-78, 81, 120,
statistics, 5-7, 31, 37, 73, 89, 92, 96-97, 106,      167, 201, 253, 348, 394, 428
   134, 137-143, 153-154, 176, 220, 223-225,
   232, 235, 277, 362, 388                         V
Stebbing, L. Susan, 31, 32n                        valerian model, 66, 119, 171, 205, 210-211,
stochastic, 7, 235, 261, 391                          315, 325-329, 330, 333, 338, 353-359, 396
Stoics, 74-76, 99                                  Valéry, Paul, 325, 335
Strawson, Galen, 23n, 37, 38n, 127-128,            Valla, Lorenzo, 84
   147, 182, 211, 337, 345, 363                    value problem, 385
Strawson, P. F. , 33, 88, 115-117, 127-130,        Van Inwagen, Peter, 23, 34-38, 47-49, 60-62,
   201, 218, 250-253, 265, 269-272, 284, 287,         120, 126, 129-130, 134, 143, 159, 199,
   290, 323, 350                                      302, 323, 348, 363, 381
Strawson/Fischer/Mele hypothesis, 253, 347,        Vargas, Manuel, 249, 253, 256, 259; his
   350                                                question, 259
strongest motive, 205, 416                         Vihvelin, Kadri, 44, 62
Suarez, Antoine, xix, 227n, 331                    volition, 25, 30-31, 81-82, 88-89, 100, 105,
swerve of atoms, 72-82                                124, 176-178, 268, 284, 406, 428
T                                                  voluntarism, 84, 89, 124, 163, 175, 194, 232,
                                                      253, 279, 284-291, 309-311, 369, 403, 427
taxonomy, xviii, 58-67, 120, 143, 159, 364,
   370; a new, 62-63                               W
tarpit of confusion, 62, 65, 367                   Wallace, David Foster, 118, 134
Taylor, Christopher, 334-335                       Warfield, Ted, 412
Taylor, Richard, 34, 45n, 47, 117-118, 134,        weakness of will, 338, 429
   148, 165                                        Widerker, David, 127, 408
Templeton Foundation, 351                          Wiener, Norbert, 32, 386
tertium quid, 52, 98, 131n, 298                    Wiggins, David, 35, 119, 127
theater of consciousness, 188, 197, 246, 380       Williams, Bernard, 216-219
theological determinism, 150                       Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 102, 115, 265
thermodynamics, 7, 9-11, 92, 174, 305, 311-        Wolf, Susan, 394, 419, 420
   312, 331, 368, 385, 388                         wretched subterfuge, 60, 347
                                                                                                   Index




tracing, 426
traditional argument, 426
                                                   Y
transfer principle, 426                            yes-no objection, 429
two-stage models, xix-xxi, 66-67, 99-101,          YouTube, xix, 183, 293, 321-322, 351
   105-107, 113-114, 118-119, 160-221,             Z
   231-243, 296-307, 314-327, 333, 338, 368;
                                                   Zermelo, Ernst, 388
   Cogito model, 186-203
two-step processes, 12, 276, 368
                                                   My thanks to J. L. Speranza for editorial
                                                   assistance and help with the index.
456   Philosophers and Scientists on the I-Phi Website

      Philosophers               Ian Hacking               Ayn Rand
                                 Ishtiyaque Haji           Thomas Reid
      Mortimer Adler             Stuart Hampshire          Charles Renouvier
      Rogers Albritton           W.F.R. Hardie             Nicholas Rescher
      Alexander of Aphrodisias   R. M. Hare                C.W.Rietdijk
      G.E.M.Anscombe             Georg W.F. Hegel          Josiah Royce
      Anselm                     Martin Heidegger          Bertrand Russell
      Thomas Aquinas             R.E.Hobart                Paul Russell
      Aristotle                  Thomas Hobbes             Gilbert Ryle
      David Armstrong            David Hodgson             T.M.Scanlon
      Augustine                  Shadsworth Hodgson        Moritz Schlick
      J.L.Austin                 Ted Honderich             Arthur Schopenhauer
      A.J.Ayer                   Pamela Huby               John Searle
      Alexander Bain             David Hume                Henry Sidgwick
      Mark Balaguer              William James             Walter Sinnott-Armstrong
      William Belsham            Robert Kane               J.J.C.Smart
      Henri Bergson              Immanuel Kant             Saul Smilansky
      Isaiah Berlin              Tomis Kapitan             Michael Smith
      Bernard Berofsky           Christine Korsgaard       L. Susan Stebbing
      Susanne Bobzien            Keith Lehrer              George F. Stout
      Emil du Bois-Reymond       Gottfried Leibniz         Galen Strawson
      George Boole               Leucippus                 Peter Strawson
      Émile Boutroux             Michael Levin             Eleonore Stump
      F.H.Bradley                C.I.Lewis                 Richard Taylor
      C.D.Broad                  David Lewis               Kevin Timpe
      C.A.Campbell               Peter Lipton              Peter van Inwagen
      Joseph Keim Campbell       John Locke                Manuel Vargas
      Carneades                  Michael Lockwood          John Venn
      Ernst Cassirer             John R. Lucas             Kadri Vihvelin
      Roderick Chisholm          Lucretius                 Voltaire
      Chrysippus                 James Martineau           G.H. von Wright
      Cicero                     Hugh McCann               David Foster Wallace
      Randolph Clarke            Colin McGinn              R. Jay Wallace
      Diodorus Cronus            Michael McKenna           W. G.Ward
      Donald Davidson            Paul E. Meehl             Ted Warfield
      Democritus                 Alfred Mele               Roy Weatherford
      Daniel Dennett             John Stuart Mill          Alfred North Whitehead
      René Descartes             Dickinson Miller          David Widerker
      Richard Double             G.E.Moore                 David Wiggins
      Fred Dretske               Thomas Nagel              Ludwig Wittgenstein
      John Earman                Friedrich Nietzsche       Susan Wolf
      Laura Waddell Ekstrom      P.H.Nowell-Smith
      Epictetus                  Robert Nozick
      Epicurus                   William of Ockham         Scientists
      John Martin Fischer        Timothy O’Connor
      Owen Flanagan              David F. Pears
      Luciano Floridi            Charles Sanders Peirce    Michael Arbib
      Philippa Foot              Derk Pereboom             Bernard Baars
      Alfred Fouillée            Steven Pinker             John S. Bell
      Harry Frankfurt            Karl Popper               Charles Bennett
      Richard L. Franklin        H.A.Prichard              Margaret Boden
      Carl Ginet                 Hilary Putnam             David Bohm
      Nicholas St. John Green    Willard van Orman Quine   Neils Bohr
      H. Paul Grice              Frank Ramsey              Ludwig Boltzmann
      Scientists and Core Concepts on the I-Phi Website                          457

Max Born                     (Lord Kelvin)             Indeterminacy
Stephen Brush              John von Neumann            Indeterminism
Leon Brillouin             Daniel Wegner               Infinities
Henry Thomas Buckle        Steven Weinberg             Laplace’s Demon
Donald Campbell            Norbert Wiener              Libertarianism
Anthony Cashmore           Eugene Wigner               Liberty of Indifference
Eric Chaisson              E. O. Wilson                Libet Experiments
Jean-Pierre Changeux       Ernst Zermelo               Luck
Arthur Holly Compton                                   Master Argument
Charles Darwin             Core Concepts               Modest Libertarianism
Abraham de Moivre                                      Moral Responsibility
Paul Dirac                                             Moral Sentiments
John Eccles                Adequate Determinism        Mysteries
Arthur Stanley Eddington   Agent-Causality             Naturalism
Albert Einstein            Alternative Possibilities   Necessity
Richard Feynman            Causa Sui                   Noise
GianCarlo Ghirardi         Causality                   Non-Causality
Nicolas Gisin              Certainty                   Nonlocality
A.O.Gomes                  Chance                      Origination
Joshua Greene              Chance Not Direct Cause     Pre-determinism
Jacques Hadamard           The Cogito Model            Predictability
Patrick Haggard            Compatibilism               Probability
Martin Heisenberg          Comprehensive               Pseudo-Problem
Werner Heisenberg              Compatibilism           Random When?/Where?
William Stanley Jevons     Conceptual Analysis         Rational Fallacy
Pascual Jordan             Control                     Responsibility
Simon Kochen               Could Do Otherwise          Same Circumstances
Stephen Kosslyn            Creativity                  Scandal
Rolf Landauer              Default Responsibility      Science Advance Fallacy
Alfred Landé               De-liberation               Second Thoughts
Pierre-Simon Laplace       Determination               Semicompatibilism
David Layzer               Determination Fallacy       Separability
Benjamin Libet             Determinism                 Soft Causality
Josef Loschmidt            Disambiguation              Special Relativity
Ernst Mach                 Either Way                  Standard Argument
Henry Margenau             Ethical Fallacy             Taxonomy
James Clerk Maxwell        Experimental Philosophy     Temporal Sequence
Ernst Mayr                 Extreme Libertarianism      Tertium Quid
Jacques Monod              Event Has Many Causes       Torn Decision
Roger Penrose              Frankfurt Cases             Two-Stage Models
Steven Pinker              Free Choice                 Ultimate Responsibility
Max Planck                 Freedom of Action           Uncertainty
Henri Poincaré             “Free Will”                 Up To Us
Adolphe Quételet           Free Will Axiom             Voluntarism
Jerome Rothstein           Free Will in Antiquity
Erwin Schrödinger          Free Will Mechanisms
Claude Shannon             Free Will Requirements
Dean Keith Simonton        Free Will Theorem
Herbert Simon              Future Contingency
B. F. Skinner              Hard Incompatibilism
Henry Stapp                Illusion of Determinism
Antoine Suarez             Illusionism
Leo Szilard                Impossibilism
William Thomson            Incompatibilism
458       About I-Phi Books
      Information Philosopher books are bridges from the information
      architecture of the printed page, from well before Gutenberg and
      his movable-type revolution, to the information architecture of the
      world-wide web, to a future of knowledge instantly available on
      demand anywhere it is needed in the world.

      Information wants to be free. Information makes you free.

      I-Phi printed books are still material, with their traditional costs
      of production and distribution. But they are physical pointers and
      travel guides to help you navigate the virtual world of information
      online, which of course still requires energy for its communication,
      and material devices for its storage and retrieval to displays.

      But the online information itself is, like the knowledge in our collec-
      tive minds, neither material nor energy, but pure information, pure
      idea, the stuff of thought. It is as close as physical science comes to
      the notion of spirit, the ghost in the machine, the soul in the body.

                It is this spirit that information philosophy
                wants to set free, with the help of Google and
                Wikipedia, Facebook and YouTube.

      At a time when one in ten living persons have a
                  presence on the web, when the work
                  of past intellects has been captured by
                  Google Scholar, we have entered the
                  age of Information Immortality.

      When you Google one of the concepts of information
      philosophy, the search results page will retrieve links to
      the latest versions of Information Philosopher pages online, and
      of course links to related pages in the Wikipedia, in the Stanford
      Encyclopedia of Philosophy, and links to YouTube lectures.

      Thank you for purchasing this physical embodiment of our work. We
      put the means of intellectual production in the hands of the people.
