        18       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                  m inis        m
                                         De t e r
Chapter 3




                                                           t i b i l i s m
                                                 Co    mpa                 ism
                                                                  rmin
                        ter  minism               Sof   t D e t e
                 De
            Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                   o m p atibi
                                                           S oft C
                             i b ilism
Hard I
       n        co   m p a t
                                      e d o m                                           In
                                  Fre       om p a t
                                                Semic
                                                     i bilism

          n      ism
  Illusio
                                                                p atib ilism
                                                       In c o m
                                                   w
                       sm                 Narro
   Impo        ssibili
                                                                p atib   ilism
                                                     t In c o m
                                                Sof                                      y
                        del                                                      Leewa
                  an Mo
            Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                          a
                                         r c e I ncom nce)
                                     Sou          l S e que
                                       (Actu   a
                                                                            i m i t e d
                                                     e lw             ith L
                                                 o d
                               - S t      a ge M
                          Tw o                         This chapter on the web
                                          informationphilosopher.com/freedom
                              m inis              m
                     de t e r                                                     Freedom                19
             In
             Freedom                             r i a ni        sm
                                       ibe r t a
                                   L
                Freedom is the property of being free from constraints, espe-
             cially from external constraints on our actions, but also from inter-
                                                                                 usal




                                                                                                            Chapter 3
                                                                           - C a
             nal constraints such as physical disabilities or addictions. Political
                                                                         t
                                                                       n limits to
             freedoms, such as the right to speak, to assemble,Aandgethe
                                   C a  u s al of external
             government constraints on associations    and organizations such as

                        E v e nt-
             media and religions,  are examples               freedom.
                Isaiah Berlin called this kind of freedom “negative” in his
                                                                                      l
             essay Two Concepts of Liberty.                                    Causa      Non-
                    I am normally said to be free to the degree to which no man
                                                   SFA
                    or body of men interferes with my activity. Political liberty in
                      m
             atibilis
                    this sense is simply the area within which a man can act unob-
     p                                                                                     ity
ncom                                                                         usal
                    structed by others. If I am prevented by others from doing what
                                                                     f
                    I could otherwise do, I am to that degree unfree. 1
                                                                   o   t C a
                                                               S
              Philosophers call this absence of external and internal con-
                     p a tibilisofmaction.” But there is another, more philo-
           straints “freedom
                   m                                                             a n ism
           I n c o                                                       t a r i
   Bro  ad sophical  form  of liberty that Berlin called “positive   ber
                                                                   freedom.”
                                                                                      i
                                                                      Soft L
                    I wish to be the instrument of my own, not of other men’s, acts

                                     iani    sm
                    of will. I wish to be a subject, not an object; to be moved by rea-
                                   r                                                                       ert   aria
                        ib e r t a
                    sons, by conscious purposes, which are my own... I wish, above
                                                                                                 f t L i b
              st L                                                                            So
     Mode                                                                 Darin
                                                                                          g
                    all, to be conscious of myself as a thinking, willing, active being,
                    bearing responsibility for my choices and able to explain them

                                              Cogito
                    by references to my own ideas and purposes.2
                           m of positive liberty raises the ancient question of “free-
            p a t i b iliskind
                    This
 Incom dom                  s)will.” One can be free to act, that is, be free of con- ism
                        cethe
                                                                                   thein
                       of
               u   e n                                                         inm
        e S  q
            e straints, but one’s will might be pre-determined by events
                                                                       e   t e r
a t i v        past and the laws of nature.
                                                  i t e d        Ind
                                         nd L i m
                Quite apart from whether we are free to act, are we free to will

               ism
             our actions?            a
       r m i n
  Dete
                This is the question that philosophers have not been able to
             resolve in twenty-two centuries of philosophical analysis.

                1    Berlin (1990) p. 122. This is sometimes called “freedom from.”
                2    Berlin (1990) p. 131. Sometimes called “freedom to.”
        20     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                This book is based on parts of the Freedom section of the web-
             site Information Philosopher, a critical study of the “problem
             of free will.” (www.informationphilosopher.com/freedom)
                Those parts of the Freedom section that could not fit in this
Chapter 3




             book will appear in two forthcoming volumes. Free Will: The Core
             Concepts will include the web pages devoted to over 60 critically
             important concepts needed to understand the free will debates.
             Free Will: The Philosophers and Scientists will excerpt the I-Phi
             web pages on 135 philosophers and 65 scientists.
                There I have researched the arguments of hundreds of philoso-
             phers and scientists on the question of free will, from the original
             philosophical debates among the ancient Greeks down to the cur-
             rent day. They are presented on my I-Phi web pages, with some
             source materials in the original languages, for use by students and
             scholars everywhere, without asking me for permission to quote.
                Some readers might want to skip ahead to Chapter 7, the History
             of the Free Will Problem. There you can try to develop your own
             ideas on how and why this problem has been thought insoluble,
             even unintelligible, for over two millennia.
                If you don’t mind being biased a bit, and would like a little
             guidance as you try to make more sense of the problem than
             hundreds of great thinkers have been able to do, I present briefly
             in this and the next chapter two of my ideas that you may want to
             study first and have in mind as you read the History chapter.
             The First Idea - against libertarian free will
                The first is a very strong logical argument against libertarian
             free will that I have found again and again in philosophy since
             ancient times. I call it the standard argument against free will.
                If you fully master the standard argument, and perhaps even
             learn to detect its flaws, you will be more likely to recognize it in
             its various forms, and under a wide variety of names.
                I believe that the standard argument was the main stumbling
             block to a coherent solution of the free will problem long ago.
                                                                Freedom                  21

   In the next chapter, I provide examples of the standard argument
taken from the work of over thirty philosophers, from Cicero
to Robert Kane, over twenty-two centuries. I am sure there are
others. Perhaps you will come across them in your readings. If so,




                                                                                          Chapter 3
I would very much like to hear from you about them.
The Second Idea - for libertarian free will
   The second thing you might want to keep in mind is what looks
to me to be, after twenty-two centuries of sophisticated discussion,
the most plausible and practical solution to the free-will problem.
   Please excuse my hubris to think that I have solved a 2200-year
old problem, one that has escaped so many great minds. Despite
John Searle’s cry of no progress, I have found steps toward the
solution in nearly twenty fine minds. They just failed to convince
their contemporaries, and I find that few of them have read their
predecessors as carefully as I have. 3
   If you don’t want to be aware of my opinions before you begin,
just skip ahead to Chapter 4 for more on the standard argument.
   Almost all philosophers and scientists have a preferred solu-
tion to any problem. It very likely biases their work. You almost
certainly bring your own views to all your reading and research. If
you want to read the free will history unbiased by my views, skip
to Chapter 7. If you want a brief introduction to my libertarian
free-will model before proceeding, read on.




  3   If you don’t remember the past, you don’t deserve to be remembered by the future
        22      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Two Requirements for Free Will
                Any plausible model for free will must separately attack the two
             branches of the standard argument against libertarian free will.
Chapter 3




                The foremost libertarian, Robert Kane, says that anyone wanting
             to show that free will is incompatible with determinism must
             successfully climb over what he calls “Incompatibilist Mountain.”
             I take the liberty of time-reversing Kane’s ascending and
             descending stages here, for reasons that will become clear later.




                   Figure 3-1. Robert Kane’s Incompatibilist Mountain (reversed)

                I like Kane’s division of the one “incompatibilism” problem into
             two.4 Although we will see that Kane thinks libertarian free will
             is focused in a single moment at the end of the decision process,
             his diagram shows that the upward and downward climbs of his
             metaphorical mountain deserve separate treatment.
             First Requirement
                The first, ascent, requirement is for a limited indeterminism.
             It must provide randomness enough to break the causal chain of
             determinism. Even more critical, it must be the indeterminism
             needed to generate creative thoughts and alternative possibilities
             for action. So why and how must it be limited? Because the inde-
             terminism must not destroy our moral responsibility, by making
             our actions random.
                So to make sense of indeterminist free will as we ascend the
             reversed incompatibilist mountain, we must demand that the
             indeterministic alternative possibilities are not normally the
             direct cause of our actions.
                4 But I don’t like the term “incompatibilism,” as explained on p. 60 in Chapter 6.
             Why define human freedom by saying that it conflicts with something that does not
             exist, except as a philosophical ideal?
                                                              Freedom             23


Second Requirement
   The second, descent, requirement is to have enough determin-
ism to say that our actions are “determined” by our character,
our values, our motives, and feelings. Again, how and why is this




                                                                                   Chapter 3
determinism limited? It must not be so much that our actions are
pre-determined from well before we began deliberation, or even
from before we were born.5
   So for our descent of Incompatibilist Mountain, we can say that
free will is not incompatible with a limited determinism or deter-
mination, but it is definitely incompatible with pre-determinism.
   Our deliberations, both evaluations and selections, are
“adequately” determined. We can be responsible for choices that
are “up to us,” choices not determined from before deliberations.


     Hobart’s Determination
        R. E. Hobart (the pseudonym of Dickinson Miller, the
     student and colleague of William James) is often misquoted as
     requiring determinism. He only advocated determination.
        Hobart did not deny chance in his famous Mind article
     of 1934, entitled “Free Will as Involving Determination, and
     Inconceivable Without It.” (It’s my second requirement.)
        Philippa Foot added to the misquote confusion in the ti-
     tle and in the footnotes for her 1957 Philosophical Review ar-
     ticle, “Free Will as Involving Determinism.” Most philosophers
     continue to misquote this important title.
        Determinist and compatibilist philosophers, eager to sup-
     port their unsupportable claims of a deterministic world, have
     been misquoting Hobart ever since, showing me that they do
     not always read the titles of their sources, never mind the origi-
     nal articles. If they did, they would be surprised to find that
     neither Hobart nor Foot was a determinist.

   5 As claimed by the incompatibilist Peter van Inwagen’s Consequence Argument
and by the impossibilist Galen Strawson’s Basic Argument.
        24     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Hobart on Indeterminism
                Hobart was nervous about indeterminism. He explicitly does
             not endorse strict logical or physical determinism, and he explic-
Chapter 3




             itly does endorse the existence of alternative possibilities, which
             he says may depend on absolute chance. Remember that Hobart is
             writing about six years after the discovery of quantum indetermi-
             nacy, and he also refers back to the ancient philosopher Epicurus’
             “swerve” of the atoms.
                    “I am not maintaining that determinism is true...it is not here
                   affirmed that there are no small exceptions, no slight undeter-
                   mined swervings, no ingredient of absolute chance.” 6
                    “We say,’ I can will this or I can will that, whichever I choose ‘.
                   Two courses of action present themselves to my mind. I think
                   of their consequences, I look on this picture and on that, one
                   of them commends itself more than the other, and I will an
                   act that brings it about. I knew that I could choose either. That
                   means that I had the power to choose either.” 7
                Here Hobart seems to agree with his mentor and colleague
             William James that there are ambiguous futures. And note that
             Hobart, like James and using his phrase, argues that courses of
             action “present themselves.” Our thoughts appear to “come to us”
             - and the will’s power to choose brings the act about - our actions
             “come from us.”
                Despite his moderate position on chance, Hobart finds fault
             with the indeterminist’s position. He gives the typical overstate-
             ment by a determinist critic, that any chance will be the direct
             cause of our actions, which would clearly be a loss of freedom and
             responsibility
                    “Indeterminism maintains that we need not be impelled to ac-
                   tion by our wishes, that our active will need not be determined
                   by them. Motives “incline without necessitating”. We choose
                   amongst the ideas of action before us, but need not choose sole-
                   ly according to the attraction of desire, in however wide a sense

               6    Hobart (1934) p. 2
               7    Hobart (1934) p. 8
                                                             Freedom         25

      that word is used. Our inmost self may rise up in its autonomy
      and moral dignity, independently of motives, and register its
      sovereign decree.
       “Now, in so far as this “interposition of the self ” is undeter-




                                                                              Chapter 3
      mined, the act is not its act, it does not issue from any concrete
      continuing self; it is born at the moment, of nothing, hence it
      expresses no quality; it bursts into being from no source”. 8
  Hobart is clearly uncomfortable with raw indeterminism. He
says chance would produce “freakish” results if it were directly to
cause our actions. He is right.
      “In proportion as an act of volition starts of itself without cause
      it is exactly, so far as the freedom of the individual is concerned,
      as if it had been thrown into his mind from without — “sug-
      gested” to him — by a freakish demon. It is exactly like it in
      this respect, that in neither case does the volition arise from
      what the man is, cares for or feels allegiance to; it does not come
      out of him. In proportion as it is undetermined, it is just as if
      his legs should suddenly spring up and carry him off where he
      did not prefer to go. Far from constituting freedom, that would
      mean, in the exact measure in which it took place, the loss of
      freedom”. 9
   It is very likely that Hobart has William James in mind as “the
indeterminist.” If so, despite knowing James very well, he is mis-
taken about James’ position. James would not have denied that
our will is an act of determination, consistent with, and in some
sense “caused by” our character and values, our habits, and our
current feelings and desires. James simply wanted chance to pro-
vide a break in the causal chain of strict determinism and alterna-
tive possibilities for our actions.




  8    Hobart (1934) p. 6
  9    Hobart (1934) p. 7
