       390      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy




                                                 m inis        m
                                        De t e r

                                                          t i b i l i s m
                                                Co    mpa                   m
                                                                r minis
                       ter  minism               S  oft D e t e
                De
           Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                  o m p atibi
                                                            oft C
                        a t i b ilism
                                                Te r m s  S

H     ard In
             co     m p
                              a         r y o f                                        In
                    G l o s s                  Se m i c
                                                       ilism
                                                        o mp     atib

          n     ism
  Illusio
                                                               p atib ilism
                                                      In c o m
                                                  w
                      sm                 Narro
   Impo       ssibili
                                                                p atib  ilism
                                                     t In c o m
                                               Sof                                      y
                       del                                                      Leewa
                 an Mo
           Valeri                                                 ilism          (Altern
                                                                                         a
Glossary




                                                        p a t i b
                                        r c e I ncom nce)
                                    Sou          l S e que
                                      (Actu   a
                                                                           i m i t e d
                                                    e lw             ith L
                                                o d
                              - S t      a ge M
                         Tw o                      This chapter on the web
                       www.informationphilosopher.com/afterwords/glossary
                           m inis           m
                  de t e r                                Glossary of Terms - A             391
              In
             Glossary of Terms
                                           a r  i a n ism
                               L
               On the Informationi b ert website, our glossary of terms uses
                                    Philosopher
             hyperlinks (with blue underlines) to provide recursive definitions from
             within each entry. We cannot do this in print, of course.
                                                                             - C au        sal
                                                                    Ag e n t
                Hyperlinks go to other pages in the I-Phi website and to external sites
             such as the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy and Wikipedia, where
             available.
                                 - C au     sal
                        Ev e n t
                The web version also offers “Search I-Phi” links to find all the pages
             on the I-Phi website that refer to the given term. In this print version
                                                                                 C a us          al
                                                                          No n -
             we provide an index. Some glosses also offer a click on “I-Phi Page” to
             get a much more detailed description of the term in the Core Concepts
             sections of the website.
                      m                      SFA
             atibilis
                The website also links to other online glossaries of relevant philo-

     p       sophical terms, such as:
                                                                              ity
ncom                                                           t C a
                • Ted Honderich’s Determinism and Freedom Terminology
                                                        S  o f       usal
                • Alfred Mele’s Lexicon for the Big Questions in Free Will Project
                                 ism
         Ancompatibil                                                           a r ian     ism
         I                                                                  r t
   Broad                                                      Soft    Lib e
             Actualism
                           t aria   nism
                Actualism is the idea that the events that do happen are the only pos-
                         r                                                                i b erta           ria
                tL i b e                                                       S  o f t L
              s
             sible events that could possibly have happened. Actualism denies the
     Mode    existence of alternative possibilities.             Darin
                                                                       g
                                         Cogito
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Sequences, Conse-
             quence Argument, Direct Argument, Frankfurt-style cases, Indirect Argument,

        p a t i b ilism
             Standard Argument
 Incom Actual          s)
                    ceSequence                                                   n i s m
        e q u  e n
                                                                            m
                                                                           r up
                                                                      telead   i
ative S                                                       In pastethat
               The Actual Sequence is the sequence of events in thed
                                                   d
                                                                                                  Glossary




                                         i m i t e
                                    nd L
             to the current moment of deliberation and decision. The term is used in

                                 a
             Direct Arguments, such as Peter van Inwagen’s Consequence Argument,
               ism
       r m i n
             Frankfurt-style cases and John Martin Fischer’s Semicompatibilism.

  Dete          It is contrasted with the Alternative Sequences that result from
             Alternative Possibilities. Arguments for incompatibilism that consider
             alternative possibilities are called Indirect Arguments.
       392        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Sequences, Conse-
             quence Argument, Direct Argument, Frankfurt-style cases, Indirect Argument,
             Standard Argument, Tracing, Transfer Principle

             Adequate Determinism
                Adequate Determinism is the kind of determinism we have in the
             world. It is also called “near determinism” (Ted Honderich), “almost
             causal determinism” (John Fischer), and “micro-indeterminism” (John
             Searle). Macroscopic objects are adequately determined in their mo-
             tions, giving rise to the appearance of strict causal determinism.
                Microscopic objects, on the other hand, show the probabilistic con-
             sequences of indeterminism, due to quantum mechanics. These proba-
             bilistic effects usually average out in large objects, leading to the illusion
             of strict causal physical determinism, including the powerful and very
             productive idea of deterministic laws of nature.
                Other glosses -- Determination, Determinism, Indeterminism, Laws of Na-
             ture, Quantum Mechanics

             Agent Causal
                Agent-causal libertarianism is the idea that an agent can originate
             new causal chains, actions that are not predetermined to happen by
             events prior to the agent’s deliberation (between alternative possibilities
             perhaps) and decision. Some agent-causal theories are metaphysical, as-
             suming that the agent’s mind is not bound by the physical laws that gov-
             ern the body. Some philosophers claim mental events are “non-causal.”
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Causality, Causa Sui, Event Causal,
             Indeterminism, Origination

             Agnostic
                Most modern philosophers claim to be agnostic on the “truth” of de-
             terminism or indeterminism. For example, Alfred Mele claims his argu-
Glossary




             ments for “Agnostic Autonomy” are valid whether or not determinism
             is true. John Fischer says semicompatibilists are agnostic. And Derk
             Pereboom has renamed “hard determinism” to “hard incompatibilism”
             to remain agnostic.
                Agnosticism ignores the great asymmetry between determinism and
             indeterminism. Determinism is congenial to claims that freedom con-
             sists of following the laws of nature and that God has foreknowledge of
             our actions. Indeterminism is much more difficult to reconcile with a
                                           Glossary of Terms - A                   393

responsible freedom, since it has such negative implications - random-
ness, chance, uncertainty, and contingency - leading to the randomness
objection to free will.
  Other glosses - Determinism, Foreknowledge, Indeterminism, Standard Ar-
gument

Akrasia
   Akrasia, from the Greek a-kratos (no power), describes “weak-willed”
actions taken against one’s better judgment. Rationalism assumes there
is always a single best way to evaluate an agent’s options or alternative
possibilities, so that weakness of will is fundamentally irrational.
   Other glosses - Strongest Motive, Weakness of Will

Alternative Possibilities
   Alternative Possibilities for thought and action were thought to be a
requirement for free will and moral responsibility until Harry Frankfurt
extended John Locke’s “locked room” example of a person who freely
chose to stay in a room, unaware that the doors had been locked, so that
alternative possibilities did not exist for him.
   Note that alternative possibilities should not be interpreted as prob-
abilities for actions. This is a mistake made by many prominent philoso-
phers who assume that indeterminism makes chance the direct cause of
action.
   Other glosses - Determination, Direct Argument, Frankfurt Examples, In-
determinism, Indirect Argument, Undetermined Liberty

Alternative Sequences
   Alternative Sequences are hypothetical counterfactual sequences of
events in the past that lead up to the current moment of deliberation
and decision. They result from Alternative Possibilities. Arguments for
incompatibilism that consider alternative possibilities are called Indi-
                                                                                     Glossary




rect Arguments.
   Alternative Sequences are contrasted with the Actual Sequence that
leads up to the current moment of deliberation and decision. The term
is used in Frankfurt-style cases and John Fischer’s Semicompatibilism.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt-style cases, Indirect Ar-
gument
       394        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Asymmetry
                There are two important uses of this term in free will and moral re-
             sponsibility.
                The first is the great asymmetry between determinism and indeter-
             minism in the standard argument against free will. Determinism is much
             easier to reconcile with the will than is indeterminism (pure chance).
                Susan Wolf has pointed out the strange asymmetry between praise
             and blame. Those opposed to punishment for retributive reasons (as op-
             posed to practical consequentialist reasons) are often in favor of praise
             for good deeds. This reflects the ancient Platonic view that we are re-
             sponsible only for the good we do. Our errors we blame on our igno-
             rance, which is, unfortunately, no excuse before the law.
               Other glosses - Illusion, Consequentialism, Determinism, Indeterminism,
             Moral Responsibility, Revisionism, Retributivism

             Authenticity
                Authenticity (from Greek authentes, author) suggests that we are the
             author of our actions, that we originate actions which are “up to us.”
             But various forms of determinism claim other authors for many or all
             actions.
               Other glosses - Autonomy, Control, Determinism, Origination, Up To Us

             Autonomy
                Autonomy, (from auto + nomos) is literally self-lawful, self-govern-
             ing, or self-rule, is often used in the free will debates as an alternative to
             free will, freedom of choice, freedom of action, etc.
                Like the term authentic, autonomy suggests that we are the author of
             our actions, that our actions are “up to us.”
                Other glosses - Authenticity, Control, Freedom, Free Will, Origination, Up
             To Us
Glossary




             Avoidability
                Avoidability is a synonym for “could have done otherwise.”
                It is the libertarian condition that the agent has alternative possibili-
             ties for action. Daniel Dennett defends avoidability as an evolved free-
             dom even in a deterministic universe.
               Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Done Otherwise, Yes-No Objection
                                         Glossary of Terms - A                  395


B
Basic Argument
   Galen Strawson developed a Basic Argument that denies the exis-
tence of free will and moral responsibility. It is based on an infinite re-
gress and denial of any causa sui or uncaused cause. Briefly stated, the
regress says that you do what you do because of your character. To be
responsible for your character, you must have done something to form
that character. But that something was done by your character at an ear-
lier time, and so on ad infinitum, or at least to when you were too young
to be responsible.
   Although Strawson is agnostic and says his argument works whether
determinism or indeterminism is true, his denial of any causa sui ef-
fectively cancels indeterminism and the Basic Argument resembles the
Consequence Argument.
  Other glosses - Agnostic, Consequence Argument, Direct Argument, Moral
Responsibility, Standard Argument, Ultimacy

Broad Incompatibilism
   Broad Incompatibilism is Randolph Clarke’s synonym for traditional
compatibilism. Clarke distinguishes it from his Narrow Incompatibil-
ism, which is a synonym for John Martin Fischer’s concept of Semicom-
patibilism.
   Broad Incompatibilism is incompatible with both free will and moral
responsibility.
   Other glosses - Compatibilism, Incompatibilism, Moral Responsibility, Nar-
row Incompatibilism, Semicompatibilism

C
                                                                                  Glossary




Causality
   Causality is the basic idea that all events have causes. When every
event is caused completely by prior events and their causes, it leads to
the idea of determinism. A causal chain links all events to earlier events
in a limitless sequence. Theologians inconsistently imagine the chain to
break with an uncaused cause (causa sui) which they identify with God
and miracles.
       396        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Quantum indeterminacy produces uncaused causes. There is still a
             causal chain, but it no longer permits complete predictability. Events are
             now merely probable, no longer certain, though the probability can be
             arbitrarily close to certainty. Most macroscopic events are, for practical
             purposes, as predictable as perfect determinism would have allowed.
             Nevertheless, a break in the causal chain is a requirement for free will.
               Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Causa Sui, Determinism, Indeter-
             minism

             Causa Sui
                Causa Sui describes an event that is self-caused or uncaused. The event
             might be the product of an agent with metaphysical power. It might be a
             random accident with only probabilistic outcomes. Theologians identify
             the causa sui with miracles, saying that only God is a causa sui. Friedrich
             Nietzsche famously called it “the best self-contradiction that has been
             conceived so far, it is a sort of rape and perversion of logic “
               Other glosses - Agent Causation, Causality, Indeterminism

             Chance
                Chance has been called an illusion by philosophers who argued that
             probability is only the result of human ignorance. William James saw an
             “antipathy to chance” in most philosophers.
                Chance has historically been seen as a negative idea, associated with
             gambling, for example. Chance has been regarded as atheistic, since it
             appears to deny Foreknowledge.
               Other glosses - Causa Sui, Randomness Objection, Undetermined Liberty

             CNC
               CNC is Robert Kane’s term for the Covert and Non-constraining
             Control of the kind in Frankfurt-style cases and manipulation of agents.
Glossary




               Other glosses - Frankfurt-style cases, Manipulation Argument

             Compatibilism
                Classical compatibilism is the idea that free will exists in a world that
             is deterministic. It was invented by the Stoic Chrysippus and developed
             by Thomas Hobbes and David Hume.
                Classical compatibilists are determinists. Immanuel Kant called com-
             patibilism a “wretched subterfuge.” William James called compatibilism
                                              Glossary of Terms - C                 397

a “quagmire of evasion.” He called compatibilists “soft determinists,”
who evade the fact of their “antipathy to chance.”
   Most modern compatibilists, aware of modern quantum physics,
avoid the determinist label, claiming to be agnostic about the “truth”
of determinism or indeterminism. Alfred Mele defines “soft compati-
bilism” as admitting that some indeterminism might be useful, since it
breaks the causal chain beck to the Big Bang.
   After P. F. Strawson, philosophers have changed the debate from free
will to moral responsibility. Many now conflate free will and moral re-
sponsibility.
   Semicompatibilists, following John Martin Fischer, argue for the
compatibilism of moral responsibility and determinism (or indeter-
minism). Like Strawson, they say that even if determinism were true,
we would not surrender the idea of moral responsibility implicit in our
natural attitudes toward blame and praise, punishment and reward.
  Other glosses - Agnostic, Determinism, Incompatibilism, Indeterminism,
Semicompatibilism

Consequence Argument
   If our current actions are caused directly by and traceable to events
long before our birth, we can not be morally responsible for them. Peter
van Inwagen coined this term for his argument, which is simply a varia-
tion on the standard Determinism Objection to free will. He developed
this argument as an improvement on the Traditional Argument that had
depended on avoidability or the ability to do otherwise, which implied
the agent had alternative possibilities for action. Van Inwagen accepted
the idea that Frankfurt-style cases had called alternative possibilities
into question.
   Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities,, Causality, Direct Argument, Frank-
furt Examples, Moral Responsibility, Tracing, Traditional Argument
                                                                                      Glossary




Consequentialism
   Consequentialism is a theory of moral responsibility that makes mor-
al judgments based on the consequences of an action. Moritz Schlick
argued that it is acceptable to punish agents despite their lack of free will
because of the beneficial effects on behavior that result.
   Consequentialism also describes theories of punishment that are
justified because of the consequences, e.g., the deterrence of a certain
       398         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             crime, as opposed to a retributivist theory, that punishes because the
             agent simply deserves the blame.
               Other glosses - Consequence Argument, Moral Luck, Moral Responsibility,
             Retributivism

             Control
                Control is what is needed for an agent to feel an action originates
             with and is “up to her.”
                Some (e.g, Harry Frankfurt) say control is found in a hierarchy of
             desires. Some (e.g, John Fischer) say control is being “responsive to rea-
             sons.” Fischer divides control into “guidance control” and “regulative
             control,” the latter involving alternative possibilities.
                Determinism undermines control, as do various manipulation
             schemes including behavioral conditioning, hypnosis, brainwashing,
             and the like, as well as physiological problems like addictions, obses-
             sions, and other mental disorders. External coercion denies even the
             freedom claimed by classical compatibilism.
                In Frankfurt-style cases, hypothetical interveners exert control over
             decisions if and only if the actions appear to be ones the intervener does
             not want.
               Other glosses - Agent Causation, Alternative Possibilities, Compatibilism,
             Determinism, Frankfurt Examples, Guidance Control, Hierarchy Of Desires,
             Origination, Reasons-Responsive, Up To Us



             D
             Degrees of Freedom
                Degrees of Freedom is the idea that freedom is not an all-or-nothing
             true/false question. Freedom is always limited by constraints on action,
Glossary




             whether simply physical constraints, external coercion, or internal dis-
             abilities. Fewer constraints mean more degrees of freedom.
                When freedom depends on the existence of viable alternative pos-
             sibilities, an agent with greater intelligence, education, or experience is
             qualitatively more free because she is more likely to generate workable
             options, more ways to do otherwise. More alternatives mean more free-
             dom.
                 Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Done Otherwise
                                         Glossary of Terms - C                 399


Deliberation
   Deliberation is the consideration of alternative possibilities and their
evaluation according to the agent’s character, values, desires, and beliefs,
with the aim of choosing one of the alternatives as a course of action.
   Note that even determinists appear to believe they have alternative
courses of action when they deliberate. That is, they must practically
consider that their alternatives are undetermined before their choice is
made, and that they are free to choose any of them. If the agent knew
with certainty that only one alternative existed, she could no longer de-
liberate.
   Randolph Clarke uses “deliberative” to describe two-stage models of
free will, which locate indeterminism in the first stage, to distinguish
them from “centered” free will models like that of Robert Kane, that
locate indeterminism in the decision stage. Clarke also calls deliberative
freedom “indirect” freedom.
   Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Determinism, Determined Delib-
eration, Indeterminism

Determination
  Determination is the act of deciding, ending a process of deliberation
and evaluation. It can include undetermined liberties, in which there is
chance “centered” in the decision itself and determined deliberations, in
which there is no chance in the decision.
  Other glosses - Deliberation, Determined Deliberation, Determinism, Self-
Determination

Determined Deliberation
  A decision that is adequately determined by the available alternative
possibilities. There is no randomness in the decision itself. These are
examples of Hobart determination. But they are not necessarily pre-
                                                                                 Glossary




determined before the generation of alternative possibilities began.
  Other glosses - Deliberation, Determinism, Self-Determination, Undeter-
mined Liberty

Determinism
   Determinism is the idea that there is but one possible future, and
that it is determined by the “fixed” past and the (mistakenly presumed
deterministic) Laws of Nature.
       400        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                There are many kinds of determinism. None of them are based on
             sufficient evidence. Most have become mere dogmatic truths. Deter-
             minism remains a hypothesis that is very popular among philosophers,
             but it is entirely unjustified. Determinism is an illusion.
                Aware of modern quantum physics, most philosophers admit the
             world is indeterministic, but they say that free will would be compatible
             with determinism, if determinism were true.
                Other glosses - Causality, Compatibilism, Determination, Indeterminism,
             Pre-Determinism

             Determinism Objection
                The Determinism Objection is the first horn in the traditional di-
             lemma of free will. Either determinism is true or indeterminism is true.
             In neither case can there be any moral responsibility. Note that the great
             asymmetry between determinism and indeterminism has led philoso-
             phers to favor the kind of deterministic or causal explanations that are
             the apparent basis for laws of nature. But determinism is an illusion.
             Many philosophers declare themselves agnostic on this objection to free
             will. The determinism objection is the core idea behind Peter van Inwa-
             gen’s Consequence Argument.
                Other glosses - Agnostic, Consequence Argument, Determinism, Luck Ob-
             jection, Illusion, Standard Argument, Randomness Objection


             Direct Argument
                The Direct Argument for the incompatibility of determinism and
             moral responsibility does not depend on avoidability or the ability to do
             otherwise. John Fischer developed it as an improvement on Peter van
             Inwagen’s Consequence Argument, using a Transfer Principle of Non-
             Responsibility which traces the causes of current decisions and actions
             back in the causal chain of the “actual sequence.”
Glossary




                Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Alternative Possibilities, Consequence Ar-
             gument, Indirect Argument, Done Otherwise, Standard Argument, Tracing,
             Transfer Principle

             Do Otherwise
                The idea that an agent could have done otherwise was historically
             seen as a requirement for free will. This idea is in clear conflict with the
             deterministic idea that the past allows but one possible future.
                                          Glossary of Terms - D                   401

   G. E. Moore and others say that “could have done otherwise” sim-
ply means “if the agent had chosen to, he could have done otherwise.”
This obviously requires a different past (which implies past alternative
possibilities). Some philosophers call this the “if-then” hypothetical or
conditional analysis.
   Harry Frankfurt developed sophisticated arguments to show that al-
ternative possibilities need not exist to claim that an agent is free.
   Nevertheless, if in the present an agent has alternative possibilities,
she can say “I can do otherwise.” Change that to the past tense once the
agent has chosen and she can say “I could have done otherwise.”
   Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Fixed Past, Frankfurt Examples

Downward Causation
   Downward Causation is the idea that higher-level processes can exert
a “downward” influence on lower levels. Examples include the dualist
immaterial mind influencing the body, and macroscopic systems, such
as the brain, influencing quantum-mechanical wave functions at the
level of the atoms. Where reductionism assumes all causation is from
the bottom up., downward causation works from the top down.
   Other glosses - Quantum Mechanics

Dual Control
   Dual Control is the power of an agent to act or not to act, in exactly
the same circumstances. That is given the Fixed Past and the Laws of
Nature just before the action (or the lack thereof), the agent can either
act or avoid performing the act.
   Robert Kane and Richard Double call this “dual (or plural) rational
control.” Double suggests that it may be impossible to act rationally in
two different ways, given the same reasons to act. Kane also called it the
“plurality condition” when there are many alternative possibilities for
                                                                                    Glossary



action, each of which has comparable good reasons.
   Actions that have dual or plural rational control are Undetermined
Liberties.
   Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Compatibilism, Control, Determin-
ism, Done Otherwise, Laws of Nature, Undetermined Liberty, Yes-No Objec-
tion
       402         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


             E
             Epistemic Freedom
                Epistemic Freedom is the idea that since we cannot know the future,
             we have a kind of freedom even in a deterministic world.
                It is closely related to epistemic probability, which says there is no
             real (or ontological) chance. There is only human ignorance about the
             complete details that would allow us to predict the future exactly. Reli-
             gious thinkers credit this to our finite minds, whereas the infinite mind
             of God has complete Foreknowledge.
                 Other glosses - Foreknowledge, Ontological, Probability

             Event Causal
               Event-causal libertarianism denies strict causality, the idea that every
             event has antecedent physical causes which completely determine all
             subsequent events. Some causes must be uncaused to break the causal
             chain of determinism. Uncaused causes include quantum events, whose
             outcomes are only probable. Event-causal theories raise the randomness
             objection in the standard argument against free will.
                Other glosses - Agent Causal, Causality, Determinism, Indeterminism,
             Standard Argument

             F
             Fixed Past
                The Fixed Past refers primarily to the obvious fact that past events
             are not changeable. But it appears often in determinist/compatibilist ac-
             counts of whether an agent could have done otherwise. “One could only
             have done otherwise if either the Fixed Past or the Laws of Nature had
Glossary




             been different,” goes the argument.
                The conclusion is “There is but one possible future, and it is deter-
             mined at each moment by the Fixed Past and the (deterministic) Laws
             of Nature.”
                G. E. Moore and others say that “could have done otherwise” sim-
             ply means “if the agent had chosen to, he could have done otherwise.”
             This obviously would have been a different past, one of the alternative
             possibilities. Some philosophers call this the “if-then” hypothetical or
             conditional analysis.
                                         Glossary of Terms - E                 403

  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Compatibilism, Determinism, Do
Otherwise, Laws of Nature

Foreknowledge
   Foreknowledge is the idea that the future is already known, usually to
a supernatural being.
   In classical Newtonian physics, a Laplacian super intelligence could
in principle predict the future from the classical laws of physics, given
knowledge of the positions and velocities of all the atoms in the uni-
verse.
  Other glosses - Determinism, Free Will, Laws of Nature

Frankfurt Cases
    Frankfurt-style case or examples claim that an agent can be respon-
sible, can be said to act freely, even though no alternative possibilities
exist. Harry Frankfurt attacked what he called the Principle of Alternate
Possibilities (PAP). Alternative possibilities for thought and action were
considered to be a requirement for free will and moral responsibility
until Frankfurt extended John Locke’s “locked room” example of a per-
son who freely chose to stay in a room, unaware that the doors had been
locked, so that an alternative possibility did not exist. In Frankfurt-style
thought experiments a hypothetical demon blocks all possibilities ex-
cept the one that he wants the agent to choose.
    Note that Frankfurt assumes that alternative possibilities do in fact
exist, or there would be nothing for his hypothetical intervening demon
to block. Since information about the agent’s decision does not exist un-
til she makes her decision, Frankfurt’s hypothetical intervening demon
(much like the similar Laplacian demon or God’s Foreknowledge) does
not exist. This is the Information Objection to Frankfurt-style examples.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Indirect Argument, Information
Objection, Kane-Widerker Objection, Leeway Incompatibilism
                                                                                 Glossary




Freedom of Action
   Freedom of Action must be carefully distinguished from Freedom of
the Will.
   An action is said to be free by classical compatibilists like Thomas
Hobbes and David Hume if the agent is not coerced by external forces.
       404        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                The action may be completely determined by causal chains going
             back in time before the agent’s birth, but they are nevertheless free in
             the compatibilist sense.
                In his essay, Two Concepts of Liberty, Isaiah Berlin defined freedom
             of action as “negative freedom,” and free will as “positive freedom.” It
             is also known as Voluntarism, in contrast to Origination. And it is the
             Liberty of Spontaneity rather than Liberty of Indifference.
                 Other glosses - Causality, Compatibilism, Determinism, Free Will, Liberty
             of Indifference, Liberty of Spontaneity, Origination, Voluntarism

             Free Will
                Free Will is sometimes called Freedom of Action. Libertarian Free
             Will includes the availability of Alternative Possibilities and the ability
             to Done Otherwise.
                John Locke encouraged the separation of the adjective free, which
             describes deliberation, from the (adequate) determination of the will.
                Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Alternative Possibilities, Delibera-
             tion, Done Otherwise

             Future Contingency
                 The most famous Future Contingent is Aristotle’s Sea Battle (De
             interpretatione 9). The Principle of Bivalence says that the statement
             “There will be a sea battle tomorrow” is either true or false. And either
             way necessarily binds the truth of the future contingent event.
                 Diodorus Cronus’ “Master Argument” denied any future contingen-
             cy.
                 Aristotle, ever sensible, decided that there was no present truth or
             falsity to a future contingent statement. He denied that the truth of a
             proposition is a necessary truth, and thus denied Logical Determinism.
             Indeed, contingency means that the event depends on the future, and so
Glossary




             does its truth.
                 Many Stoics appear to have regarded the truth of future contingent
             statements as predetermining all future events. But Chrysippus denied
             necessity even as he affirmed fate and physical causal determinism.
                 Modern philosophers (especially J. Łukasiewicz) have developed a
             three-valued logic to handle such statements, but not with complete
             success.
                Other glosses - Determinism, Principle of Bivalence, Master Argument,
             Standard Argument
                                         Glossary of Terms - F                  405


G
Guidance Control
    John Martin Fischer separates an agent’s control into two kinds. The
first he calls “guidance control” - the kind of control needed to initiate
or originate an action, by being “reasons-responsive” and taking owner-
ship of the action, meaning the agent can say the action was “up to me.”
For Fischer, this includes steering a vehicle which is on a fixed track and
actually can only make determined turns.
    Another kind of control is “regulative control” - the kind needed to
choose between “alternative possibilities.” Fischer describes guidance
control as happening in the “actual sequence,” where regulative control
refers to “alternative sequences” of events. Derk Pereboom uses the re-
lated terms source and leeway incompatibilism.
  Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Se-
quences, Control, Direct Argument, Leeway Incompatibilism, Origination,
Reasons-Responsive, Source Incompatibilism

H
Hard Determinism
   Hard Determinism was coined by William James to describe deter-
minists who fully accept the negative implications of determinism. They
reject any free will. They deny the voluntarism of Thomas Hobbes, the
negative “freedom from” external constraints on our actions. They also
deny any positive “freedom to” originate our actions, to be the authors
of our lives, the claim that things “depend on us” (in Greek ἐφ ἡμῖν).
   Other glosses - Compatibilism, Determinism, Hard Incompatibilism, Origi-
nation, Up To Us, Voluntarism
                                                                                  Glossary




Hard Incompatibilism
   Hard incompatibilists deny any indeterminism in the “actual se-
quence” of events. No event “originates” in the agent. Since nothing is
“up to us,” they argue for the incompatibility of determinism and moral
responsibility.
       406         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Hard incompatibilists deny both free will and moral responsibility.
             They call free will an “illusion” and some call for revisionism. William
             James called such thinkers “hard determinists.” Derk Pereboom coined
             the new term for those who are agnostic on indeterminism and deny
             free will and moral responsibility, whether determinism is true or not.
                Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Agnostic, Illusion, Indeterminism, Origi-
             nation, Revisionism, Source Incompatibilism, Up To Us

             Hierarchy Of Desires
                Harry Frankfurt formulated the idea of a Hierarchy Of Desires. First-
             order desires or volitions are desires to act. Second-order desires are
             desires to desire, for example, to want to act. The theory invites a regress
             of willings, and recalls the comments of John Locke and Arthur Scho-
             penhauer. “We are free to will, but can we will what we will?”
                Frankfurt says moral responsibility requires a first-order desire with
             which the agent “identifies,” which means she has a second-order desire
             that is consistent with the first-order desire that moves her to action.
                 Other glosses - Moral Responsibility

             I
             Illusion
                 It is now common among hard incompatibilists to call free will an
             illusion. this may be because of Frankfurt Examples that claim to prove
             that Alternative Possibilities do not exist. Or it may be because of the
             standard argument against free will. In any case, the real illusion is de-
             terminism, in its many forms.
                 Illusionists are often revisionists calling for an end to retributive pun-
             ishment.
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt Examples, Hard Incom-
Glossary




             patibilism, Standard Argument, Retributivism, Revisionism

             Incompatibilism
                Incompatibilists come in two kinds. Both claim that determinism is
             incompatible with free will. One kind were called “hard determinists”
             by William James. They deny free will. The other are libertarians. They
             deny determinism.
                Today many incompatibilists declare themselves agnostic about the
             “truth” of determinism and say the incompatibilities extend to indeter-
             minism as well.
                                         Glossary of Terms - H                   407

   Derk Pereboom coined “hard incompatibilism” to describe agnostics
on determinism who deny both free will and moral responsibility. They
call free will an “illusion” and some call for revisionism.
   The traditional argument for incompatibilism assumes alternative
possibilities and the ability to do otherwise. The Consequence Argu-
ment and Direct Argument do not.
   Other glosses - Agnostic, Alternative Possibilities, Broad Incompatibilism,
Consequence Argument, Determinism, Done Otherwise, Direct Argument,
Hard Incompatibilism, Indeterminism, Illusion, Indeterminism, Illusion, Lee-
way Incompatibilism, Semicompatibilism, Source Incompatibilism, Tradition-
al Argument

Indeterminism
   Indeterminism is the idea that some events are uncaused, specifically
that they are random accidents with only probabilistic outcomes. In an-
cient times, Epicurus proposed that atoms occasionally swerve at ran-
dom, breaking the causal chain of determinism and allowing for moral
responsibility. In modern physics, we now know that atoms constantly
swerve, or move indeterministically, whenever they are in the presence
of other atoms. The universe is irreducibly random on the atomic scale.
Laws of Nature are therefore probabilistic or statistical. Although for
large objects, the departure from classical laws of motion is usually en-
tirely insignificant, indeterministic quantum noise plays a role in the
two-stage model of free will.
  Other glosses - Causality, Causa Sui, Determinism, Laws of Nature, Moral
Responsibility, Probability

Indirect Argument
   The Indirect Argument for the incompatibility of determinism and
moral responsibility depends on avoidability or the ability to do other-
wise. If the agent does not have alternative possibilities, she cannot do
                                                                                   Glossary



otherwise, and she cannot be morally responsible.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Basic Argument, Consequence Ar-
gument, Direct Argument, Standard Argument

Information Objection
  The Information Objection claims that Frankfurt examples can not
prove that Alternative Possibilities do not exist, because the information
needed by an intervener to block alternatives does not exist until the
moment of an agent’s decision.
       408        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt Examples, Kane-Widerk-
             er Objection, Standard Argument, Yes-No Objection

             Intellect
                Intellect is often contrasted with Will, when the latter is identified
             with the desires and passions and the former identified with reason.
             From Aquinas to Hume, some philosophers argued that acts of will are
             always based on emotions and desires, not the pure intellect that gener-
             ates, evaluates, and deliberates the alternative possibilities.
               Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Deliberation, Evaluation, Reasons-
             Responsive

             K
             Kane-Widerker Objection
                Robert Kane and later David Widerker objected to Frankfurt-style
             examples that posit a demon or intervener who allows the agent to do
             “freely” whatever the intervener wants her to do. The objection notes
             that the intervener can not know what an agent is going to do without
             assuming the agent is determined and the intervener has Foreknowl-
             edge. This is an epistemic objection.
                The intervener needs a “prior sign” of the causal chain. Such a sign is
             an event that leads causally to the decision, and thus Frankfurt examples
             “beg the question” by assuming determinism. Information about the
             agent’s decision does not exist until she makes her decision (the onto-
             logical Information Objection), so Frankfurt’s hypothetical intervening
             demon (much like the similar Laplacian demon or God’s Foreknowl-
             edge) can not exist.
               Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt Examples, Information
             Objection, Yes-No Objection
Glossary




             L
             Laws of Nature
               The “Laws of Nature” are often cited in compatibilist arguments as
             controlling events, together with the “Fixed Past.”
               The idea appears often in determinist/compatibilist accounts of
             whether an agent could have done otherwise. “One could only have
                                           Glossary of Terms - K              409

done otherwise if either the Fixed Past or the Laws of Nature had been
different,” goes the argument. The Fixed Past refers primarily to the ob-
vious fact that past events are not changeable.
   The usual conclusion is “There is but one possible future, and it is
determined at each moment by the Fixed Past and the (deterministic)
Laws of Nature.”
   However, the real Laws of Nature, beginning with the most funda-
mental laws of physics, are indeterministic and probabilistic, reflecting
the availability of alternative possibilities..
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Compatibilism, Determinism,
Done Otherwise, Fixed Past

Leeway Incompatibilism
   Leeway Incompatibilism requires indeterminism in the “alternative
sequences” provided by alternative possibilities, to establish incompat-
ibility of determinism and moral responsibility. By contrast, Source In-
compatibilism depends on actions that originate within the agent in the
“actual sequence.” Derk Pereboom coined this term, which is a variation
on the Principle of Alternative Possibilities (PAP).
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Source Incompatibilism

Liberty of Indifference
   Liberty of Indifference (liberum arbitrium indifferentiae) is an an-
cient case of two options so similar that only a miniscule effort is needed
to choose one over the other. This seemed to be a case where even an
immaterial mind might move a material body. It was also argued that
where options are identical, randomness would suffice to choose one.
Some philosophers argued that this randomness was at the heart of free
will, showing its absurdity and unintelligibility. In a famous example
typical of philosophical test cases, the scholastic teacher Jean Buridan
                                                                                Glossary



placed an ass equidistant between identical bales of hay. Since animals
lack our God-given liberty, Buridan argued, the ass would starve to
death.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities,

Liberty of Spontaneity
  Liberty of Spontaneity was Descartes’ (and the Scholastics’) term for
what Thomas Hobbes called Voluntarism. Spontaneity translates the
Greek automaton (αủτóματον).
       410        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Descartes contrasted it with Liberty of Indifference, but they are
             not proper opposites. It is more properly contrasted with Libertarian
             “Free Will” and with Berlin’s Positive Freedom, which is the “freedom
             to” choose or act that comes with genuine Alternative Possibilities and
             results in actions that are “up to us.,”that we originate.
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Liberty of Indifference, Self-Real-
             ization, Voluntarism

             Logical Fallacy
                The Logical Fallacy is to assume that purely logical (and linguistic)
             analysis can yield “truths” about the world. Logical positivism was in
             practical terms a logical fallacy. The hundreds of papers published on
             Harry Frankfurt’s attacks on the idea of alternative possibilities are a
             prime example. Nothing is logically true of the physical world. Modal
             analyses using the idea of possible worlds shows that anything that is
             not internally contradictory can be postulated of some possible world.
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt-style Examples,

             Luck Objection
                The Luck Objection to free will and moral responsibility arises be-
             cause the world contains irreducible indeterminism and chance. As a
             result, many unintended consequences of our actions are out of our
             control.
                We are often held responsible for actions that were intended as good,
             but that had bad consequences. Similarly, we occasionally are praised
             for actions that were either neutral or possibly blameworthy, but which
             had good consequences.
                In a deterministic world, it is hard to see how we can be held re-
             sponsible for any of our actions. Counterintuitively, semicompatibilist
             philosophers hold that whether determinism or indeterminism is true,
Glossary




             we can still have moral responsibility.
                At the other end of the spectrum, some libertarians are critical of any
             free will model that involves chance, because the apparent randomness
             of outcomes would make such free will unintelligible, because it would
             be a matter of luck.
                Unfortunately, much of what happens in the real world contains a
             good deal of luck, giving rise to many of the moral dilemmas that lead
             to moral skepticism.
                Whether determinist, compatibilist, semicompatibilist, or libertar-
             ian, it seems unreasonable to hold persons responsible for the unin-
                                        Glossary of Terms - L                411

tended consequences of their actions, good or bad. In many moral and
legal systems, it the person’s intentions that matter first and foremost.
   And in any case, actions need not have moral consequences to be
free, that would commit the moral restrictivism of restricting free deci-
sions to moral decisions.
   Other glosses - Agnostic, Consequentialism, Control, Determinism Objec-
tion, Moral restrictivism, Indeterminism, Mind Argument, Moral Luck, Stan-
dard Argument, Randomness Objection

M
Manipulation Argument
   The Manipulation Argument grows out of the accepted loss of con-
trol and moral responsibility for agents who are addicted or induced
to act by hypnosis and the like. As with the hypothetical interveners
in Frankfurt-style cases, these arguments often postulate counterfactual
manipulators - such as evil neuroscientists who control the develop-
ment of persons from the egg (as in Brave New World) or condition
them in their formative years (like a “Skinner box” reinforcing selected
behaviors). The argument says that if we deny responsibility when such
manipulators have control, why not deny it when causal determinism
(or random indeterminism) is in control?
   The Manipulation Argument is only meant to enhance the intuition
of lost control, in order to support the Consequence Argument and
similar Determinism Objections in the standard argument against free
will. Derk Pereboom’s Four-Case Argument is a well-known example of
a Manipulation Argument.
   Other glosses - Consequence Argument, Control, Moral Responsibility,
Standard Argument

Master Argument
                                                                               Glossary




   The Master Argument was first formulated by Diodorus Cronus, a
late 4th-century philosopher of the Megarian School, who argued that
the actual is the only possible and that some true statements about the
future imply that the future is already determined. He formulated a
“Master Argument” to show that if something in the future is not going
to happen, it was true in the past that it would not happen.
       412        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                This is related to the problem of future contingency, made famous in
             the example of Aristotle’s Sea-Battle in De Interpretatione 9. Aristotle
             thought statements about the future lacked any truth value.
                Note that the truth value of a statement made in the past can “actu-
             ally” be changed if an event does or does not happen, showing that the
             “fixed past” has some changeability.
                Other glosses - Actualism, Basic Argument, Consequence Argument, Fu-
             ture Contingency, Principle of Bivalence, Standard Argument

             Mind Argument
                The Mind Argument is Peter van Inwagen’s name for the Random-
             ness Objection in the standard argument against free will. Alfred Mele
             calls it the “Luck Objection.”
                Van Inwagen named the Mind Argument for the journal Mind,
             where most of the randomness objections were published, especially R.
             E. Hobart’s 1934 classic “Free Will As Involving Determination And In-
             conceivable Without It.”
               Other glosses - Luck Objection, Randomness Objection, Standard Argu-
             ment

             Modal Fallacy
                The Modal Fallacy usually involves possible or contingent statements
             that are falsely claimed to be necessary. For example:
                   This proposition is true. (contingent)
                   If it is true, it cannot be false. (contingent)
                   If it cannot be false, then it is true and necessarily true (modal fal-
             lacy).
                Ted Warfield clams that his colleague Peter van Inwagen’s Conse-
             quence Argument contains contingent premises that make it a modal
             fallacy. Warfield has reformulated a purely necessary form of the argu-
Glossary




             ment. Unfortunately, necessary arguments do not apply to the world.
               Other glosses - Consequence Argument

             Modest Libertarianism
                Modest Libertarianism is a concept proposed by Alfred Mele for con-
             sideration by Libertarians. It is a two-stage model of free will in which
             indeterminism is limited to the early stages of the deliberation process
                                         Glossary of Terms - M                   413

which consider alternative possibilities that may or may not “come to
mind.” Modest libertarianism is a variation of Daniel Dennett’s 1978
two-stage “Valerian” decision model, in his provocative essay “Giving
Libertarians What They Say They Want.”
   Mele feels that randomness anywhere in the causal chain leads to his
Luck Objection, a variation on the standard Randomness Objection.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Indeterminism, Luck Objection,
Randomness Objection

Moral Luck
   Moral Luck is Thomas Nagel’s notion that since an action’s conse-
quences are beyond the agent’s control, randomness makes moral re-
sponsibility a matter of chance. This is often framed as the Luck Objec-
tion, a variation on the randomness objection Since there is irreducible
randomness in the universe, there are no doubt many cases where luck
enters into moral situations, but not universally. Many actions are ad-
equately determined and have reliable and predictable consequences,
enough to establish the general concept of moral responsibility.
  Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Consequentialism, Control, Luck
Objection, Moral Responsibility, Standard Argument, Randomness Objection

Moral Restrictivism
   Moral Restrictivism is to assume that free choices are restricted to
moral decisions. Robert Kane does this, as did Plato and the Scholastics.
This is not to deny that moral responsibility is historically intimately
connected with free will and even dependent on the existence of free
will (for libertarians and broad compatibilists). Any decision can be
free. Our freedom to act also includes merely practical, financial, and
fiduciary judgments, as well as occasional non-rational flip-of-the-coin
decisions and even misjudgments.
  Other glosses - Moral Responsibility, Restrictivism
                                                                                   Glossary




Moral Responsibility
   Moral Responsibility is historically tightly connected to the problem
of free will, but it is an moral restrictivism to require that free choices be
moral decisions.
  Other glosses - Moral Restrictivism
       414         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Moral Sentiments
                Moral Sentiments arguably would exist whether or not determin-
             ism is “true.” David Hume first made this argument, but Peter Strawson
             made it famous in current debates, with his agnosticism about deter-
             minism vs. free will, in favor of a Humean Naturalism that takes our
             moral sentiments as givens that are beyond the skepticism of logic and
             critical thought.
                Note that Hume the Naturalist had no problem “Deriving Ought
             from Is” - something shown logically impossible by Hume the Skeptic.
                 Other glosses - Agnostic, Moral restrictivism, Naturalism

             Moral Skepticism
                Moral Skepticism challenges the idea that there are always rational
             and best answers to moral questions. Because there are various theories
             of morality - deontic, pragmatic, utilitarian, etc, it is easy to construct
             moral dilemmas and paradoxes. Moral skeptics like Walter Sinnott-
             Armstrong believe these are real problems in life and cannot be ex-
             plained away by clever arguments.
                Note that moral skepticism tends to lead to relativism and moral ni-
             hilism in the absence of objective values.
                 Other glosses - Moral Responsibility

             N
             Narrow Incompatibilism
                Narrow Incompatibilism is Randolph Clarke’s synonym for John
             Martin Fischer’s concept of Semicompatibilism. Clarke distinguishes it
             from his term Broad Incompatibilism.
                Narrow Incompatibilism is incompatible with free will, but not with
Glossary




             moral responsibility.
               Other glosses - Broad Incompatibilism, Compatibilism, Incompatibilism,
             Moral Responsibility, Semicompatibilism

             Naturalism
                Naturalism is the position that the Laws of Nature (assumed to be de-
             terministic) apply to human beings and their actions, because humans
             are natural things, continuous with animals and other things that lack
                                        Glossary of Terms - M                415

free will. The position originated with David Hume and has been devel-
oped in the moral responsibility debates by Paul Russell.
   Naturalists tend to be revisionists on retributive punishment.
   Assuming that free will is restricted to morally responsible agents is
an example of the Moral restrictivism. One way of seeing the continu-
ous nature between animals and humans is to recognize that animals,
like children, have a will and freedom of action, they just lack moral
responsibility.
  Other glosses - Determinism, Moral restrictivism, Laws of Nature, Moral
Responsibility, Restrictivism, Revisionism

Naturalistic Fallacy
   G. E. Moore in Principia Ethica claimed that ethics is human, not
natural. So ethical claims can not be supported by appeals to natural
properties, like pleasure or utility. Moore thinks “good” cannot be de-
fined. It is an elemental essential property.
   Moore’s ethical non-naturalism resembles David Hume”s denial that
“ought” (human ethics) can be derived from “is” (nature).
   Note the conflict with Naturalists for whom natural behaviors are
moral behaviors, and “un-natural” behaviors are bad.
  Other glosses - Moral restrictivism, Moral Responsibility, Naturalism

O
Ontological
   Ontology is the study of real things existing in the world. A crisis in
philosophy emerged when Locke and Hume, and later Kant, observed
that all our knowledge comes to us through our perceptions. We cannot
know the “things themselves” behind the perceptions. Moreover, our
perceptions may be illusions.
                                                                               Glossary




   The existence of real ontological chance is often denied by those who
claim that randomness and probability are merely the result of human
ignorance. Chance, they say is an epistemic problem, not an ontological
one.
  Other glosses - Epistemic, Illusion, Probability, Randomness
       416         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Origination
                Origination is the idea that new causal chains can begin with an
             agent, something that is not predetermined to happen by events prior to
             the agent’s deliberation (between alternative possibilities) and decision.
             Origination accounts for creativity.
                Ted Honderich is “dismayed” because the truth of determinism re-
             quires that we give up “origination” with its promise of an open future.
             For him, limiting freedom to classical compatibilist voluntarism means
             we are not the authors of our own actions. They are not up to us.
               Other glosses - Agent Causal, Alternative Possibilities, Causa Sui, Up To Us,
             Voluntarism

             Ought From Is
               David Hume famously criticized philosophers for talking about the
             way things are and suddenly describing the way they ought (or ought
             not) to be, as if the ought had been deduced from the is.
               Moore’s naturalistic fallacy similarly denies that ethical rules can de-
             pend on natural facts.
               Other glosses - Moral restrictivism, Naturalistic Fallacy
             Ought Implies Can
                Ought Implies Can (sometimes abbreviated K) is the deontic prin-
             ciple, usually attributed to Immanuel Kant, that an agent ought to do a
             moral act only if she actually can do it, if she has control.
                 Other glosses - Control, Done Otherwise, Voluntarism

             P
             Possible Worlds
Glossary




                 Gottfried Leibniz argued that necessary truths are true in all possible
             worlds. David Lewis appears to have believed that the truth of his coun-
             terfactuals was a result of believing that for every non-contradictory
             statement there is a possible world in which that statement is true. This
             is called modal realism. It implies the existence of infinitely many paral-
             lel universes, an idea similar to the contraversial many-world interpre-
             tations of quantum mechanics.
                                         Glossary of Terms - O                 417

   The astronomer David Layzer analyzes questions of free will in terms
of many possible worlds.
   It is a bit ironic that philosophers, who are skeptical about our abil-
ity to obtain knowledge of the real external world, are optimistic about
many possible worlds.
Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Modal Fallacy, Quantum Mechanics

Pre-Determinism
   Pre-Determinism is the idea that a strict causal determinism is true,
with a causal chain of events back to the origin of the universe, and one
possible future.
   It is what most philosophers mean when they say that free will is
compatible with determinism, and when they use determinism in the
standard argument against free will.
  Other glosses - Causality, Compatibilism, Determinism, Standard Argu-
ment

Principle of Alternate Possibilities
   The Principle of Alternate (sic) Possibilities (or PAP) was formulated
as follows in 1961 by Harry Frankfurt in order to defend compatibilism
from the apparent lack of alternative possibilities in the deterministic
world of classical compatibilism.
      PAP: A person is morally responsible for what he has done only if
he could have done otherwise.
   Frankfurt maintained that PAP was false, and that agents could be
free and morally responsible without alternative possibilities and the ca-
pability to do otherwise in the same circumstances.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Determinism, Done Otherwise,
Moral Responsibility, Same Circumstances
                                                                                 Glossary



Principle of Bivalence
    The Principle of Bivalence is that for any proposition p, either p is
true or p is false. It is the reason the standard argument against free will
is framed as two horns of a dilemma. Either determinism is true or false.
Most philosophers do not want to give up the idea of causal determin-
ism, so opt to be compatibilists.
       418        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                Bivalence is also known as “the law of the excluded middle.” There is
             no middle term between true and false. This becomes the basis for the
             idea that there is no tertium quid or middle between chance and neces-
             sity, perceived as logical opposites.
                The Principle of Bivalence is also the basis for Logical Determinism,
             in which the present truth of a statement implies its truth in the future.
                Other glosses - Determinism, Future Contingency, Standard Argument

             Probability
                 Probability has often been a way to deny real chance. The great math-
             ematicians who invented the calculus of probabilities, which governs
             games of chance, thought that there was nothing random really going
             on. For them probability was merely a result of human ignorance. The
             problem was epistemic, not ontological.
                 Deterministic Laws of Nature guarantee we could predict the future,
             if only we had all the information needed. Laplace’s demon, a supreme
             intelligence, could know the future, as God foreknows it, if he knew the
             positions and velocities of all the particles in the universe.
                 Today we know that the Laws of Nature are not deterministic. Not
             only are they probabilistic, but irreducibly random, due to the under-
             lying quantum mechanics that has replaced classical mechanics as the
             proper description of the universe’s fundamental particles.
                 The laws become arbitrarily close to certain in the limit of large num-
             bers of particles (billiard balls, planets), leading to the illusion of per-
             fectly deterministic laws.
                 Probability is the explanation for alternative possibilities and unpre-
             dictable “uncaused” causes (causa sui) that are the “free” part of “free
             will.”
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Causa Sui, Determinism, Epistemic,
             Foreknowledge, Illusion, Laws of Nature, Ontological, Quantum Mechanics
Glossary




             Q
             Quantum Mechanics
                The development of Quantum Mechanics in the late 1920’s marked
             the end of physical determinism.
                Quantum mechanics has replaced classical mechanics as the proper
             description of the universe’s fundamental particles. But note that in the
                                        Glossary of Terms - Q                  419

limit of macroscopic objects with large numbers of particles, the quan-
tum laws correspond exactly to (i.e., become the same as) the classical
laws. This is Neils Bohr’s correspondence principle.
   Deterministic Laws of Nature have been replaced with probabilistic
laws. Quantum events can start new “causal chains” with events that are
unpredictable from prior events, self-caused events that are causa sui.
   Quantum phenomena are behind the generation of alternative pos-
sibilities that are the “free” part of “free will.”
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Causa Sui, Determinism, Laws of
Nature, Probability



R
Randomness Objection
   The Randomness Objection is the second horn in the traditional di-
lemma of free will. Either determinism is true or indeterminism is true.
In neither case can there be any moral responsibility. Note that the great
asymmetry between determinism and indeterminism has led philoso-
phers to favor the kind of deterministic or causal explanations that are
the apparent basis for laws of nature. But determinism is an illusion.
   Indeterminism is a greater threat to moral responsibility than deter-
minism, since it is associated with many negative ideas, such as chance.
Nevertheless, many philosophers declare themselves agnostic on this
objection to free will. The randomness objection is the core idea behind
Peter van Inwagen’s Mind Argument.
  Other glosses - Agnostic, Determinism Objection, Illusion, Indeterminism,
Luck Objection, Mind Argument, Standard Argument

Reactive Attitudes
                                                                                 Glossary




   Reactive Attitudes were identified by Peter Strawson as feelings that
we would naturally have even if we were convinced of the truth of deter-
minism (or indeterminism). Strawson was an early agnostic, claiming
he could not make sense of either). Reactive Attitudes include gratitude
and resentment, and our normal tendency to praise or blame, punish or
reward. Strawson modeled his naturalist claims in the face of skepticism
about free will after David Hume, who overcame his own famous skepti-
cal views to claim ethical truths could be found in naturalism.
    Other glosses - Naturalism
       420        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Reasons-Responsive
                Reasons-Responsiveness describes an agent who has the kind of con-
             trol needed to initiate or originate an action. Being “reasons-respon-
             sive” and taking ownership of the action means the agent can say the
             action was “up to me.” John Martin Fischer calls this “guidance control”
             in the “actual sequence” of events that figure in the “Direct Argument”
             for source incompatibilism. Fischer’s account of moral responsibility is
             like Thomas Aquinas’ and Susan Wolf ’s account of free actions as those
             guided by reasons.
               Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Control, Direct Argument, Origination,
             Source Incompatibilism, Up To Us

             Regulative Control
                 John Martin Fischer separates an agent’s control into two kinds. The
             first he calls “guidance control” - the kind of control needed to initiate
             or originate an action, by being “reasons-responsive” and taking owner-
             ship of the action, meaning the agent can say the action was “up to me.”
             The other kind of control is “regulative control” - the kind needed to
             choose between “alternative possibilities.” Fischer describes these op-
             tions as happening in the “actual sequence” or “alternative sequences”
             of events. Derk Pereboom uses the related terms source and leeway in-
             compatibilism.
                Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Alternative Possibilities, Alternative Se-
             quences, Control, Direct Argument, Guidance Control, Leeway Incompatibil-
             ism, Origination, Reasons-Responsive, Source Incompatibilism

             Restrictivism
                Restrictivist theories claim that the number of “free” actions is a tiny
             fraction of all actions. Robert Kane, for example limits them to rare “self-
             forming actions” (SFAs) in which weighty and difficult moral decisions
Glossary




             are made. Limiting freedom to moral decisions is the moral restrictiv-
             ism. Peter van Inwagen restricts free will to cases where the reasons that
             favor either alternative are not clearly stronger. This is the ancient liberty
             of indifference. Susan Wolf restricts free decisions to those made ratio-
             nally according to “the True and the Good.”
               Other glosses - Liberty of Indifference, Self-Forming Action

             Retributivism
               Retributivism describes punishment that is deserved because the
             agent was morally responsible for the crime. Many hard incompatibilists
                                            Glossary of Terms - R                 421

who think free will is an illusion, and many naturalists, are revisionists
calling for an end to retributive punishment.
   Susan Wolf has pointed out the strange asymmetry between praise
and blame. Those opposed to punishment for retributive reasons (as op-
posed to practical consequentialist reasons) are often in favor of praise
for good deeds. This reflects the ancient Platonic view that we are re-
sponsible only for the good we do. Our errors we blame on our igno-
rance, which is, unfortunately, no excuse before the law.
    Other glosses - Illusion, Moral Responsibility, Naturalism, Revisionism

Revisionism
   Revisionists hope to change popular attitudes about free will and
moral responsibility, bringing them more into line with the views of
modern philosophy. A leading issue is the widely held view among
current philosophers that free will is an illusion. Revisionists conclude
there should be an end to retributive punishment.
    Other glosses - Illusion, Moral Responsibility, Retributivism

Rule Beta
   Rule Beta is Peter van Inwagen’s “Third Argument” for incompatibil-
ism. Van Inwagen argues against the compatibilism of determinism and
moral responsibility. It is a Transfer Principle of unavoidability (one has
no choices and can not do otherwise ).
      p, and no one has, or ever had, any choice about that. If p then q,
and no one has, or ever had, any choice about that. Hence, q, and no one
has, or ever had, any choice about that.
   Rule Beta wraps the ancient and physical dilemma of determinism
in analytical logical window dressing. It is identical to the Determinist
Objection in the standard argument against free will.
   Other glosses - Done Otherwise, Logical Fallacy, Moral Responsibility, Stan-
                                                                                    Glossary



dard Argument, Transfer Principle

S
Same Circumstances
    Determinists argue that, given the Laws of Nature and the Fixed Past,
it is impossible for an agent to act differently in Exactly the Same Cir-
cumstances. Libertarians demand such Dual Rational Control and the
ability to Do Otherwise as a freedom condition.
    Other glosses - Done Otherwise, Fixed Past, Laws of Nature
       422        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             Self-Determination
                Self-Determination is the idea of a positive freedom, a freedom for
             actions that we originate, actions that are “up to us.” Such acts constitute
             the essence of Free Will. This is Mortimer Adler’s term, adopted also by
             Robert Kane. Adler called it the Natural Freedom of Self-Determination.
             to indicate it is a universal property. It is a Determined De-Liberation.
                Other glosses - Determination, Determined De-Liberation, Origination,
             Self-Perfection, Self-Realization, Up to Us

             Self-Forming Action
                Self-Forming Actions (SFAs) are Robert Kane’s idea of free actions in
             the distant past that contribute to our character and values. When we act
             out of habit today, we trace the Ultimate Responsibility (UR) for those
             actions back to those SFAs. Although current habitual actions may seem
             (adequately) determined, they are still self-determined and thus free.
                We can be responsible for current actions that are essentially (viz. ad-
             equately) determined by our character and values, as long as we formed
             that character ourselves by earlier free Self-Forming Actions. For Kane,
             SFAs in turn require brains that are not deterministically caused by any-
             thing outside the agent.
               Other glosses - Self-Determination, Tracing, Ultimate Responsibility

             Self-Perfection
                Self-Perfection is the idea from Plato to Kant that we are only free
             when our decisions are for reasons and we are not slaves to our passions.
             Mortimer Adler’ called it the Acquired Freedom of Self-Perfection. to
             indicate it is acquired in moral development. It is also used by Robert
             Kane. Adler cites many theologically minded philosophers who argue
             that man is only perfect and free when following a divine moral law
             (the moral restrictivism). Sinners, they say, do not have free will, which
Glossary




             is odd because on their account sinners are presumably responsible for
             evil in the world despite an omniscient, omnipotent, and benevolent
             God.
                Other glosses - Moral Restrictivism, Restrictivism, Self-Determination,
             Self-Realization

             Self-Realization
                Self-Realization is the idea of freedom as freedom from coercions
             that make our actions not up to us. It is known as Freedom of Action.
                                         Glossary of Terms - S                  423

Mortimer Adler’ called it the Circumstantial Freedom of Self-Realiza-
tion. to indicate it depends on external circumstances. Today this nega-
tive freedom recognizes internal coercions as well, such as addictions or
mental disabilities. This is the classical compatibilist definition of free-
dom, also known as voluntarism. It is also used by Robert Kane.
   Other glosses - Compatibilism, Self-Determination, Self-Perfection, Volun-
tarism

Semicompatibilism
   Semicompatibilism is John Martin Fischer’s name for the compatibil-
ism of moral responsibility and determinism (or indeterminism). It is
contrasted with classical compatibilism, the broader idea that free will is
compatible with determinism.
   Randolph Clarke calls these respectively Narrow and Broad Incom-
patibilism.
   Classical compatibilists are determinists. Semicompatibilists avoid
the determinist label, claiming to be agnostic about the “truth” of deter-
minism or indeterminism. Semicompatibilism grew out of the apparent
success of Harry Frankfurt’s attacks on the Principle of Alternate Pos-
sibilities.
   Other glosses - Agnostic, Compatibilism, Determinism, Frankfurt Exam-
ples, Indeterminism, Narrow Incompatibilism

Soft Causality
   Soft Causality is the idea that most events are adequately determined
by normal causes, but that some events are not precisely predictable
from prior events.
   Soft Causality includes occasional quantum events, which are only
probabilistic and statistical. This means that they are not strictly caused
by prior events, although they may be causes of subsequent events. They
                                                                                  Glossary



depend on chance in the form of irreducible quantum indeterminacy
   Their unpredictability leads us to call them uncaused events, which
in turn become uncaused causes (causa sui) that start new causal chains.
   Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Causality, Causa Sui, Determinism,
Indeterminacy, Indeterminism

Soft Compatibilism
   Soft Compatibilism is one of Alfred Mele’s terms. Soft compatibilists
know, as a result of quantum physics, that determinism is not true. They
think that some indeterminism, in the right places, might be useful. For
       424        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             soft compatibilists, the right place is in what John Martin Fischer calls
             the Actual Sequence, where it breaks the causal chain of determinism
             back to the Big Bang. This position is also known as Source Incompati-
             bilism.
                Note that soft compatibilists accept the traditional Voluntarism of
             Thomas Hobbes and David Hume. Even if determinism were true, they
             say, there would still be Freedom of Action.
               Other glosses - Compatibilism, Determinism, Freedom of Action, Free Will,
             Hard Compatibilism, Origination, Source Incompatibilism, Voluntarism

             Soft Determinism
                Soft Determinism was coined by William James to describe compati-
             bilists, who accepted the truth of determinism. They claimed free will
             was the voluntarism of Thomas Hobbes, the negative “freedom from”
             external constraints on our actions. This is called “Freedom of Action”
             to distinguish it from Freedom of the Will
               Other glosses - Compatibilism, Determinism, Freedom of Action, Free Will,
             Hard Determinism, Origination, Voluntarism

             Soft Incompatibilism
                 Soft Incompatibilism says that free will is incompatible with pre-de-
             terminism, and that pre-determinism is not true. It is preferable to the
             loose usage of the plain “incompatibilist” to describe a libertarian, since
             it is ambiguous and also used for determinists.
                 Soft Incompatibilism stands in contrast to Hard Incompatibilism,
             which maintains that pre-determinism is true and free will does not ex-
             ist. It is not incompatible with an adequate determinism.
                 Soft Incompatibilism involves Soft Causality. Soft Incompatibilists
             accept occasional quantum events, which are only probabilistic and sta-
             tistical, since they break strict causal chains back to the Big Bang with
Glossary




             uncaused causes (causa sui) that start new causal chains. It resembles Al
             Mele’s Soft Libertarianism.
                Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Causa Sui, Soft Causality, Soft Lib-
             ertarianism, Pre-Determinism

             Soft Libertarianism
                Soft Libertarianism is one of Alfred Mele’s terms. Soft libertarians
             think that some indeterminism, in the right place is useful. For soft lib-
                                         Glossary of Terms - S                 425

ertarians , the right place is in what John Martin Fischer calls the Actual
Sequence, where it breaks the causal chain of determinism back to the
Big Bang. This position is also known as Source Incompatibilism.
   Soft libertarianism differs from Mele’s modest libertarianism in that
it does not require robust alternative possibilities (APs). APs produce
what John Martin Fischer calls the Alternative Sequences.
   Mele also develops a model for “Daring Soft Libertarians.” Daring
soft libertarians, he says, especially value a power to make decisions that
are not deterministically caused - a certain initiatory power. This model
reaches out to Robert Kane’s idea of Ultimate Responsibility, in which
we can be responsible for current actions, ones that are essentially de-
termined by our character and values, as long as we formed that char-
acter ourselves by earlier free actions that he calls Self-Forming Actions
(SFA). SFA’s in turn require brains that are not deterministically caused
by anything outside the agent.
  Other glosses - Compatibilism, Determinism, Freedom of Action, Free Will,
Hard Compatibilism, Origination, Source Incompatibilism, Voluntarism

Source Incompatibilism
    Source Incompatibilism or “Sourcehood” focuses on indeterminism
in the “actual sequence” of events, an event that “originates” in the agent,
to establish the incompatibility of determinism and moral responsibil-
ity.
    Hard incompatibilists deny this indeterminism. By contrast, Leeway
Incompatibilism depends on the ability to do otherwise in “alternative
sequences.”
   Other glosses - Actual Sequence, Alternative Sequences, Consequence Ar-
gument, Direct Argument, Hard Incompatibilism, Indirect Argument, Leeway
Incompatibilism, Origination

Standard Argument
                                                                                 Glossary




   The Standard Argument against Free Will is a dilemma with two
horns, the Determinism Objection and the Randomness Objection.
   If determinism is “true” all our actions are determined and we lack
free will and moral responsibility. If indeterminism is “true” all our ac-
tions are random and we are equally unfree and not responsible.
   A subtle combination of randomness and adequate determinism is
required for a two-stage model of free will.
       426       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Other glosses - Basic Argument, Consequence Argument, Determinism
             Objection, Direct Argument, Indirect Argument, Randomness Objection

             Strongest Motive
                Given the alternative possibilities for action, the agent might appear
             to be determined to select the strongest motive. But given the complex-
             ity of an agent’s character and values, motives and reasons, feelings and
             desires, the idea of idea of an obvious “strongest motive” has been dis-
             credited. Some philosophers say that the strongest motive was, after the
             fact, whatever the agent chose, reducing it to a tautology.
               Other glosses - Akrasia, Alternative Possibilities, Self-Forming Action,
             Weakness of Will

             Tracing
                Tracing is the idea that an agent’s responsibility (or non-responsibil-
             ity) for some action or the consequence of an action is not limited to
             the agent’s thoughts or actions at the moment immediately prior to the
             action or consequence, but can be traced back to earlier actions, from
             which responsibility can be transferred. Difficulties arise establishing
             that the consequences could reasonably have been foreseen by the agent.
                Other glosses - Consequence Argument, Consequentialism, Moral Respon-
             sibility, Transfer Principle

             Traditional Argument
                The Traditional Argument for the incompatibility of determinism
             and moral responsibility has three steps:
                 1. If determinism is true, no agent could have avoided acting as she
             did act - could have done otherwise.
                  2. An agent is only responsible for actions if she could have done
             otherwise (the Principle of Alternative Possibilities).
Glossary




                  3. Thus, if determinism is true, no agent is morally responsible.
               Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Consequence Argument, Done
             Otherwise, Direct Argument, Incompatibilism, Moral Responsibility

             Transfer Principle
                A Transfer Principle says that an agent’s responsibility or non-
             responsibility (or avoidability or unavoidability) for an action can be
                                           Glossary of Terms - T            427

transferred to the consequences of that action, or to the probable con-
sequences (strong transfer), or to consequences that could reasonably
have been foreseen by the agent (weak transfer). John Martin Fischer
developed the Principle of Transfer of Non-Responsibility as a variation
on Peter van Inwagen’s “Third Argument” or Rule Beta. Robert Kane’s
Ultimate Responsibility is Transfer of Responsibility from Self-Forming
Actions long ago to current actions, however automatic and habitual.
   Other glosses - Consequence Argument, Moral Responsibility, Rule Beta,
Self-Forming Actions, Ultimate Responsibility

U
Ultimacy
   Ultimacy or the Ultimacy Condition is often used by determinists,
hard incompatibilists, and illusionists to deny moral responsibility. Ga-
len Strawson’s Basic Argument is a good example of denying Ultimacy
by an infinite regress of responsibility for our character.
   Other glosses - Basic Argument, Consequence Argument, Responsibility,
Ultimate Responsibility

Ultimate Responsibility
   Ultimate Responsibility (UR) is Robert Kane’s concept that we can be
responsible for current actions, ones that are essentially determined by
our character and values, as long as we formed that character ourselves
by earlier free actions that he calls Self-Forming Actions (SFA).
    Other glosses - Responsibility, Self-Forming Action

Undetermined Liberty
   A decision that involves chance, which selects at random from a
number of alternative possibilities that appear equally valuable or use-
                                                                              Glossary



ful. When the second stage of evaluation does not produce a Determined
Deliberation, the agent can “flip a coin” and yet take responsibility for
the decision, however it comes out.
   Note that an undetermined liberty is not random in the absolute
sense of having no connection with character, values, motives, feelings,
       428       Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

             desires, etc. It is randomly chosen from within a subset of alternative
             possibilities that all are rational. An undetermined liberty is a liberty of
             indifference, but it is still a determination that is adequately determined.
             Robert Kane’s SFAs are undetermined liberties.
                Other glosses - Adequate Determinism, Determination, Determined Delib-
             eration, Liberty of Indifference, Up To Us

             Up To Us
                The idea that we are the originators of our actions was first described
             by Aristotle in his Metaphysics and Nichomachean Ethics with the
             Greek phrase ἐφ’ ἡμῖν, “up to us,’ or “depends on us.”
                Agent causal libertarians insist that our actions begin with something
             inside our minds. (Aristotle had also said some actions begin ἐφ’ ἡμῖν
             - “in us”.) They describe this variously as non-occurrent causation, con-
             tra-causal freedom, metaphysical freedom, a causa sui, or simply non-
             causal freedom.
                If our actions are not “up to us,” if we feel they “happen to us,” then we
             cannot feel morally responsible for them.
                 Other glosses - Agent Causal, Moral Responsibility, Origination,

             V
             Volition
                Volition is another word for Will. It implies the moment of decision
             or choice and commitment to a course of action, as distinguished from
             earlier moments of deliberation and evaluation of alternative possibili-
             ties. Aquinas, who identified five or more stages, called this moment the
             electio or choice.
                Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Deliberation, Free Will, Volun-
             tarism
Glossary




             Voluntarism
                Voluntarism is the classical compatibilist definition of freedom as
             freedom from coercions that make our actions not up to us. Today this
             negative freedom includes internal constraints as well, such as addic-
             tions or mental disabilities.
                                            Glossary of Terms - U                429

   Mortimer Adler and Robert Kane call this self-realization, contrast-
ing it with the libertarian positive freedom of self-determination. Hon-
derich calls it voluntariness, contrasting it with the libertarian freedom
of origination, without which, he says, we are not the authors of our own
actions.
   Other glosses - Liberty of Spontaneity, Origination, Self-Determination,
Self-Realization, Up To Us

W
Weakness of Will
   Weakness of Will (akrasia) describes actions taken against one’s bet-
ter judgment. Rationalism assumes there is always a single best way to
evaluate an agent’s options or alternative possibilities, so that weakness
of will is fundamentally irrational.
    Other glosses - Akrasia, Alternative Possibilities, Strongest Motive

Y
Yes-No Objection
   The Yes-No Objection claims that Frankfurt examples can not prove
that alternative possibilities do not exist, because the agent’s decision to
act or not to act, to do or not to do, can always wait until the last possible
moment, so a hypothetical intervener would have to block alternatives
ahead of time and thus constitute an external coercion that denies the
agent’s compatibilist voluntarism or negative freedom.
  Other glosses - Alternative Possibilities, Frankfurt Examples, Information
Objection, Kane-Widerker Objection, Voluntarism
                                                                                   Glossary
