Great Problems
       of
  Philosophy
 and Physics
  SOLVED?


                  Bob Doyle
  The Information Philosopher
     “beyond logic and language”
                 This book on the web
informationphilosopher.com/problems/
                and metaphysicist.com
Great Problems
       of
  Philosophy
 and Physics
  SOLVED?


                  Bob Doyle
  The Information Philosopher
     “beyond logic and language”
  First edition, 2016
  © 2016, Bob Doyle, The Information Philosopher


  All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in
any form by electronic or mechanical means (including photo-
copying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without
the prior permission of The Information Philosopher.


  Publisher’s Cataloging-In-Publication Data
  (Prepared by The Donohue Group, Inc.)


  Names: Doyle, Bob, 1936-
  Title: Great problems in philosophy and physics solved? / Bob
Doyle, the Information Philosopher.
  Other Titles: Great problems - solved?
  Description: First edition. | Cambridge, MA, USA : I-Phi Press,
2016. | Includes bibliographical references and index.
  Identifiers: ISBN 978-0-9835802-8-7 | ISBN 978-0-9835802-
9-4 (EPUB)
   Subjects: LCSH: Philosophy--Textbooks. | Philosophy and
science--Textbooks.
  Classification: LCC BD21 .D69 2016 (print) | LCC BD21
(ebook) | DDC 100--dc23



  I-Phi Press
  77 Huron Avenue
  Cambridge, MA, 02138 USA
Dedication
  To the hundreds of philosophers and scientists with web pages
on the Information Philosopher website.
   After collecting and reading their works for the past six decades,
I have tried to capture their essential contributions to philosophy
and physics, as much as practical with excerpts in their own words.
   Special thanks to many who have sent suggestions and
corrections to ensure that their work is presented as accurately
as possible for the students and young professionals who use the
I-Phi website (nearly a thousand unique new visitors every day) as
an entry point into some great intellectual problems that they may
themselves help to solve in the coming decades.
   As a scientist and inventor, the author has contributed some
modest tools to help individuals and communities communicate,
to share information. So he would like also to dedicate this work
to some of the creators of the world’s fundamental information-
sharing technologies.
  Alexander Graham Bell, Alan Turing, Claude Shannon, John
von Neumann, Norbert Wiener, Steve Jobs, Tim Berners-Lee,
Mark Zuckerberg, Jimmy Wales, Larry Page, Sergei Brin.
  Information philosophy builds on the intersection of computers
and communications. These two technologies will facilitate the
sharing of knowledge around the world in the very near future,
when almost everyone will have a smartphone and affordable
access to the Internet and the World-Wide Web.
   Information is like love. Giving it to others does not reduce it.
It is not a scarce economic good. Sharing it increases the Sum of
information in human minds.
  Information wants to be free.
  Bob Doyle
  Cambridge, MA
  September, 2016
vi   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                     te nt s
                  Con
                                                              Contents         vii

Table of Contents
Preface                                                                  xi
 How To Use This Book With The I-Phi Website 1
1. Introduction                                                           3
  The New Ideas of Information Philosophy 4; The Three Worlds of
Information Philosophy 9; Information Creation in the Material World 10;
Information Creation in the Biological World 11; Information Creation in the
World of Ideas 12; What Does Creation of Information Mean? 13
2. Metaphysics                                                          15
  Possibility and Possible Worlds 22; Naming and Necessity 24; Actual
Possibles 25; Actualism 28; Identity 30; Criteria 30; Coinciding Objects 33;
Composition 38; Aristotle Essences 45; Modal Logic Is Not Metaphysics 47
3. Ontology                                                             55
 The Metaphysicist’s Approach 56; Continuous or Discrete? 58;
Meta-Ontology 61
4. Free Will                                                            63
  The Two-Stage Model of Free Will 64; Neuroscientific Evidence for the
Two-Stage Model 66; History of the Free Will Problem 69; The Standard
Argument Against Free Will 74; Possible Worlds and Alternative Possibilities
76; Free Will and Creativity 77
5. Value                                                                79
 An Information-based Moral Code? 84; A Minimum Moral/Political
Message? 85; An Information-based Social Contract? 87; Information and
Negative Entropy as Objective Values 89
6. Good and Evil                                                        91
 Information (Negative Entropy) as Objective Good? 92; Evil 93;
A Statistical Comparison with Societal Norms 95
7. God and Immortality                                                  97
  No Creator, But There Was/Is A Creation 98; Theodicy (The Problem of
Evil) 98; Omniscience and Omnipotence Contradictory? 98; The Ergod 99;
The Problem of Immortality 100
8. Epistemology                                                        103
  The History of Epistemology 104; The Search for Knowledge Turns
Inward 109
9. Universals                                                          119
 The One and the Many 122; Philosophical Triads 126; Three Sources for
Authoritative Knowledge 128; Types of Triads 128; A Few Tetrads 129
10. The Problem of Induction                                           131
 Induction and the Scientific Method 137
11. The Problem of Meaning                                             139
 Meaning in the Theory of Information 142
12. Mind                                                               147
  The Scandal in Psychology 147; Mind as Immaterial Information 148;
Information Evolves to Become Mind 149; An Information Mind Model 150
viii        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

       13. The Mind-Body Problem                                             155
        Interactionists 156; The Mind-Brain Identity Theory 158; Eliminative
       Materialism 159; Mind/Body and the ERR 163
       14. Consciousness                                                     165
        The Binding Problem 166
       15. The Self and Other Minds                                          171
        Mind Over Matter? 172; The Problem of Other Minds 173
       16. Mental Causation                                                  177
         The Problem of Mental Causation according to Kim 179; The Emergence of
       Life from Matter and Mind from Life 179; Ribosomes Select Randomly Moving
       Amino Acids 181; Ion Pumps in Neurons Select Individual Atoms 183;
       Information Solves the Problem of Mental Causation. 185; “Bottom-up”
       Physical Processes Are Not Deterministic 186; Molecular Machines 187
       17. Information Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics                   189
        The “Possibilities Function” 194; Possibilities and Information Theory 196;
       Other Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics 198
       18. The Measurement Problem                                           201
         Von Neumann’s Two Processes 205; Designing a Quantum Measurement
       Apparatus 207; An Irreversible Example of Process 1 208; The Bound-
       ary between the Classical and Quantum Worlds 210; The Role of the
       Conscious Observer 211; Three Essential Steps in a “Measurement” and
       “Observation” 214; Quantum Collapses Can Produce New Information 215
       19. Determinism                                                       217
         Indeterminism 219; Determination 220; The Emergence of Determin-
       ism 222; The History of Determinism 222
       20. Collapse of the Wave Function                                     225
        What is the Wave Function? 225; Information Physics Explains the Two-Slit
       Experiment 227; Where Is Information About Probabilities Embodied? 230
       21. Entanglement                                                      233
         Einstein’s Discovery of Nonlocality and Nonseparability 235; The Importance
       of Conservation Laws in Entanglement 240; Can a Special Frame Resolve the
       EPR Paradox? 242; Do We Need Superdeterminism? 245; EPR “Loopholes”
       and Free Will 246
       22. Decoherence                                                       249
         The Decoherence Program 251; The Measurement Process 257;
       The Measurement Problem 259; What Decoherence Gets Right 261; What
       Decoherence Gets Wrong 263; Quantum Interactions Do Not Create Lasting
       Information 263; The Transition from Quantum to Classical World 263;
       Decoherence and Standard Quantum Mechanics 264
       23. Schrödinger’s Cat                                                 269
       24. The Arrow of Time                                                 277
        The Thermodynamic Arrow 277; The Historical Arrow 281; The Radiation
       Arrow 282; The Cosmological Arrow 283
       25. Microscopic Irreversibility                                       285
        The Origin of Irreversibility 287; Detailed Balancing 290
                                                            Contents          ix

26. The Recurrence Problem                                          293
 Zermelo’s Paradox 293; The Extreme Improbability of Perfect Recurrence 295
27. Emergence                                                       297
  Emergence or Reduction? 297; History of the Idea of Emergence 298; Three
Kinds of Information Emergence 302; Emergence in the Body 305; Emer-
gence in the Brain 306; The Emergence of Immaterial Information Process-
ing 306; The Emergence of Determinism 307; There Was a Time with No
Determinism 308; Emergence Denied 309
28. Origins of Life and Information                                 311
  History and Evolution in the Universe 312; The Origin of Information 316;
Information in Biology 317; Biological Machines 319; Ribosomes 321; ATP
Synthase 323; The Flagellum 324; Chaperones 326; Motive Power? 326;
Life, Love, and Death 327; Working Backwards in Time 327
A. Information                                                      331
 Information in the Universe 334; Information and Entropy 342
B. Entropy and the Second Law                                       345
  Discrete Particles 345; The Second Law of Thermodynamics 349; Entropy
Flows in the Universe 354; Positive and Negative Flows 356
C. Quantum Physics                                                  361
  Basic Quantum Mechanics 366; The Principle of Superposition 367;
The Axiom of Measurement 368; The Projection Postulate 369; Dirac’s Three
Polarizers 371; The Wonder and Mystery of the Oblique Polarizer 374;
The Quantum Physics Explanation 375; Einstein and Quantum Physics 376
D. Chance                                                           379
 The Calculus of Probabilities 381; Chance and Free Will 392
E. Experience Recorder and Reproducer                               395
 The Binding Problem 398; Speed and Power of the ERR 399; How the ERR
Works 400; The ERR and Consciousness 401; Four “Levels” of the ERR 403;
What It’s Like To Be A... 404; Mental States? 405; Summary 406
F. The Cosmic Creation Process                                      409
  The Fundamental Question of Information Philosophy 409; The Two Steps in
Cosmic Creation 411; The Flatness Problem in Cosmology 414; The Problem
of Missing Mass 416; The Horizon Problem 417
G. Biosemiotics                                                     419
 Will Biologists Accept Biosemiotics? 420
Bibliography                                                        423
  Arrow of Time 423; Biology 423; Chance 424; Consciousness 424;
Cosmology 424; Decoherence 425; Einstein 425; Emergence 426;
Entanglement 426; Epistemology 426; Free Will 427; Information in
Biology 428; Information 428; Meaning 428; Metaphysics 429; Mind 429;
Origin of Life 431; Philosophy 432; Physics 432; Psychology 433; Quantum
Mechanics 434; Theology 435; Value 435
Index                                                               437
 Image Credits 450; Books by Bob Doyle 450; Colophon 450
      x   Great Problems of Philosophy - Solved?
Preface




                       re f a ce
                      P
                                                                        Preface   xi


Preface




                                                                                   Preface
   If I am right that information philosophy is a new method of
philosophizing, if by going “beyond logic and language” it can
provide new philosophical insights, it should be tested, applied to
some of the great problems in philosophy and the philosophy of
science. But what are the great problems?
    A survey of several popular textbooks on philosophy produces
a ­remarkable consensus on the problems facing philosophers from
­ancient to modern times. They typically include metaphysics -
 what is there?, the problem of knowledge - how do we know what
 exists?, the mind/body problem - can an immaterial mind move
 the material body?, the “hard problem” of consciousness, free-
 dom of the will, theories of ethics - is there an objective universal
 Good?, and problems from theology - does God exist?, is God
 responsible for the evil in the world, what is immortality?
  Perhaps the best-known summary of philosophical problems
was Bertrand Russell’s The Problems of Philosophy, published
over a hundred years ago. Other important texts in analytic
philosophy were G. E. Moore’s Some Main Problems of Philosophy
and later A. J. Ayer’s The Central Questions of Philosophy.1
   Another set of classic problems comes from the philosophy
of science, which attempts to use metaphysics, ontology,
epistemology, and logic to provide new foundational principles
for the sciences. Philosophers of science question the foundations
of physics as well as the attempts by some thinkers to reduce all sci-
ences to physics. Some philosophers of mind, by contrast, argue
for emergent properties that cannot be reduced to a “causally
closed” world of physics.
  Philosophers of biology speculate whether biology can be
reduced to physics and chemistry, or whether something else is
needed to explain life. We will show that information processing
and communication is the extra explanatory factor.
  1     A popular recent text surveyed is Feinberg and Shafer-Landau, 2002
      xii        Great Problems of Philosophy - Solved?
Preface




            Figure 1. A taxonomy of problems in physics and philosophy.
                                                            Preface xiii

  The figure on the left arranges these great philosophy problems
and major problems in the philosophy of physics into a taxonomy




                                                                       Preface
showing their relationships.
  In the twentieth century, philosophers like Ludwig
Wittgenstein labeled many of our problems “philosophical
puzzles.” Russell called them “pseudo-problems.”
   In his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Wittgenstein hoped
to represent all knowledge in words. He saw a proposition as a
picture or model of reality and that the totality of true proposi-
tions is the whole of natural science (or the whole corpus of the
natural sciences).2 In his later work, he and subsequent analytic
language philosophers thought many of these problems could be
“dis-solved,” revealing them to be conceptual errors caused by the
misuse of language.
  As an aeronautical engineer and architect, Wittgenstein might
have explored his idea of dynamical models3 further. He might
have seen that models are a better tool than language to represent
the fundamental, metaphysical nature of reality. Dynamical inter-
active models can easily show what often cannot be said.
   Information philosophy goes beyond a priori logic and its
puzzles, beyond analytic language and its paradoxes, beyond
philosophical claims of necessary truths, to a contingent physical
world that is best represented with models of dynamic, interacting
information structures, including living things.
   Knowledge begins with information in minds that is a partial
isomorphism (mapping) of the information structures in the
external world. I-Phi is the ultimate correspondence theory.
   Using the new methodology of information philosophy, many
classic problems are now back under consideration as genuinely
important, analyzable, and potentially soluble in terms of physical,
but immaterial, information.
  To be sure, where scientists seek solutions, philosophers prefer
problems, especially ones that are teachable as problems. But the
goal of information philosophy is not to remove a problem from
philosophy once it is tentatively solved.
  2    Tractatus 4.01, 4.11
  3    Tractatus 4.04
      xiv         Great Problems of Philosophy - Solved?

              Returning to Russell’s pioneering text, we can say he simply was
            wrong when he insisted that
Preface




                  “questions which are already capable of definite answers are placed in
                  the sciences, while those only to which, at present, no definite answer
                  can be given, remain to form the residue which is called philosophy.”4
              Information philosophy aims to show that philosophical problems
            should not be reduced to “Russell’s Residue.”
              Although our proposed solutions to dozens of problems are
            grounded in science, they remain great questions in philosophy that
            should continue to be taught as philosophy.
            What’s In The Book
               The introductory chapter provides background on the basic
            concepts of information philosophy - what information is, its
            relationship to entropy and the second law of thermodynamics,
            how information is created, why metaphysical (non-epistemic)
            possibilities are needed in order to create new information, the
            connection between the theoretical probability of each possibility
            and the empirical statistics of actual events, how many living
            things have an experience recorder and reproducer (ERR) that stores
            and recalls information, and why, despite microscopic chaos and
            ontological indeterminism, the macroscopic world we live in is
            adequately or statistically deterministic, a cosmos that only appears
            to be determined and “causally closed under the laws of nature.”
               Because information is immaterial, it provides insights into many
            questions regarded as metaphysical. They include being and becom-
            ing, causality, chance, change, coinciding objects, composition
            (parts and wholes), constitution, essentialism, identity (and dif-
            ferences), individuation, modality (counterfactuals), necessity (or
            contingency), persistence (perdurance and endurance), possibility
            and actuality, space and time, truth, and vagueness. Much work
            in recent metaphysics has been an effort to establish metaphysical
            necessity, especially the necessity of identity.
               By contrast, information philosophy shows the existence of
            metaphysical possibilities. See chapter 2 for some proposed solutions
            to the questions above and go to metaphysicist.com for the rest.

              4       The Problems of Philosophy, 1912, p.155
                                                             Preface       xv

  Chapter 3 explores meta-ontological questions about the
existential status of Platonic Forms, such as numbers and other




                                                                            Preface
abstract entities.
   In chapter 4, we present our two-stage model of free will, which
begins with the free generation of random alternatives (new infor-
mation) followed by a willed decision that is adequately (statisti-
cally) determined by our motives and reasons. The chance events in
the first stage do not cause our actions, although they are factors in
the decision. It is the agent’s decision in the second stage that is the
cause of the action. Actions are not pre-determined.
   Chapter 5 makes the case that, because a formless entity has no
utility, information serves as a basis for objective value.
  In chapters 6 and 7, armed with the value of information, we dis-
cuss good, the problem of Evil, God, and information immortality.
  Chapter 8 argues that knowledge is created in minds, where it
remains embodied in the experience recorder, but may be stored
externally in books and the world-wide web.
  In chapter 9, we examine the status of attributes and properties.
  The problem of induction is connected to deduction and
abduction (hypothesis formation) in chapter 10.
  Chapter 11 relates the meaning of a new experience to the recorded
experiences that are played back during the new one.
   In chapters 12 and 13, we offer a model of the mind as immate-
rial information, as “software in the hardware” of the material brain,
which we see as a biological information processor.
   In chapter 14 and appendix E we analyze consciousness as the
interactive exchange of actionable information by the experience
recorder and reproducer (ERR) .
  We show in chapter 16 how downward mental causation is
possible, while bottom-up causal chains that would reduce biology
and psychology to physics and chemistry are implausible.
   We provide an interpretation of quantum mechanics in chapter
17 that minimizes mysteries with visual models of what is going on
in the quantum world of possibility waves and actual particles.
      xvi       Great Problems of Philosophy - Solved?

              We show in chapter 18 that unless new information is created,
            there is nothing for an observer to see and nothing to be measured.
Preface




              There is no strict determinism and thus no pre-determinism. In
            chapter 19 we see that the statistical determinism that we have is
            adequate enough to give us causal control when we need it.
               When a particle is located somewhere, the many other possible
            locations it might have been found (where the wave function was
            non-zero) simply disappear as possibilities. In chapter 20, we call
            this the collapse of the possibilities function. It is the fundamental
            unavoidable quantum mystery.
              In chapter 21, we disentangle the EPR paradox by showing that
            we cannot measure one entangled particle without also instantly
            measuring the second particle, as the two-particle wave function
            collapses everywhere.
               The “transition” from the quantum world to the appearance of a
            classical world (decoherence) occurs when the number of particles
            is large enough to average over quantum chance. In chapter 22, we
            see there is only one world, quantum all the way up!
              In chapter 23, the puzzle of Schrödinger’s Cat is solved by showing
            that the macroscopic cat is always either dead or alive. Schrödinger’s
            possibilities function gives us only the probabilities that the cat is
            dead or alive before we look in the box.
              Chapter 24 discusses arrows of time (radiation, entropy increase,
            evolution, history), and the fundamental arrow, the expansion of
            the universe, which creates all possibilities.
               The origin of irreversibility is the random direction of particles
            after their interaction with radiation. Chapter 25 shows this loss of
            microscopic path information explains “one-way causality” in the
            biological and mental realms.
               The idea that the universe will ultimately return to its original
            state is shown in chapter 26 to be wrong.
               New information structures created at the biological and mental
            levels explain how new properties emerge that cannot be reduced to
            lower levels in a “causally closed” physical world. Chapter 27.
                                                            Preface xvii

   In chapter 28, we show that the story of biological evolution is
continuous with the evolution of cosmological information struc-




                                                                          Preface
tures. Life has evolved to include biological information processing
and communications as well as the external storage of information
that contains what we call the Sum of human knowledge. Living
things are dynamic and growing information structures, forms
through which matter and energy continuously flow. And it is infor-
mation that controls those flows!
   Appendix A defines information and proposes dynamical interac-
tive information models as the best way to teach and to solve prob-
lems in philosophy.
   In appendix B we show how statistical mechanics calculates the
possible positions and velocities for vast numbers of molecules in
a gas and proves the famous Second Law of Thermodynamics -
that entropy always increases, yet the universe creates magnificent
information structures, including us!
    Appendix C reviews the basic principles of standard quantum
physics, which are unfortunately questioned or denied by so many
ill-informed philosophers of science.
   In appendix D we ask whether chance is ontological and real or
epistemic and the result of human ignorance? We look through Ein-
stein’s skeptical eyes to see the origin of ontological chance, without
which there would be “nothing new under the sun.”
   Appendix E describes the experience recorder and reproducer
(ERR), which stores information about all your past experiences
and plays back in the subconscious mind those that resemble some-
thing in your current experience.
  In appendix F we describe the critical steps in the cosmic creation
process, which accounts not only for the existence of atoms and
molecules, for the formation of galaxies, stars, and planets, and for
biological evolution, but also for the “free creations of the human
mind” behind our philosophy and our physics.
   Appendix G argues that life is coextensive with language, that
biology uses a semiotic system of signaling, signifiers, and signi-
fieds. Human language evolved from biological communications.
      xviii       Great Problems of Philosophy - Solved?

                I hope that you will look at the I-Phi website to explore further
              work in progress on these great problems in physics and philosophy.
Preface




                 Google Analytics reports that Information Philosopher has tens
              of thousands of unique visitors each year from all over the world.
                I look forward to your emails with critical comments on problems
              that interest you and your feedback on our web pages for over 300
              philosophers and scientists who have worked on these problems.
                 A Google search for their names often returns links to I-Phi pages
              on the first results page, alongside those from Wikipedia and the
              Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
                 Wikipedia does not allow original research and each article on
              the SEP is mostly the work of a single philosopher, with minimal
              content from original sources. By contrast, I-Phi pages present
              the work of hundreds of philosophers and scientists, often in their
              original languages, with downloadable PDFs of their major papers,
              for scholars without easy online access.
                For example, we now have a bilingual Tractatus, with indexes in
              English and German, and a bilingual of Frege’s major argument.
                 Your inputs will help make informationphilosopher.com as
              accurate a resource as possible for twenty-first-century philosophers.
                Please also take a look at our new websites devoted to metaphysical
              problems that we believe are solvable using information philosophy,
              metaphysicist.com, and our case for possibilities - possibilist.com.


                Bob Doyle
                bobdoyle@informationphilosopher.com
                Cambridge, MA
                September, 2016
                                                                         1



How To Use This Book With The I-Phi Website




                                                                         Chapter 1
   The content of this book comes primarily from the Problems
section on the informationphilosopher.com website and from our
new metaphysicist.com site. You will find multiple entry points
into the websites from this book, with URLs for the chapters and in
many of the footnotes. I hope that you agree that the combination of
a printed book and an online knowledge-base website is a powerful
way to do philosophy in the twenty-first century.
  The Problems web page has a right-hand navigation menu to
the major problems and left-hand navigation to the hundreds of
philosophers and scientists who have contributed to these classic
problems in philosophy and physics.




   Figures in the text often link to full-color animated images on the
I-Phi website. All images come from open-source websites.
  Names in Small Caps are the philosophers and scientists with
web pages on the I-Phi website.
   It is not easy to navigate any website, and I-Phi is no exception.
Find things of interest quickly with the Search box on every page.
Once on a page, a “Cite this page” function generates a citation
with the URL and the date you retrieved the page, in standard APA
format that you can copy and paste into your work.
        2   Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 1




                                c t i o n
                    Int    rodu
                                                 Introduction             3


Introduction




                                                                          Chapter 1
   Information philosophy is a new methodology for diagnosing
and analyzing plausible solutions for several great philosophical
problems, many with us since antiquity. It hopes to take phi-
losophy, and the philosophy of sciences like physics and biology,
beyond logical puzzles and language games.
   The information philosopher proposes information as the
preferred basis for examining current problems in a wide range
of disciplines - from information creation in cosmology to
measurement information in quantum physics, from the emer-
gence of information in biology to its role in psychology, where it
offers a solution to the classic mind-body problem and the “hard”
problem of consciousness. And of course in philosophy, where
failed language analysis can be replaced or at least augmented
by the analysis of immaterial information content as the basis for
justified (if not “true”) beliefs and as a ground for objective values.
   The immodest goal of information philosophy is to restore
philosophy to its ancient role as the provider of first principles to
all other systems of thought.
   Information philosophy is a philosophical system, the first since
the nineteenth century, because it makes the somewhat extrava-
gant claim that analysis of the information content, its creation,
processing, and communication, can provide profound insight
into problems of philosophy, physics and biology that have so far
not yielded acceptable solutions.
   Just as analytical language philosophy is not the philosophy
of language, so information philosophy is not the philosophy of
information, with its focus on the philosophy of computers and
the proper uses of information technology.
   Information is physical, but it is immaterial, and as such, it
enters the realm of the metaphysical. Information is neither matter
nor energy, though it needs matter for its embodiment and energy
for its communication. Information is the modern spirit.
        4     Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Although the tagline of information philosophy is “beyond
            logic and language,” the information philosopher uses logic (while
Chapter 1




            noting that logic alone can tell us nothing about the physical
            world) and of course information philosophy is written in a lan-
            guage, despite the fact that the fundamental ambiguity of words
            makes precise communication difficult and despite the inability
            of twentieth-century linguistic analysis to make much progress in
            philosophy.
               As the possible ground for all thought, information philosophy
            may be a sort of metaphilosophy. Quantitative information comes
            close to Gottfried Leibniz’s ideal ambiguity-free language, though
            the problem of meaning1 remains irreducibly contextual.
              The strength of information philosophy comes from embrac-
            ing and incorporating quantitative new knowledge from physics,
            biology, and neuroscience - but above all, from the fields of infor-
            mation theory and information science.
               This raises the bar for young philosophers. In addition to doing
            clear conceptual analysis of problems and knowing the history of
            classic philosophical problems, they may now have to master some
            concepts from quantum mechanics, thermodynamics, molecular
            biology, neuroscience, and cosmology.
              So beyond the words and images in this book, the I-Phi website
            provides animated visualizations of the most basic concepts that
            you will need to become an information philosopher.
              These visualizations are dynamical and interactive models of
            what is going on at the most fundamental level of reality. They let
            us directly show concepts that may not be easily said.
              Some of these concepts are familiar philosophical ones that we
            hope information will explain more clearly. Some are scientific
            concepts that every philosopher should know today. Other ideas
            are novel and unique to information philosophy.
              1    See chapter 11 for more on the meaning in information.
                                                 Introduction          5


The New Ideas of Information Philosophy
  Here is a quick summary of several key ideas you should know




                                                                       Chapter 1
which play major roles in the rest of this book.
   1) Possibilities exist. Their existential status is problematic,
because possibilities are not things, not physical material objects.
They belong to the Platonic realm of ideas, an “ideal world” con-
trasted with the “material world.” We will discuss the status of
possibilities as a problem in metaphysics. Metaphysicians today
defend necessitism, especially the necessity of identity. We will
defend a metaphysical possibilism.
  Note that the “possible worlds” of metaphysicians like David
Lewis and the “many worlds” of physicists like Hugh Everett III
are perfectly deterministic. Actual possibilities mean there is more
than one possible future.
   2) Chance is real. Without chance and the generation of pos-
sibilities, no new information can come into the world. Without
chance, there can be no creativity. Without the creation of new
information, new ideas, the information content of the universe
would be a constant - “nothing new under the sun.” In such an
eliminatively materialist and determinist world, there is but one
possible future. Possibilities are metaphysical and chance is onto-
logical.
   3) Determinism is an illusion. Determinism has had a long and
successful history in philosophy and physics, but it is an unwar-
ranted assumption, not supported by the evidence. The material
world is quantum mechanical, and ontological chance is the result
of quantum indeterminacy. An adequate and statistical determin-
ism does appear when macroscopic objects contain large numbers
of microscopic particles so that quantum events can be averaged
over.
   4) Knowledge is an isomorphism. Information represents a con-
cept or an object better than an imprecise description in language.
Information is the form in all concrete objects as well as the con-
tent in non-existent, merely possible, abstract entities. Knowledge
is an information structure in a mind that is a partial isomorphism
        6     Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

            (a mapping) of an information structure in the external world.
            Information philosophy is the ultimate correspondence theory.
Chapter 1




               4) Beyond language. But there is no isomorphism, no informa-
            tion in common, no necessary connection, between words and
            objects. Although language is an excellent tool for human com-
            munication, its arbitrary and ambiguous nature makes it ill-suited
            to represent the world directly. Language does not picture reality.
            Is is not the best tool for solving philosophical problems.
               5) The experience recorder and reproducer. The extraordinarily
            sophisticated connection between words and objects is made in
            human minds, mediated by the brain’s experience recorder and
            reproducer (ERR). Words stimulate neurons to start firing and to
            play back relevant experiences that include the objects. The neu-
            roscientist Donald Hebb famously said that “neurons that fire
            together get wired together.” Our ERR model says neurons that
            were wired together by old experiences will fire together again
            when a new experience resembles the old in any way, instantly
            providing guidance to deal with the new.
               6) Dynamic models. The elements of information philosophy,
            dynamical models of information structures, go far beyond logic
            and language as a representation of the fundamental, metaphysi-
            cal, nature of reality. They “write” directly into our mental experi-
            ence recorders. By contrast, words must be interpreted in terms of
            earlier experiences. Without words and related experiences previ-
            ously recorded in your mental experience recorder, you could not
            comprehend spoken or written words. They would be mere noise,
            with no meaning. Compare these two representations of a cat.




              Figure 1-1. Linguistic and picture/model representations compared.
                                                  Introduction           7


  Compared to a spoken or printed word, a photograph or a
moving picture with sound can be seen and mostly understood by




                                                                         Chapter 1
human beings, independent of their native tongue.
   Computer animated dynamical models can incorporate all the
laws of nature, from the differential equations of quantum physics
to the myriad processes of biology. At their best, such simulations
are not only our most accurate knowledge of the physical world,
they are the best teaching tools ever devised. We can transfer
knowledge non-verbally to coming generations and most of the
world’s population via the Internet and ubiquitous smartphones.
  A dynamic information model of an information structure in
the world is presented immediately to the mind as a look-alike and
act-alike simulation, which is experienced for itself, not mediated
through ambiguous words.
  7) Laws of nature are statistical. Because microscopic atomic
processes are governed by quantum physics, which is a statistical
theory, all laws of nature are in fact statistical laws. They give us
probabilities, not certainties. When material objects contain large
numbers of atomic particles, the statistical uncertainty approaches
zero and the laws are adequately but only statistically deterministic.
   Quantum mechanical probabilities (Erwin Schrödinger‘s wave
functions) evolve deterministically and continuously according
to the Schrödinger equation, but the actual outcomes occur dis-
continuously and statistically. While this may seem like a logical
contradiction, it is not.
   The average value of possible particle positions moves according
to classical mechanical laws, but the actual positions where par-
ticles are found are indeterminate (random), following quantum
mechanical laws. The “determinism” we have is only an “adequate”
statistical determinism.
   8) Entropy and the Second Law. Abstract immaterial informa-
tion is mathematically, phenomenologically, and experimentally
related to a physical quantity in thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics called the entropy. The second law of thermodynamics
        8      Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

            says that, left to itself, a closed system approaches a state of maxi-
            mum entropy, or disorder. This change is “irreversible,” without
            an input of free energy and information (negative entropy) from
Chapter 1




            outside the system.
               A closed system cannot spontaneously increase its information
            structure, rearranging its material to contain more information. It
            can of course spontaneously decay, and will do so according to the
            second law. The approach to equilibrium destroys information.
            The lost information equals the amount of entropy (disorder)
            that is gained. Information is sometimes called negative entropy,
            the amount by which a system is below the maximum entropy
            possible.
              9) The universe is open. It began in a state of total disorder, with
            the maximum entropy possible for the initial conditions, some
            13.75 billion years ago. How then can the universe today contain
            such rich information structures as galaxies, stars, and planets like
            Earth, with its rich biological information-processing systems?
            This is the fundamental question of information philosophy.
               The answer is that the maximum entropy of the early universe
            was tiny compared to the maximum possible entropy today, as a
            result of the expansion of the universe. And because the universe
            has not had time to reach its potential maximum of disorder, new
            information (negative entropy) has been and is now being created.
              The expansion of the universe is the fundamental arrow of time.
             10) Negative entropy has value. The source for all potential infor-
            mation can be a basis for objective value.
               11) The cosmic creation process. Information philosophy explains
            the creation, the emergence of new information in the universe
            as a two-step process beginning with a quantum event (in which
            possibilities become actualized) and ending with some positive
            entropy carried away from the resulting low-entropy information
            structure, to satisfy the second law. 2
             This process explains the creation of every single bit of infor-
            mation, whether the formation of a hydrogen atom from a proton

              2     See appendix F for more details.
                                                  Introduction           9

and electron, a complex physical measurement like discovering
the Higgs boson, or the creation of a new idea in a human mind.




                                                                         Chapter 1
   12) The two-stage model of free will. Since every free act cre-
ates information, free will is intimately related to cosmic creation,
beginning with the generation of alternative possibilities for action.
   13) Information is history. The material particles of physics and
chemistry carry no history. Their paths do not tell us where they
have been in the past, though some deterministic physicists think
so. Cosmological objects do have an evolutionary history. And so
does biology. Matter and energy (with low entropy) flows through
living things, maintaining their dynamical information structures.
   To discover the origin of life, it will be easier to work backwards
in time through the history of biological evolution than to start
from physics and chemistry that knows nothing of information.
The Three Worlds of Information Philosophy
    There is an over arching idea that provides a high-level view
of the role of information. It is the notion that the “world” can be
divided into “worlds” based on the ancient dualist view, a material
world in the here and now and an ideal world above and beyond
it, “outside space and time,” some think.
   Beyond the dualism, many philosophers have argued for a
“third world” between these two. Information philosophy strongly
defends this notion of a third world, which is distinguished by the
interaction of abstract information processing and concrete infor-
mation structures in the world of living things.
  The great logician Gottlob Frege distinguished three “realms;”
an external realm of public physical things and events, an internal
subjective realm of private thoughts, and an “objective” Platonic
realm of ideal “senses” (to which sentences refer, providing their
meaning).
   Karl Popper (very likely influenced by Frege) made the case for
a World I - the realm of physical things and processes, a World II
- the realm of subjective human experience, and a World III - the
realm of culture and objective knowledge.
        10      Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Charles Sanders Peirce proposed a triad of Objects, Percepts,
             and Concepts, which maps well onto the realms and worlds of
Chapter 1




             Frege and Popper.
                Information philosophy agrees with these fundamental divi-
             sions, but defines them based on the different roles played by
             information in each world. The three “worlds” of information phi-
             losophy are symbolized in our tricolor logo (the colors are visible
             on the book cover and on our website). The material world is the
             lower green ball. The biological world is the middle red ball, and
             the ideal or mental world is the upper blue ball.
                 We see the biological world as mixing matter from the material
             world and form from the ideal world. It is much larger than Pop-
             per’s world of subjective human experience. All living things have
             experiences and the experience recorder and reproducer (ERR)
             model of information philosophy lets us understand better “what
             it’s like to be” a conscious living thing by analyzing its experiences.
               The biological world is unique in that it not only creates but also
             processes and communicates information.
              The mental world is an immaterial world, a world of pure infor-
             mation, the stuff of thought and of philosophy.
               We can identify three different roles for information in these
             three worlds - the purely material, the biological, and the mental.
                But we shall see in appendix F that information creation in all
             three worlds involves the same fundamental process of physical
             information creation that is common to all creation processes,
             from the largest galaxies down to the composite matter of nucle-
             ons, atoms, and molecules built up from the fundamental particles
             of physics - quarks, gluons, photons and electrons,
                We will show that this cosmic creation process is also present
             in all biological information creation, including the creation of
             new ideas in human minds. Understanding this process is vital
             to the solutions of several of our problems in philosophy and the
             philosophy of physics.
                                                Introduction           11


Information Creation in the Material World
   The physical world of material objects, often described by




                                                                        Chapter 1
philosophers as the “external world,” could not be perceived or
distinguished as individual objects if it did not have observable
shapes or forms. If the matter were in a state of thermal equilib-
rium, maximum disorder or entropy, it might resemble the inte-
rior of a cloud, uniform in appearance in all directions. The early
universe was just such a haze for the first few hundred thousand
years. There was no permanent information structure larger than
atomic and sub-atomic particles (electrons, protons, neutrons,
helium nuclei).
   The physical shapes that we do see - the sun, moon, and stars,
the mountains and rivers - are the result of physical processes that
created the quantifiable information in those shapes and forms.
Cosmologists, astrophysicists, and geophysicists have specific
models of how visible material objects like galaxies, stars, and
planets came into existence and evolved over time.
   But, and this is new and philosophically significant, the early
universe did not contain the information of later times, just as
early primates do not contain the information structures for intel-
ligence and verbal communication that humans do, and infants
do not contain the knowledge and remembered experience they
will have as adults.
   Creation of information in the material world can be described
as the “order out of chaos” when matter and radiation first appeared
and the expansion of the early universe led to the gravitational
attraction of randomly distributed matter into highly organized
galaxies, stars, and planets. The expansion - the increasing space
between material objects - drove the universe away from thermo-
dynamic equilibrium, increasing the positive entropy and, some-
what paradoxically, at the same time creating negative entropy, a
quantitative measure of the order that is the basis for all informa-
tion. Material information structures were emergent.
        12         Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             Information Creation in the Biological World
                A qualitatively different second kind of information creation
Chapter 1




             was when the first molecule on earth replicated itself and went
             on to duplicate its information exponentially. Accidental errors in
             the duplication provided variations in reproductive success, the
             basis for evolution. But most important, besides being informa-
             tion creators, biological systems are also information processors.
             Living things use information to guide their actions. All biological
             systems are built from communicating “cognitive” elements.
               Biology is physics and chemistry plus information.
                Many biologists have explored the role of information in bio-
             logical processes. We want to emphasize that all living things
             are biological information processors, precursors of our man-
             made information-processing machines. Whereas computers
             are assembled by humans, even in the case of computers that we
             design to assemble other computers, biological information pro-
             cessors assemble themselves from atoms and molecules.
                Biological evolution can be viewed as a story of information-
             processing systems becoming steadily more powerful and sophis-
             ticated. With the appearance of life in the universe came teleo-
             nomic purpose. This biological purpose is not a telos, an essence
             preceding the existence of life, but life, once existing, striving to
             maintain and improve itself. The earliest philosophers, especially
             Aristotle, recognized this as a unique characteristic, perhaps the
             defining characteristic, of living things. He called it “entelechy,”
             meaning “to have a purpose within.”
                Matter and energy are conserved. There is the same amount of
             E + mc2 today as there was at the universe origin. But information
             is not conserved. It has been increasing since the beginning of
             time. Everything emergent3 is new information.
                Living things are dynamic and growing information structures,
             forms through which matter and energy continuously flow.
                And it is information processing that controls those flows, usu-
             ally putting each atom or molecule in an appropriate place!
               3     See chapter 27 on emergence
                                                 Introduction           13


Information Creation in the World of Ideas
   The third process of information creation, and the most impor-




                                                                         Chapter 1
tant to philosophy, is human creativity. Almost every philosopher
since philosophy began has considered the mind as something
distinct from the body. Information philosophy provides a new
explanation for that critical distinction.
   We see the concrete physical information structures of the
universe evolving to create abstract information creation and
processing systems. Human beings are the current pinnacle of
that evolutionary process, especially as we are conscious, indeed
self-conscious, of our role externalizing information, sharing
knowledge with our fellow human beings and guarding it as our
most important gift to future generations.
   For better or worse, it is knowledge, pure information, that pro-
vides humanity with the Baconian power we have to dominate our
planet. Subverting traditional notions of economic scarcity and
of fundamental limits to material resources, information creation
has continuously provided new and different ways to use the exist-
ing material of our planet as new resources.
   We identify the mind with the immaterial information in the
material brain, the knowledge acquired through a combination
of heredity and experience. The brain, part of the material body,
we see as a biological information processor. As many philoso-
phers and cognitive scientists have speculated in recent decades,
the mind is indeed software in the brain hardware.
What Does Creation of Information Mean?
   Creation means the coming into existence, the “emergence,” of
recognizable information structures, from a prior chaotic state in
which there was little recognizable order or information.
   This fact of increasing information describes very well an unde-
termined universe with an open future that is still creating itself.
Stars are still forming, biological systems are creating new species,
and intelligent human beings are co-creators of the world we live
in. We are the authors of our lives.
            14   Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 2




                                    ys i c s
                          M    etaph




                                                                    This chapter on the web
                                                                          metaphysicist.com
                                          informationphilosopher.com/problems/metaphysics
                                                           Metaphysics          15


 Metaphysics
   We apply methods of information philosophy to metaphysics




                                                                                     Chapter 2
and find solutions to several classic problems, puzzles and para-
doxes. You can find them all on our new website metaphysicist.
com and in our forthcoming book Metaphysics. In this chapter,
we discuss just a few of them, absolute and relative identity, the
problem of composition (parts/wholes), coinciding objects (colo-
cation), Aristotelian essentialism, the need for metaphysical pos-
sibility, and the semantics and modal logic of "possible worlds."
   Many ancient puzzles are variations on the problem of coincid-
ing objects, including Dion and Theon, the Growing Argument,
and the Statue and the Clay. We solve these puzzles.
  A central problem in information philosophy is the existential
or ontological status of ideas. The creation of new ideas requires
the existence of ontological chance. Metaphysical possibility must
therefore be a fundamental aspect of metaphysical reality.
  Information provides a unique explanation of self-identity and
the relative identity of numerically distinct objects. It also explains
the existential status of abstract entities.
   Metaphysics is an abstract human invention about the nature
of concrete reality – immaterial thoughts about material things.
Information philosophy explains the metaphysics of chance and
possibilities, which always underlie the creation of new informa-
tion. Without metaphysical possibilities, there can be no human
creativity and no new knowledge.
  A materialist metaphysics asks questions about the underly-
ing substrate presumed to constitute all the objects in the uni-
verse. Unfortunately, most modern philosophers are eliminative
materialists and determinists who think there is "nothing but" the
substrate of matter. As Jaegwon Kim puts it,
      “bits of matter and their aggregates in space-time exhaust the contents
      of the world. This means that one would be embracing an ontology
      that posits entities other than material substances — that is, imma-
      terial minds, or souls, outside physical space, with immaterial, non-
      physical properties.”1
  1       Physicalism, or Something Near Enough. p.71
            16      Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    A formalist or idealist metaphysics asks about the arrangement
                 and organization of matter that shapes material objects, what
                 brings their forms into existence, and what causes their changes
Chapter 2




                 in space and time. Information philosophy defends a Platonic
                 realm of immaterial ideas in a property dualism with the realm
                 of matter. The information realm is physical and natural. It is not
                 supernatural and “outside space and time.” Ideas are embodied
                 in matter and use energy for their communication. But they are
                 neither matter nor energy. They are forms that inform.
                    The total amount of matter (and energy) in the universe is a
                 conserved quantity. Because of the universe expansion, there is
                 ever more room in space for each material particle, ever more
                 ways to arrange the material, ever more possibilities. The total
                 information in the universe is constantly increasing. This is the
                 first contribution of information philosophy to metaphysics.
                    The second contribution is to restore a dualist idealism, based
                 on the essential importance of information communication in
                 all living things. Since the earliest forms of proto-life, informa-
                 tion stored in each organism has been used to create the following
                 generations, including the variations that have evolved to become
                 thinking human beings who have invented the world of ideas
                 that contains metaphysics. Abstract information is an essential, if
                 immaterial, part of reality. Plato was right that his “ideas” (ἰδέας)
                 are real. Plato's forms inform.
                    A third contribution from information philosophy adds biology
                 to the analysis of metaphysical problems which began in puzzles
                 over change and growth. The parts of living things – we call them
                 biomers – are communicating with one another, which integrates
                 them into their “wholes” in a way impossible for mere material
                 parts – we find a biomereological essentialism.
                    The arrangement of individual material particles and their
                 interaction is abstract immaterial information. The metaphysics
                 of information can explain the cosmic creation process underly-
                 ing the origin of all information structures in the universe and the
                 communication of information between all living things, which
                                                  Metaphysics           17

we will show use a meaningful biological language, consisting of
arbitrary symbols. Biological communications have evolved to
become human language.




                                                                             Chapter 2
  Ontology asks the question “what is there?”
   Eliminative materialism claims that nothing exists but mate-
rial particles, which makes many problems in ancient and modern
metaphysics difficult if not insoluble. To be sure, we are made
of the same material as the ancient metaphysicians. With every
breath we take, we inspire 10 or 20 of the fixed number of mol-
ecules of air that sustained Aristotle. We can calculate this because
the material in the universe is a constant.
   But information is not a fixed quantity. The stuff of thought and
creativity, information has been increasing since the beginning of
the universe. There is ever more knowledge (but relatively little
increase in wisdom?) With hundreds if not thousands of times as
many philosophers as ancient Greece, can we still be debating the
same ancient puzzles and paradoxes?
   Information philosophy restores so-called “non-existent
objects” to our ontology. Abstract entities consist of the same kind
of information that provides the structure and process informa-
tion of a concrete object. What we call a “concept” about an object
is some subset of the immaterial information in the object, accu-
rate to the extent that the concept is isomorphic to that subset.
  Epistemology asks, “how do we know what there is?”
   Immaterial information provides a new ground for epistemol-
ogy, the theory of knowledge. We know something about the
“things themselves” when we discover an isomorphism between
our abstract ideas and concrete objects in the material world. But
words and names are not enough. Information philosophy goes
beyond the logical puzzles and language games of analytic phi-
losophy. It identifies knowledge as information in human minds
and in the external artifacts of human culture.
            18       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     Abstract information is the foundation – the metaphysical
                 ground – of both logic and language as means of communication.
                 It is a dual parallel to the material substrate that the Greeks called
Chapter 2




                 ὑποκείμενον - the “underlying.” It gives matter its form and shape.
                 Form informs.
                    Much of formal metaphysics is about necessary relationships
                 between universal ideas, certain knowledge that we can believe
                 independent of any experience, knowledge that is “a priori” and
                 “analytic” (true by logic and reason alone, or by definition). Some
                 of these ideas appear to be unchanging, eternal truths in any pos-
                 sible world.
                    Information philosophy now shows that there is no necessity
                 in the natural world. Apodeictic certainty is just an idea. There
                 is no a priori knowledge that was not first discovered empirically
                 (a posteriori). Only after a fact is discovered do
                 we see how to demonstrate it logically as a priori.      There is no
                 And everything analytic is part of a humanly con-   necessity in the
                 structed language, and thus synthetic. All such       natural world
                 “truths” are philosophical inventions, mere con-
                 cepts, albeit some of the most powerful ideas ever to enter the
                 universe.
                    Most important, a formal and idealistic metaphysics is about
                 abstract entities, in logic and mathematics, some of which seem to
                 be true independent of time and space. Aristotle, the first metaphy-
                 sician, called them “first principles” (archai, axioma). Gottfried
                 Leibniz said they are true in all possible worlds, which is to say
                 their truth is independent of the world.
                    But if these abstract metaphysical truths are not material,
                 where are these ideas in our world? Before their discovery, they
                 subsisted as unknown properties. Once invented and discovered
                 to be empirical facts, they are embedded in material objects, arti-
                 facts, and minds – the software in our hardware. Those ideas that
                 are invented but not found empirically “real” (imagined fictions,
                 flawed hypotheses, round squares) are also added to the sum of
                 human knowledge, even if never embodied.
                                                 Metaphysics            19

   Many unchanging abstract entities share a property that the
early philosophers Parmenides, Plato, and Aristotle called “Being,”
to distinguish its nature from “Becoming,” the property of all
material objects that change with time. Certain truths cannot pos-




                                                                             Chapter 2
sibly change. They are eternal, “outside space and time.”
   It is unfortunate that information philosophy undermines the
logical concepts of metaphysical necessity, certainty, the a priori
and analytic, even truth itself, by limiting their analyticity to the
unchanging abstract entities in the realm of Being. But, on the
positive side, information philosophy now establishes the meta-
physical possibility of ontological possibilities.
   Possibilities depend on the existence of irreducible ontological
chance, the antithesis of necessity. Without metaphysical possi-
bilities, no new information can be created.
   Information philosophy and metaphysics restore an immate-
rial mind to the impoverished and deflated metaphysics that we
have had since empiricism and naturalism rejected the dualism of
René Descartes and its troublesome mind-body problem.
  Naturalism is a materialism. Just as existentialism is a human-
ism. Even stronger, naturalism is an eliminative materialism. It
denies the immaterial and particularly the mental.
  While information philosophy is a form of the great dualism
of idealism versus materialism, it is not a substance dualism.
Information is a physical, though immaterial, property of matter.
Information philosophy is a property dualism.
   Abstract information is neither matter nor energy, although it
needs matter for its embodiment and energy for its communica-
tion.
  Information is immaterial. It is the modern spirit, the ghost in
the machine. It is the mind in the body. It is the soul. And when
we die, our personal information and its communication perish.
The matter remains.
  Information is the underlying currency of all communication
and language. Passive material objects in the universe contain
            20         Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 information, which metaphysicians and scientists analyze to
                 understand everything material. But passive material objects do
                 not create, actively communicate, and process information, as do
Chapter 2




                 all living things.
                   Realism is the ontological commitment to the existence of
                 material things. Information realism is equally committed to the
                 existence or subsistence of immaterial, but physical, ideas.
                    Human language is the most highly evolved form of informa-
                 tion communication in biology. But even the simplest organisms
                 signal their condition and their needs, both internally among
                 their smallest parts and externally as they compete with other
                 living things in their environment.
                    Biosemioticians convincingly argue that all the messages in
                 biology, from the intracellular genetic codes sent to the ribosomes
                 to produce more of a specific protein, to the words in sentences
                 like this one, are a meaningful part of one continuously evolv-
                 ing semantic system. All messaging is as purposeful as a human
                 request for food, so biology is called teleonomic, though not teleo-
                 logical. This “telos” or purpose in life did not pre-exist life.2
                    Like human language, the signs used in biological messages can
                 be symbolic and arbitrary, having no iconic or indexical or any
                 other intrinsic relation between a signifier and the signified con-
                 cept or object. Like human signs, the meaning of a biological sign
                 is highly dependent on the context. Only four neurotransmitters
                 act as primary messengers sent to a cell, inside of which one of
                 dozens of secondary messengers may be activated to determine
                 the use inside the particular cell - the ultimate Wittgensteinian
                 “meaning as use” in the message.
                    Modern Anglo-American metaphysicians think problems in
                 metaphysics can be treated as problems in language, potentially
                 solved by conceptual analysis. They are analytical language phi-
                 losophers. But language is too flexible, too ambiguous and full
                 of metaphor, to be a diagnostic tool for metaphysics. We must
                 go beyond language games and logical puzzles to the underlying
                 information contained in a concept or object.
                   2     See Appendix G on Biosemiotics.
                                                  Metaphysics             21

   Information philosophy restores the metaphysical existence of
a realm that is “beyond the natural” in the sense since at least
David Hume and Immanuel Kant that the “laws of nature”




                                                                               Chapter 2
completely determine everything that exists, everything that hap-
pens, in the phenomenal and material world.
   Although the immaterial realm of information is not “super-
natural” in any way, the creation of information throws consider-
able light on why so many humans, though few scientists, believe
– correctly as it turns out – that there is a providential force in the
universe.3
   Martin Heidegger, the philosopher of “Being,” called
Friedrich Nietzsche the “last metaphysician.” Nietzsche
thought that everything in his “lebensphilosophie” was the cre-
ation of human beings. Indeed, when we are creative, what we
create is new information.
   Did we humans “discover” the abstract ideas, or did we “invent”
them and then find them to be true of the world, including those
true in any possible world?
  As opposed to an analytic language metaphysician, a meta-
physicist searches for answers in the analysis of immaterial (but
physical) information that can be seen when it is embodied in
external material information structures. Otherwise it can only
be known – in minds.
   Metaphysical truths are pure abstract information, subsisting
in the realm of ideas.
  Metaphysical facts about the world are discovered when there
are isomorphisms between abstract ideas and the concrete struc-
tures in the external world that embody those ideas.
   Information philosophy bridges the ideal and material worlds
of Plato and Aristotle and the noumenal and phenomenal worlds
of Kant. It demonstrates how immaterial minds are a causal force
in the material world, connecting the psychological and phe-
nomenological with the “things themselves,” which are seen as
embodiments of our ideas.

  3     See chapter 7.
            22       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    The causal force of ideas, combined with the existence of alter-
                 native possibilities, is the information philosophy basis for human
                 free will.
Chapter 2




                    What are we to say about a field of human inquiry whose major
                 problems have hardly changed over two millennia? Information
                 philosophy looks at a wide range of problems in metaphysics,
                 situating each problem in its historical framework and providing
                 accounts of the best work by today’s metaphysicians. Metaphy-
                 sicians today are analytic language philosophers, some of whom
                 work on a surprisingly small number of metaphysical problems
                 that began as puzzles and paradoxes over two thousand years ago.
                    The metaphysicist adds biological knowledge and quantum
                 physics to help investigate the fundamental nature of reality.
                 David Wiggins called for the former and E. Jonathan Lowe
                 called for the latter. David Chalmers thinks information may
                 help solve the "hard problem" of consciousness.
                    An information-based metaphysics provides a single explana-
                 tion for the origin and evolution of the universe as well as life on
                 Earth. Since the beginning, it is the creation of material infor-
                 mation structures that underlies all possibilities. From the first
                 living thing, biological communication of information has played
                 a causal role in evolution.
                   Metaphysics must include both the study of matter and its
                 immaterial form. A quantum particle is pure matter. The quantum
                 wave function is pure abstract information about possibilities.
                   The metaphysics of possibility grounds the possibility of meta-
                 physics.
                 Possibility and Possible Worlds
                    In the “semantics of possible worlds,” necessity and possibil-
                 ity in modal logic are variations of the universal and existential
                 quantifiers of non-modal logic. Necessary truth is defined as
                 “truth in all possible worlds.” Possible truth is defined as “truth
                 in some possible worlds.” These abstract notions about “worlds” –
                 sets of propositions in universes of discourse – have nothing to do
                 with physical possibility, which depends on the existence of real
                                                 Metaphysics            23

contingency. Propositions in modal logic are required to be true or
false. Contingent statements that are neither true or false are not
allowed. So much for real possibilities in modal logic!




                                                                             Chapter 2
   Historically, the opposition to metaphysical possibility has
come from those who claim that the only possible things that can
happen are the actual things that do happen. To say that things
could have been otherwise is a mistake, say the eliminative mate-
rialists and determinists. Those other possibilities simply never
existed in the past. The only possible past is the past we have actu-
ally had.
  Similarly, there is only one possible future. Whatever will
happen, will happen. The idea that many different things can
happen, the reality of modality and words like “may” or “might”
used in everyday conversation, have no place in metaphysical
reality. The only “actual” events or things are what exists. For
“presentists,” even the past does not exist. Everything we remem-
ber about past events is just a set of “Ideas.” And philosophers
have always been troubled about the ontological status of Plato’s
abstract “Forms,” entities like the numbers, geometric figures,
mythical beasts, and other fictions.
  Traditionally, those who deny alternative possibilities in this
way have been called “Actualists.”
   Reading the last half-century with the development of modal
logic, one might think that metaphysical possibilities have been
restored. So-called modal operators like “necessarily” and “pos-
sibly” have been added to the structurally similar quantification
operators “for all” and “for some.” The metaphysical literature is
full of talk about “possible worlds.”
   The most popular theory of possible worlds is David Lewis’s
“modal realism,” an infinite number of worlds, each of which
is just as actual (eliminative materialist and determinist) for its
inhabitants as our world is for us.
   There are no genuine possibilities in Lewis’s “possible worlds”!
It comes as a shock to learn that every “possible world” is just
as actual, for its inhabitants, as our world is for us. There are no
alternative possibilities, no contingency, no things that might
            24       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 have been otherwise, in any of these possible worlds. Every world
                 is as physically deterministic as our own.
                                         Modal logicians now speak of a “rule of
Chapter 2




                   There are no
                   possibilities in necessitation” at work in possible world
                   David Lewis's      semantics. The necessarily operator and the
                   possible worlds possibly operator are said to be “duals” - either
                                      one can be defined in terms of the other, so
                 either can be primitive. But most axiomatic systems of modal
                 logic appear to privilege necessity and de-emphasize possibility.
                 They rarely mention contingency, except to say that the necessity
                 of identity appears to rule out contingent identity statements.
                    The rule of necessitation is that “if p, then necessarily p.” It
                 gives rise to the idea that if anything exists, it exists necessarily.
                 This is called “necessitism.” The idea that if two things are identi-
                 cal, they are necessarily identical. The “necessity of identity” was
                 “proved” by Ruth Barcan Marcus in 1947, by her thesis adviser
                 F. B. Fitch in 1952, and by Willard Van Orman Quine in 1953.
                 David Wiggins in 1965 and Saul Kripke in 1971 repeated the
                 arguments, with little or no reference to the earlier work.
                 Naming and Necessity
                    Perhaps Kripke's most famous work is his idea that proper
                 names are "rigid designators" that are necessarily true in all pos-
                 sible worlds. That is to say, the same individual in other possible
                 worlds must have exactly the same name. This raises the ques-
                 tion of "trans-world identity." Must every possible property of
                 any individual be exactly the same? According to Leibniz's Law,
                 which Kripke uses, two entities are only identical if every prop-
                 erty they have is identical. So far, so good. But what about the
                 property of being in two different worlds, two different places?
                 If that one property differs, why shouldn't many other propeties,
                 including their names?
                    Kripke and Hilary Putnam famously asked whether the word
                 "water" and the molecular formula H2O are necessarily the same
                 in all possible worlds, because water is a "natural kind?"
                                                 Metaphysics            25


   There is simply no necessity in the physical world, neither the
actual world nor "possible" other worlds. Necessitism exists only
in the ideal worlds of logic and mathenatics.




                                                                             Chapter 2
   The emphasis on necessitation in possible-world semantics
leads to a flawed definition of possibility, one that has no connec-
tion with the ordinary and scientific meanings of possibility.
   Modal logicians know little if anything about real possibilities
and nothing at all about possible physical worlds. Their possible
worlds are abstract universes of discourse, sets of propositions that
are true or false. Contingent statements, that may be either true or
false, like statements about the future, are simply not allowed in
systems of formal logic.
   Modal logicians define necessary propositions as those that are
“true in all possible worlds.” Possible propositions are those that
are only “true in some possible worlds.” This is the result of forc-
ing the modal operators ‘necessarily’ and ‘possibly’ to correspond
to the universal and existential quantification operators ‘for all’
and ‘for some.’ But the essential nature of possibility is the con-
junction of contingency and necessity. Contingency is defined as
the not impossible and the not necessary.
   We propose the existence of a metaphysical possibilism along-
side the notion of necessitism.
   “Actual possibilities” exist in minds and in quantum-mechan-
ical “possibility functions” It is what we might call “actual possi-
bilism,” the existence in our actual world of possibilities that may
never become actualized, but that have a presence as abstract enti-
ties that have been embodied as ideas in minds. In addition, we
include the many possibilities that occur at the microscopic level
when the quantum-mechanical probability-amplitude wave func-
tion collapses, making one of its many possibilities actual.
Actual Possibles
  Although there are no genuine possibilities in Lewis’s “possible
worlds,” we can explain the existence of “actual possibles” in meta-
physical terms using the possible world semantics of Saul Kripke,
            26         Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 who maintained that his semantics could be used to describe vari-
                 ous ways our actual world might have been. Unlike many other
                 “possible world” interpretations, Kripke accepts that empirical
Chapter 2




                 facts in the physical world are contingent, that many things might
                 have been otherwise. Kripke’s counterfactuals are genuinely dif-
                 ferent ways the actual world might have been or might become.
                       I will say something briefly about ‘possible worlds’. (I hope to elab-
                       orate elsewhere.) In the present monograph I argued against those
                       misuses of the concept that regard possible worlds as something like
                       distant planets, like our own surroundings but somehow existing in a
                       different dimension, or that lead to spurious problems of ‘transworld
                       identification’. Further, if one wishes to avoid the Weltangst and phil-
                       osophical confusions that many philosophers have associated with
                       the ‘worlds’ terminology, I recommended that ‘possible state (or his-
                       tory) of the world’, or ‘counterfactual situation’ might be better. One
                       should even remind oneself that the ‘worlds’ terminology can often be
                       replaced by modal talk—’It is possible that . . .’
                       ‘Possible worlds’ are total ‘ways the world might have been’, or states or
                       histories of the entire world.4
                    Following Kripke, we build a model structure M as an ordered
                 triple <G, K, R>. K is the set of all “possible worlds,” G is the
                 “actual world,” R is a reflexive relation on K, and G ε K.
                   If H1, H2, and H3 are three possible worlds in K, H1RH2 says
                 that H2 is “possible relative to” or “accessible from” H1, that every
                 proposition true in H2 is possible in H1.
                    Indeed, the H worlds and the actual world G are all mutually
                 accessible and each of these is possible relative to itself, since R is
                 reflexive.
                   Now the model system M assigns to each atomic formula
                 (propositional variable) P a truth-value of T or F in each world
                 H ε K.
                    Let us define the worlds H1, H2, and H3 as identical to the real
                 world G in all respects except the following statements describing
                 actions of a graduating college student Alice deciding on her next
                 step.

                   4       Naming and Necessity, p. 15, 18
                                                  Metaphysics             27

 In H1, the proposition “Alice accepts admission to Harvard
Medical School” is true, but false in other worlds, so “possible.”
  In H2, the proposition “Alice accepts admission to MIT” is true.




                                                                               Chapter 2
   In H3, the proposition “Alice postpones her decision and takes
a ‘gap year’” is true.
  At about the same time, in the actual world K, the statement
“Alice considers graduate school” is true.
   Note that the abstract information that corresponds to the three
possible worlds H is embodied physically in the matter (the neu-
rons of Alice’s brain) in the actual world and in the three possible
worlds. There is no issue with the “transworld identity” of Alice
as there would be with Lewis’s “modal realism,” because all these
possible worlds are in the same spatio-temporal domain.
   The metaphysical question is which of the three possible worlds
becomes the new actual world, say at time t. What is the funda-
mental structure of reality that supports the simultaneous exis-
tence of alternative possibilities?
   Just before time t, we can interpret the semantics of the model
structure M as saying that the above statements were “merely pos-
sible” thoughts about future action in Alice’s mind.
   Note also that just after the decision at time t, the three possible
alternatives remain in Alice’s experience recorder and reproducer
as memories.
  Some consequences of Alice’s alternative possible decisions.
   In the future of world H1, Alice’s research discovers the genetic
signals used in messaging by cancer cells and cancer is eliminated.
Several hundred million lives are saved (extended) in Alice’s life-
time.
   In the future of world H2, Alice engineers the miniaturization
of nuclear weapons so they are small enough to be delivered by
tiny drones. One is stolen from an air force base by a terrorist and
flown to an enemy country where millions of lives are lost. Alice
kills herself the next day.
            28       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    In the future of world H3, a mature Alice returns to school,
                 completes her Ph.D. in Philosophy at Princeton and writes a book
                 titled Free Will and Moral Responsibility.
Chapter 2




                 Actualism
                   Actualism appeals to philosophers who want the world to be
                 determined by physical laws and by theologians who want the
                 world to be in the hands of an omnipotent, omniscient, and
                 benevolent god.
                    Some physicists think the future is causally closed under deter-
                 ministic laws of nature and the “fixed past.” If the knowledge that a
                 Laplacian “super-intelligence” could gather about all the motions
                 of material particles at a single instant is fixed for all time, then
                 everything today might have been pre-determined from the earli-
                 est moments of the physical universe.
                   The special theory of relativity, for example, describes a four-
                 dimensional “block universe” in which all the possible events of
                 the future already exist alongside those of the past. It makes “fore-
                 knowledge” of the future conceivable.
                   Diodorus Cronus dazzled his contemporaries in the fourth
                 century BCE with sophisticated logical arguments, especially par-
                 adoxes, that “proved” there could be only one possible future.
                    Diodorus’ Master Argument is a set of propositions designed
                 to show that the actual is the only possible and that some true
                 statements about the future imply that the future is already deter-
                 mined. This follows logically from his observation that if some-
                 thing in the future is not going to happen, it must have been that
                 statements in the past that it would not happen must have been
                 true.
                    Modern day “actualists” include Daniel Dennett, for whom
                 determinism guarantees that the actual outcome is and always
                 was the only possible outcome. The notion that we can change the
                 future is absurd, says Dennett, change it from what to what?
                   The ancient philosophers debated the distinction between
                 necessity and contingency (between the a priori and the
                                                  Metaphysics             29

a posteriori). For them, necessity included events or concepts
that are logically necessary and physically necessary, contingency
those that are logically or physically possible. In the middle ages




                                                                               Chapter 2
and the enlightenment, necessity was often contrasted with free-
dom. In modern times it is often contrasted with mere chance.
   Causality is often confused with necessity, as if a causal chain
requires a deterministic necessity. But we can imagine chains
where the linked causes are statistical, and modern quantum
physics tells us that all events are only statistically caused, even if
for large macroscopic objects the statistical likelihood approaches
certainty for all practical purposes. The apparent deterministic
nature of physical laws is only an “adequate” determinism.
  In modern philosophy, modal theorists like David Lewis dis-
cuss counterfactuals that might be true in other “possible worlds.”
Lewis’ work at Princeton may have been inspired by the work of
Princeton scientist Hugh Everett III. Everett’s interpretation of
quantum mechanics replaces the “collapse” of the wave function
with a “splitting” of this world into multiple worlds.
   According to the Schrödinger equation of motion, the time evo-
lution of the wave function describes a “superposition” of possible
quantum states. Standard quantum mechanics says that interac-
tion of the quantum system with other objects causes the system
to collapse into one of these possible states, with probability given
by the square of the “probability amplitude.”
   One very important kind of interaction is a measurement by a
“conscious observer.”5
  In standard quantum theory, when a measurement is made,
the quantum system is “projected” or “collapsed” or “reduced”
randomly into a single one of the system’s allowed states. But if
the system was “prepared” in one of these “eigenstates,” then the
measurement will find it in that state with probability one (that is,
with certainty).
  So modern physics does not deny the possibility of a certain
measurement outcome, with probability equal to one, or even an
impossible one, with probability equal to zero. But these are very
special physical circumstances.
  5     See chapter 18
            30       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Identity
                  In information philosophy, identity depends on the total infor-
                 mation in an object or concept.
Chapter 2




                    We distinguish the intrinsic information inside the object (or
                 concept) from any relational information with respect to other
                 objects that we call extrinsic or external. We can “pick out” the
                 intrinsic information as that which is “self-identical” in an object.
                 The Greeks called this the πρὸς ἑαυτο - self-relation. or ἰδίος
                 ποιὸν, “peculiar qualifications” of the individual.
                    Self-identity, then, is the fact that the intrinsic information as
                 well as the extrinsic relational or dispositional information are
                 unique to this single object. No other object can have the same
                 disposition relative to other objects. This is an absolute kind of
                 identity. Some metaphysicians say that such identity is logically
                 necessary. Some say self-identity is the only identity, but we can
                 now support philosophers who argue for a relative identity.
                    To visualize our concept of information identity, imagine put-
                 ting yourself in the position of an object. Look out at the world
                 from its vantage point. No other object has that same view, that
                 same relation with the objects around you, especially its relation
                 with you. Now another object could have intrinsic information
                 identicality. We will in fact identify a very large number of objects
                 and concepts in the world that are intrinsically identical, includ-
                 ing natural and artifactual kinds, which we may call digital kinds,
                 since they are identical, bit for bit.
                   We can now offer three fundamental facts about identity:
                   Id1. Everything is identical to everything else in some respects.
                    Id2. Everything is different from everything else in some other
                 respects.
                    Id3. Everything is identical to itself in all respects at each
                 instant of time, but different in some respects from itself at any
                 other time.
                                                  Metaphysics            31

   We can rewrite these observations in terms of information phi-
losophy
  I1. Any two things have some information in common.




                                                                              Chapter 2
  I2. Any two things have some different information.
   I3.The identity of anything over time is changing because the
information in it (and about it) is changing with time.
   These three observations might be called information axioms.
Armed with them, we are in a position to “dis-solve” or decon-
struct some of the most famous metaphysical puzzles and para-
doxes.
A Criterion for Identity
   After accepting the fundamental fact that nothing is perfectly
identical to anything but itself, the criterion for relative identity,
for identical “in some respect,” or qua that respect, is that some
subset of the information in two different things must be the same
information, bit for bit.
   Relative identity means that a can be the same I as b, but not
the same E as b, where I is the sum of all the intrinsic properties
and relations - internal self-relations between an object’s differ-
ent parts. For physical objects, these could be within some physi-
cal boundary, subject to conditions of vagueness. In a biological
entity, it also includes the vast communications going on inside
and between the cells, which makes it much more than a mereo-
logical sum of its parts.
  The E for an object is the sum of extrinsic relations an object has
with things outside, including its disposition in space and time.
  Mathematically, ∫iF(x) = ∫iG(x) , but ∫eF(x) ≠ ∫eG(x) , which says
that F(x) and G(x) are identical over their intrinsic domains (i)
but differ over their extrinsic domains (e) .
  Set theoretically, in classical propositional calculus, we can say
that Ia is the set of intrinsic properties and internal relations that
            32       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 can be predicated in propositions about an object a. Ea is the set of
                 extrinsic relations. We can now describe why absolute identity is
                 limited to self-identity.
Chapter 2




                   If Ia + Ea = Ib + Eb, then a and b are one and the same object.
                    And, if Ia = Ib, then a and b are relatively identical, qua their
                 information content.
                   Note that while self-identity is reflexive, symmetric, and an
                 equivalence self-relation, relative identity is often none of these.
                 This is because, unlike Max Black’s identical spheres, Saul
                 Kripke’s natural kinds, and our many digital clones, some part of
                 the information in a and b may be identical, but the information
                 that is not identical may also differ in quantity. We can say that if
                 aRb is 60% identical, bRa may be only 10% identical.
                    Extensional quantification over things in analytic language
                 philosophy is about their set membership, which is dependent on
                 language references to the properties of objects.
                    By contrast, quantification in information philosophy is a cal-
                 culation of the total information content in the entities, in prin-
                 ciple, free of language ambiguities, in practice, very difficult.
                 A Criterion for Essence
                    Information identity suggests a possible definition of the
                 “essence” of an object, what is “essential” about it. Furthermore, if
                 two objects are considered “essentially” the same, we can pick out
                 the subset of information that corresponds to that “essence.”
                    A subset of the intrinsic information may be essential with
                 respect to (qua) some concept of the object. As Edmund Husserl
                 emphasized, our concepts about objects depend on our intentions,
                 our intended uses of the object, which give it different (pragmatic)
                 meanings. We can say that an essence is the subset of an object’s
                 information that is isomorphic to the information in the concept.
                   What we call a “concept” about a material object is usually some
                 subset of the information in the object, accurate to the extent that
                                                Metaphysics            33

the concept is isomorphic to that subset. By “picking out” differ-
ent subsets, we can sort objects. We can compare objects, finding
them similar qua one concept and different qua another concept.




                                                                            Chapter 2
We can say that “a = b” qua color but not qua size.
   But there are concepts that may have little to do with the
intrinsic peculiar information about an object. They are concepts
imposed on the object by our intended uses of it.
   We must distinguish these extrinsic essences – our external
ideas and concepts about what the object is – from the intrinsic
essences that depend only on the object itself and its own pur-
poses, if any. The essences we see in an object are subjective, but
we may define an objective essence as the total intrinsic informa-
tion, including internal messaging, in the object.
   Husserl and Gottlob Frege both pointed out that our ideas
are dependent on our personal experience. Experience constrains
and amplifies our possible concepts. Two persons may get the
general “sense” or “meaning” of something referred to, but Frege
said the “idea” or representation (Vorstellung) in each mind can be
very different, based on that individual’s experience. Information
philosophy locates the creation of meaning in the responses of the
experience recorder and reproducer (ERR) to different stimuli.
   The relation “identical to,” between two numerically distinct
concrete or abstract entities, is the source of logical puzzles and
language games through the ages that are little more than verbal
disputes. Most such disputes are easily resolved or “dis-solved” by
paying careful attention to all the information, all the particular
properties, intrinsic and extrinsic, of the two entities that may be
identical qua some particular properties.
Coinciding Objects
   The problem of coinciding objects (sometimes called coloca-
tion) is whether two things can be in the same place at the same
time. Common sense says that they cannot.
  John Locke described the impossibility that two things of the
same kind should exist in the same place at the same time.
            34       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     ANOTHER occasion the mind often takes of comparing, is the very
                     being of things, when, considering anything as existing at any deter-
                     mined time and place, we compare it with itself existing at another
Chapter 2




                     time, and thereon form the ideas of wherein identity and diversity.
                     When we see anything to be in any identity place in any instant of
                     time, we are sure (be it what it will) that it is that very thing, and not
                     another which at that same time exists in another place, how like and
                     undistinguishable soever it may be in all other respects: and in this
                     consists identity, when the ideas it is attributed to vary not at all from
                     what they were that moment wherein we consider their former exis-
                     tence, and to which we compare the present. For we never finding, nor
                     conceiving it possible, that two things of the same kind should exist in
                     the same place at the same time, we rightly conclude, that, whatever
                     exists anywhere at any time, excludes all of the same kind, and is there
                     itself alone. 6
                   In modern metaphysics, the problem of coinciding objects
                 should be the question of whether one mass of material – what the
                 Greeks called substrate or ὑποκείμενον (“the underlying”) – could
                 contain the whole of two (or more) separate objects containing
                 that same mass.
                   It is now common for many identity theorists to claim that the
                 whole of one object and the whole of another can occupy just
                 the same place at just the same time. Among them, according to
                 Michael Burke, are Roderick Chisholm, E. Jonathan Lowe,
                 Saul Kripke, and David Wiggins.
                    But it is not clear that this was the ancient problem in debates
                 between the Academic Skeptics and the Stoics. In modern times,
                 multiple ancient puzzles are used to pose the problem of coin-
                 ciding objects. One is the Statue and the Clay from which it is
                 sculpted. Another is Dion and Theon, known as the “body-minus”
                 problem. Another is Tibbles, the Cat and a similar cat missing his
                 tail. A third is the Stoic Chrysippus’s so-called “Growing Argu-
                 ment.”
                   All these modern claims that there can be two “coinciding
                 objects” can be shown to be distinguishing between different
                 aspects, in particular, the matter and form, of a single object,

                    6     Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Of Identity and Diversity, Book II,
                 ch xxvii
                                                              Metaphysics            35

giving them different names, and then arguing that they have dif-
ferent persistence conditions.
  Aristotle’s Metaphysics makes perhaps the earliest and clearest




                                                                                          Chapter 2
such distinction, using the example of a statue and its matter.
      The term “substance” (οὐσία) is used, if not in more, at least in
      four principal cases; for both the essence and the universal and the
      genus are held to be the substance of the particular (ἑκάστου), and
      fourthly the substrate (ὑποκείμενον). The substrate is that of which
      the rest are predicated, while it is not itself predicated of anything else.
      Hence we must first determine its nature, for the primary substrate
      (ὑποκείμενον) is considered to be in the truest sense substance.
      Now in one sense we call the matter (ὕλη ) the substrate; in another,
      the shape (μορφή); and in a third, the combination Both matter and
      form and their combination are said to be substrate of the two. By
      matter I mean, for instance, bronze; by shape, the arrangement of the
      form (τὸ σχῆμα τῆς ἰδέας); and by the combination of the two, the
      concrete thing: the statue (ἀνδριάς). Thus if the form is prior to the
      matter and more truly existent, by the same argument it will also be
      prior to the combination.7
  Aristotle clearly sees the statue as a combination of its form/
shape and its matter/clay.
   Of course Aristotle sees no problem with the body and soul of
a person being combined in one substance (οὐσία), but a hundred
or so years after Aristotle, the Academic Skeptics attacked the
Stoics, saying Stoics were making single things into dual beings,
two objects in the same place at the same time, but indistinguish-
able. And this may have been the beginning of the modern prob-
lem.
   The “two things” that bothered the Skeptics appeared first in the
“growing argument” described by the later second century BCE
Stoics, Posidonius and Mnesarchus, as reported by Stobaeus in
the fifth century CE. What is it that grows, they asked, the mate-
rial substance or the peculiar qualities of the individual? But note
that this is still matter versus form. The substance (matter) does
not grow. It is the individual that grows.
      The substance neither grows nor diminishes through addition or sub-
      traction, but simply alters, just as in the case of numbers and mea-
      sures. And it follows that it is in the case of peculiarly qualified indi-

  7       Metaphysics, Book VII, § iii, 1-2
            36        Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     viduals, such as Dion and Theon, that processes of both growth and
                     diminution arise.
                     Therefore each individual’s quality actually remains from its genera-
Chapter 2




                     tion to its destruction, in the case of destructible animals, plants and
                     the like. In the case of peculiarly qualified individuals they say that
                     there are two receptive parts, the one pertaining to the presence of the
                     substance, the other to that of the qualified individual...
                     The peculiarly qualified thing is not the same as its constituent sub-
                     stance. Nor on the other hand is it different from it, but is all but the
                     same, in that the substance both is a part of it and occupies the same
                     place as it, whereas whatever is called different from something must
                     be separated from it and not be thought of as even part of it...8
                    Like Aristotle, the Stoics were distinguishing the individual’s
                 “constituent substance” from the “peculiar qualifications” of the
                 individual.
                    The Stoic term for “constituent substance” or substrate, follow-
                 ing Aristotle, was ὑποκείμενον. Their term for the unique person,
                 possibly separate from the material body, was ἰδίος ποιὸν - a par-
                 ticular individual “who,” for example, Socrates, as opposed to
                 κοινός ποιὸν, a general “whoness,” for example, a human being.
                   But in the vehement debates of the third century BCE the Aca-
                 demic skeptics laughed at the Stoics for seeing a dual nature in
                 man. Their most famous puzzle was the coinciding objects of Dion
                 and Theon (reframed by Peter Geach as the puzzle of Tibbles,
                 the Cat and a similar cat lacking a tail).
                    Plutarch, writing in the first century CE, accused the Stoics
                 of “crazy arithmetic” and absurdity, that “each of us is a pair of
                 twins, two-natured and double, joined in some parts but separate
                 in others, two bodies sharing the same color, the same shape, the
                 same weight, the same place,”
                     Yet this difference and distinction in us no one has marked off or dis-
                     criminated, nor have we perceived that we are born double, always in
                     flux with one part of ourselves, while remaining the same people from
                     birth to death with the other...
                    8     Stobaeus (I,177,21 - 179,17, in The Hellenistic Philosophers, A.A.Long and
                 D.N.Sedley, v.1, p.168
                                                           Metaphysics                37

    If when we hear Pentheus in the tragedy say that he sees two suns and
    a double Thebes we say he is not seeing but mis-seeing, going crazy in
    his arithmetic, then when these people propose that, not one city, but




                                                                                           Chapter 2
    all men, animals, trees, furniture, implements and clothes are double
    and two-natured, shall we not reject them as forcing us to misthink
    rather than to think?9
   Another early statement is in the first century BCE.
    That what concerns the peculiarly qualified is not the same as what
    concerns the substance, Mnesarchus says is clear. For things which are
    the same should have the same properties. For if, for the sake of argu-
    ment, someone were to mould a horse, squash it, then make a dog, it
    would be reasonable for us on seeing this to say that this previously
    did not exist but now does exist. So what is said when it comes to the
    qualified thing is different.
    So too in general when it comes to substance, to hold that we are
    the same as our substances seems unconvincing. For it often comes
    about that the substance exists before something’s generation, before
    Socrates’ generation, say, when Socrates does not yet exist, and that
    after Socrates’ destruction the substance remains although he no
    longer exists.10
An Information Analysis of “Coinciding Objects”
   Most of these metaphysical puzzles start with a single object,
then separate it into its matter and its form, giving each of them
names and declaring them to be two coinciding objects. Next we
postulate a change in either the matter or the form, or both. It is
of course impossible to make a change in one without the other
changing, since we in fact have only one object.
   But our puzzle maker asks us to focus on one and insist that the
change has affected the status of only that one, usually claiming
that the change has caused that one to cease to exist. This follows
an ancient view that any change in material constitutes a change
in identity. But the modern metaphysicist knows that all objects
are always changing and that a change in identity may always pre-
serve some information of an entity. The puzzle claims that an
   9      “Against the Stoics on Common Conceptions” 1083, The Hellenistic Philoso-
phers, A.A.Long and D.N.Sedley, v.1, p.166-7
   10     ibid, p.168
            38       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 aspect of the object persists if the relative identity, or identity “in
                 some respect” has not changed.
                   To create a paradox, we use two of our axioms about identity,
Chapter 2




                   Id1. Everything is identical to everything else in some respects.
                    Id2. Everything is different from everything else in some other
                 respects.
                    We (in our minds) “pick out” one respect whose identity per-
                 sists over time because of Id1 and a second respect which changes
                 in time because of Id2.
                    We now have one object that both persists and does not persist
                 (in different respects, of course), the very essence of a paradox.
                 We call them different objects to create the puzzle.
                    For example, in the case of the statue and the clay, Mnesarchus’s
                 original version assumed that someone moulds a horse, then
                 squashes it. We are asked to pick out the horse’s shape or form.
                 The act of squashing changes that shape into another relatively
                 amorphous shape. The object changes its identity with respect
                 to its shape. Mnesarchus said it would be reasonable to see this
                 sequence of events as something coming into existence and then
                 ceasing to exist. The most obvious thing changing is the horse
                 shape that we name “statue.”
                    By design of the puzzle, there is no change in the amount of
                 clay, so the matter is considered identical over time with respect
                 to the amount of clay. The clay persists.
                    We now claim to have seen a difference in persistence condi-
                 tions. The object qua clay persists. The object qua statue goes in
                 and out of existence.
                   But this is just a way of talking about what has happened because
                 a human observer has “picked out” two different aspects of the
                 one object. As the statue is being smashed beyond recognition,
                 every part of the clay must move to a new position that accom-
                 modates the change in shape of the statue. There are changes in
                                                  Metaphysics            39

the clay with identical information to the change in the shape of
the statue. These we ignore to set up the puzzle.
   In more modern versions of the statue and clay puzzle, we can




                                                                              Chapter 2
make a change in the matter, for example by breaking off an arm
and replacing it with a new arm made of different material but
restoring the shape. We ignore the change in form, although it
was obviously a drastic change until the restoration, and we focus
on the clay, making the claim that the original clay has ceased to
exist and new clay come into existence.
  In either case, the claim to see different persistence conditions is
the result of focusing on different subsets of the total information.
   When identity theorists say that the whole of one object and
the whole of another can occupy just the same place at just the
same time, they are never talking about two objects of the same
type, kind, or sort. They are always “picking out” different aspects
of a single object and giving them differing existential status.
Composition (Parts and Wholes)
   Debates about the relation of parts to wholes is a major part
of modern metaphysics. Many puzzles have to do with different
persistence conditions of the “parts” of a composited whole, as we
saw with the idea of coinciding objects.
   “Mereological universalism” or extensional mereology is an
abstract idea, defined in 1937 by Stanislaw Leśniewski and later
by Henry Leonard and Nelson Goodman (1940). It claims that
any collection of things, for example the members of a set in sym-
bolic logic, can be considered as the parts of a whole, a “fusion”
or “mereological sum,” and thus can compose an object. Critics
of this idea says that such arbitrary collections are just “scattered
objects.” A mind-independent connection between things is
needed for them to be considered integral “parts.”
  That connection is to be found in the information that led to the
whole in the first place and/or is now maintaining that integrity.
            40       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    “Mereological essentialism” is Roderick Chisholm’s radical
                 idea that every whole has its parts necessarily and in every pos-
                 sible world. This goes too far. No physical object can maintain its
Chapter 2




                 parts indefinitely and freeze its identity over time. Recall our third
                 axiom of identity:
                    Id3. Everything is identical to itself in all respects at each
                 instant of time, but different in some respects from itself at any
                 other time.
                    “Mereological nihilism” is the opposite extreme. Peter van
                 Inwagen and the early Peter Unger denied the existence of
                 composites, seeing them as simples (partless entities) arranged to
                 look like a composite object. For van Inwagen, a table is “simples
                 arranged table-wise.”
                    It is the information in the process that is doing the arranging is
                 responsible for the composite whole.
                   Van Inwagen made a surprising exception for living objects. He
                 bases the composite nature of biological entities on the Cartesian
                 dualist view that humans are thinking beings!
                   Van Inwagen’s says that his argument for living beings as
                 composite objects is based on the Cartesian “Cogito,” I think,
                 therefore I am.
                     My “reasons for believing in organisms,” therefore, are reasons for
                     stopping where I do and not going on to maintain that there are no
                     organisms but are only simples arranged organically. My argument
                     for the existence of organisms, it will be remembered, involved in an
                     essential way the proposition that I exist.11
                   With van Inwagen’s exception of living things, and now that
                 Unger has abandoned his own form of nihilism in recent years,
                 both philosophers now accept that they themselves exist (sic).
                   Van Inwagen could see no obvious demarcation level at which
                 even the simplest living things should not be treated as composite
                 objects. We shall see that it is biological information that makes a
                 whole being out of just matter and energy.
                   Information philosophy and metaphysics ask who or what is
                 doing the arranging? Information provides a more fundamental
                   11    Material Beings, p.213
                                                  Metaphysics            41

reason than van Inwagen’s for treating living things as integrated
composites and not simply mereological sums of scattered objects.
Furthermore, it extends a true composite nature to artifacts and




                                                                              Chapter 2
to groupings of living things because they share a teleonomic
property – a purpose. And it shows how some “proper parts” of
these composites can have a holistic relation with their own parts,
enforcing transitivity of part/whole relations.
   A process that makes a composite object an integrated whole
we call teleonomic (following Colin Pittendrigh, Jacques
Monod, and Ernst Mayr) to distinguish it from a teleological
cause with a “telos” pre-existing all life. Teleonomy is the explana-
tory force behind van Inwagen’s “arrangement” of simple parts.
  Biological parts, which we can call biomers, are communicat-
ing systems that share information via biological messaging with
other parts of their wholes, and in many cases communicate with
other living and non-living parts of their environments. These
communications function to maintain the biological integrity (or
identity) of the organism and they control its growth. Artifacts
have their teleonomy imposed by their creators. For example,
when a carpenter cuts the wood for a table, it is the “telos,” the
end or purpose for the table, that “arranges it table-wise.”
   Biocommunications are messages transferring information,
inside the simplest single-cell organisms. For the first few bil-
lion years of life these were the only living things, and they still
dominate our planet. Their messages are the direct ancestors of
messages between cells in multicellular organisms. They evolved
to become all human communications, including the puzzles and
problems of metaphysics. A straight line of evolution goes from
the first biological message to this book of Great Problems.
   Like many metaphysical problems, composition arose in the
quarrels between Stoics and Academic skeptics that generated
several ancient puzzles still debated today. But it has roots in Aris-
totle’s definition of the essence (ουσία), the unchanging “Being”
of an object. We will show that Aristotle’s essentialism has a bio-
logical basis that is best understood today as a biomereological
            42       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 essentialism. It goes beyond mereological sums of scattered
                 objects because of the teleonomy shared between the parts,
                 whether living or dead, of a biomeric whole.
Chapter 2




                    The essence of an object, the “kind” or “sort” of object that it
                 “is”, its “constitution,” its “identity,” includes those “proper” parts
                 of the object without which it would cease to be that sort or kind.
                 Without a single essential part, it loses its absolute identity.
                    While this is strictly “true,” for all practical purposes most
                 objects retain the overwhelming fraction of the information that
                 describes them from moment to moment, so that information
                 philosophy offers a new and quantitative measure of “sameness”
                 to traditional philosophy, a measure that is difficult or impossible
                 to describe in ordinary language.
                    Nevertheless, since even the smallest change in time does make
                 an entity at t + Δt different from what it was at t, this has given rise
                 to the idea of “temporal parts.”
                 Temporal Parts
                   Philosophers and theologians, e.g., Alfred North Whitehead
                 and Jonathan Edwards, have argued for distinct temporal parts,
                 with the idea that each new part is a completely new creation ex
                 nihilo. The world is newly created at every instant! Even modern
                 physicists (e.g., Hugh Everett III) talk as if parallel universes are
                 brought into existence at an instant by quantum experiments that
                 collapse the wave function.
                    David Lewis, who claims there are many possible worlds,
                 is a proponent of many temporal parts. His theory of “perdur-
                 ance” asserts that the persistence through time of an object is as a
                 series of completely distinct entities, one for every instant of time.
                 Lewis’s work implies that the entire infinite number of his possible
                 worlds (as “real” and actual as our world, he claims), must also be
                 entirely created anew at every instant.
                   While this makes for great science fiction and helps to pop-
                 ularize metaphysics, at some point attempts to understand the
                                                Metaphysics            43

fundamental nature of reality must employ Occam’s Razor and
recognize the fundamental conservation laws of physics. If a new
temporal part is created ab initio, why should it bear any resem-




                                                                            Chapter 2
blance at all to its earlier version?
  It is extravagant in the extreme to suggest that all matter dis-
appears and reappears at every instant of time. It is astonishing
enough that matter can spontaneously be converted into energy
and back again at a later time.
   Most simple things (the elementary particles, the atoms and
molecules of ordinary matter, etc.) are in stable states that exist
continuously for long periods of time, and these compose larger
objects that persist through “endurance,” as Lewis describes the
alternative to his “perdurance.” Large objects are not absolutely
identical to themselves at earlier instants of time, but the differ-
ences are infinitesimal in terms of information content.
   The doctrine of temporal parts ignores the physical connec-
tions between all the “simples” at one instant and at the follow-
ing moment. It is as if this is an enormous version of the Zeno
paradox of the arrow. The arrow cannot possibly be moving when
examined at an instant. The basic laws of physics describe the con-
tinuous motions of every particle. They generally show very slow
changes in configuration – the organizational arrangement of the
particles that constitutes abstract information about an object.
   One might charitably interpret Lewis as admitting the endur-
ance of the elementary particles (or whatever partless simples he
might accept) and that perdurance is only describing the con-
stant change in configuration, the arrangement of the simples, the
information, that constitute or compose the whole.
   Then Lewis’s temporal parts would be a series of self-identical
objects that are not absolutely identical to their predecessors and
successors, just a temporal series of highly theoretical abstract
ideas, perhaps at the same level of (absurd) abstraction as his pos-
sible worlds?.
            44       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   Is a temporal part a reasonable concept? What exactly is a part?
                 And what constitutes a whole? For each concept, there is a strict
                 philosophical sense, an ordinary sense, and a functional or teleo-
Chapter 2




                 nomic sense.
                   In the strict sense, a part is just some subset of the whole. The
                 whole itself is sometimes called an “improper part.”
                    In the ordinary sense, a part is distinguishable, in principle sep-
                 arable, from other neighboring parts of some whole. The small-
                 est possible parts are those that have no smaller parts. In physics,
                 these are the atoms, or today the elementary particles, of matter.
                   In the functional sense, we can say that a part serves some pur-
                 pose in the whole. This means that it has may be considered a
                 whole in its own right, subordinate to any purpose of the whole
                 entity. Teleonomic examples are the pedals or wheel of a bicycle,
                 the organs of an animal body, or the organelles in a cell.
                    The teleonomic sense of an object is that it seems to have a
                 purpose, the Greeks called it a telos, either intrinsic as in all living
                 things, or extrinsic as in all artifacts, where the purpose was
                 invented by the object’s creator.
                   The most important example of a teleonomic process is of
                 course biology. Every biological organism starts with a first cell
                 that contains all the information needed to accomplish its “pur-
                 pose,” to grow into a fully developed individual, and, for some, to
                 procreate others of its kind.
                   By contrast, when a philosopher picks out an arbitrary part of
                 something, declaring it to be a whole something for philosophical
                 purposes, perhaps naming it, the purpose is simply the philoso-
                 pher’s intention of analyzing it further.
                    For example, something that has no natural or artifactual basis,
                 that does not “carve nature at the joints,” as Plato described it, that
                 arbitrarily and violently divides the otherwise indivisible, may be
                 a perfectly valid philosophical “idea,” an abstract entity.
                                                      Metaphysics          45

  But temporal parts do not “carve nature at the joints.” They do
not capture the fundamental nature of reality.
  Temporal parts are bad metaphysics.




                                                                                Chapter 2
  Aristotelian Essentialism
  Aristotle knew that most living things can survive the loss of
various parts (limbs, for example), but not others (the head). By
analogy, he thought that other objects (and even concepts) could
have parts (or properties) that are essential to its definition and
other properties or qualities that are merely accidental.
  Aristotelian essentialism is the study of those essential parts.
   For Aristotle, and in ordinary use, not every part of a whole
is a necessary part (let alone in all possible worlds). Much of the
verbal quibbling in metaphysical disputes is about objects that are
defined by language conventions as opposed to “natural kinds”
that we can recognize by their information contents.
   When we can identify the origin and current processing of that
information, we have the deep metaphysical sense of essence.
Aristotle called the arrangement “the scheme of the ideas.”
   By matter I mean, for instance, bronze; by shape, the arrangement of
   the form (τὸ σχῆμα τῆς ἰδέας); and by the combination of the two, the
   concrete thing: the statue (ἀνδριάς)12
  Information philosophy provides the deep reason behind
Aristotle’s essentialism for living things and artifacts.
   The “parts” of biological organisms are created and maintained
(arranged) by anti-entropic processes that distribute matter and
energy to all the vital parts. There is a purpose or “telos.” Aris-
totle called it a built-in telos or “entelechy” (loosely translated
as “having the final cause within”). The telos is implemented by
messaging between all the vital parts or “proper parts.” A bio-
mereological essentialism notes that every biomer (a biological
part) is normally in direct or indirect communication with vast
numbers of other biomers in the living organism and with the
extra-cellular environment. Communication is information that

  12   Metaphysics, Book VII, § vii
            46       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 is neither matter nor energy. It is the ideal content of the message
                 that implements the organism’s “telos.” Some examples...
                   • Human artifacts. Here the “telos” comes from the creator.
Chapter 2




                 The leg of a table is an essential part of the original design. Such
                 proper parts often have recognizable functions, so when they are
                 missing the whole is no longer functional.
                   • Physical combinations of elementary particles into nuclei and
                 chemically emergent combinations of atoms – water from hydro-
                 gen and oxygen and salt from sodium and chlorine.
                    • Cosmological and other material objects formed with an
                 anti-entropic process that created their information. Astronomi-
                 cal bodies were pulled together by gravity into information struc-
                 tures. Crystals grow information rich structures (e.g., snowflakes).
                   Many of these “wholes” can survive the loss of some parts. But
                 we are back quibbling. When their efficient/material causes and
                 their formal and final causes are “teleonomic” and not simply
                 arbitrary human conventions, we can say these are “natural kinds.”
                    The problem of composition becomes more severe when some
                 metaphysicians consider matter to be infinitely divisible, just as
                 the real number line contains an infinite number of numbers
                 between any two numbers (and a higher order of infinity of irra-
                 tional numbers!).
                    By contrast, the metaphysicist’s view is that matter is discrete,
                 not infinitely divisible like the continuous spatial and tempo-
                 ral dimensions. The Greek materialists argued for simple atoms
                 separated by a void. Ludwig Boltzmann and Albert Einstein
                 showed that the atoms of nineteenth-century chemistry really
                 exist. In modern physics the simplest elementary particles are
                 quarks, leptons, and bosons. So let’s suppose that we have a region
                 of space with two oxygen atoms in it. It seems reasonable to say
                 that it contains two simple things (the atoms).
                   Peter van Inwagen denies the mereological sum. David
                 Lewis defends it. Recent mereological debates in metaphysics
                 have taken this form:
                                                  Metaphysics            47

  Mereological nihilist: There are two things in this region.
   Mereological universalist: There are three things in this region
(the two simples and the mereological sum).




                                                                              Chapter 2
   Now a metaphysicist can still argue cleverly and cogently about
the proper number of parts and the choice of the proper whole.
The oxygen atoms each contain eight protons, eight neutrons, and
eight electrons. So one possible count is the 48 sub-atomic par-
ticles that are visible. We can go deeper by noting that the nuclear
particles are each made up of three quarks, which are not observ-
able. We then can count 112 parts to the whole?
   And the metaphysicist has a strong argument for the two
simple atoms to be considered a whole. If the two atoms are very
close, they can form an oxygen molecule. Even when disassoci-
ated, quantum mechanics that treats them as a quasi-molecule is
more accurate than a description as two independent atoms.
Why Modal Logic Is Not Metaphysics
   Modal logicians from Ruth Barcan Marcus to Saul Kripke,
David Lewis, and the necessicist Timothy Williamson are right
to claim metaphysical necessity as the case in the purely abstract
informational world of logic and mathematics. But when infor-
mation is embodied in concrete matter, which is subject to the
laws of quantum physics and ontological chance, the fundamental
nature of material reality is possibilist.
   There are two reasons for the failure of modal logic to represent
metaphysical reality. The first is that information is vastly superior
to language as a representation of reality. The second is that truths
and necessity cannot be the basis for metaphysical possibility.
   Possible world semantics is a way of talking about universes
of discourse - sets of true propositions - that considers them
“worlds.” It may be the last gasp of the attempt by logical positiv-
ism and analytic language philosophy to represent all knowledge
of objects in terms of words.
            48       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   Ludwig Wittgenstein’s core idea from the Tractatus had the
                 same goal as Gottfried Leibniz’s ambiguity-free universal lan-
                 guage,
Chapter 2




                    “The totality of true propositions is the whole of natural science
                 (or the whole corpus of the natural sciences)”13
                    Information philosophy has shown that the meaning of words
                 depends on the experiences recalled in minds by the experience
                 recorder and reproducer (ERR).14 Since every human being has
                 a different set of experiences, there will always be variations in
                 meaning about words between different persons.
                    The goal of intersubjective agreement in an open community of
                 inquirers hopes to eliminate those differences, but representation
                 of knowledge in words will always remain a barrier and source of
                 philosophical confusion. The physical sciences use analytic differ-
                 ential equations to describe the deterministic and continuous time
                 evolution of simple material objects, which is a great advance over
                 ambiguous words. But these equations fail at the quantum level
                 and where discrete digital messages are being exchanged between
                 biological interactors. Moreover, while mathematical methods are
                 precise, their significance is not easily grasped.
                    The very best representation of knowledge is with a dynamic
                 and interactive model of an information structure, what Ludwig
                 Wittgenstein may have seen as a model and “picture of reality.”
                 Today that is a three-dimensional model implemented in a digi-
                 tal computer with a high-resolution display, even a virtual reality
                 display, some day visible on the Internet. While computer models
                 are only “simulations” of reality, they incorporate the best “laws”
                 of physics, chemistry, and biology.
                    Sadly, modal logicians have never proposed more than a hand-
                 ful of specific propositions for their possible worlds, and many
                 of these generated controversies, even paradoxes, about sub-
                 stitutivity of presumed identicals in modal contexts. Word and
                 object have degenerated to words and objections. By comparison,
                 molecular models of the extraordinary biological machines that
                   13   Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 4.11
                   14   See Appendix E.
                                                  Metaphysics            49

have evolved to keep us alive and let us think can be “shown,” not
said, just as Wittgenstein imagined.
   His later work can be summed up as the failure of language




                                                                              Chapter 2
to be a picture of reality. Information philosophy gives us that
picture, not just a two-dimensional snapshot, but a lifelike anima-
tion and visualization of the fundamental nature of metaphysical
reality.
   Our information model incorporates the irreducible onto-
logical chance and future contingency of quantum physics. The
claimed “necessity of identity,” and the “necessary a posteriori” of
natural and artificial digital “kinds” with identical intrinsic infor-
mation content are just more “ways of talking.” There is no neces-
sity in the physical world.
  Truths and necessity are ideal concepts “true in all possible
worlds,” because they are independent of the physical world. They
have great appeal as eternal ideas “outside space and time.”
   Possible worlds semantics defines necessity as “propositions
true in all possible worlds” and possibility as “propositions true
in some possible worlds.” There is no contingency here, as the
only allowed propositions are either true or false. Modal logicians
have little knowledge of our actual physical world and zero factual
knowledge, by definition, of other possible worlds. The possible
worlds of “modal realism” are all actual worlds, deterministic and
eliminatively materialist. There are no possibilities in possible
worlds, even the equally deterministic “many worlds” of physics.
  A necessicist metaphysics is only a half-truth. Without meta-
physical possibility, we cannot account for the information in the
universe today, nor can we explain the cosmic, biological, and
human creation of new information in our free and open future.
  Necessitism and possibilism are another variation of the great
duals of idealism and materialism.15 See possibilist.com.
  History of Metaphysics
   Metaphysics has signified many things in the history of phi-
losophy, but it has not strayed far from a literal reading of “beyond

  15    See the table of dualisms in chapter 9.
            50       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 the physical.” The term was invented by the first-century BCE
                 head of Aristotle’s Peripatetic school, Andronicus of Rhodes,
                 who edited and arranged Aristotle’s works, giving the name Meta-
Chapter 2




                 physics (τα μετα τα φυσικα βιβλια), literally “the books beyond
                 the physics,” perhaps the books to be read after reading Aristotle’s
                 books on nature, which he called the Physics.
                     Aristotle never used the term metaphysics. For Plato, Aristo-
                 tle’s master, the realm of abstract ideas was more “real” than that
                 of physical objects, because ideas could be more permanent (the
                 Being of Parmenides), whereas material objects are constantly
                 changing (the Becoming of Heraclitus). Neoplatonists like
                 Porphyry worried about the existential status of the Platonic
                 ideas. Does Being exist? What does it mean to say “Being Is”?
                   Aristotle’s original concerns in his “First Philosophy” were
                 ontology (the science of being), cosmology (the fundamental pro-
                 cesses and original causes of physical things), and theology (is a
                 god required as a "first mover" or “first cause?”).
                    Aristotle’s Physics describes four “causes” or “explanations”
                 (aitia) of change and movement of objects already existing in
                 the universe (the ideal formal and final causes, vs. the efficient
                 and material causes). Aristotle’s metaphysics can then be seen as
                 explanations for existence itself. What exists? What is it to be?
                 What processes can bring things into (or out of) existence? Is
                 there a cause or explanation for the universe as a whole?
                    In critical philosophical discourse, metaphysics has perhaps
                 been tarnished by its Latinate translation as “supernatural,” with
                 its strong theological implications. But from the beginning, Aris-
                 totle’s books on “First Philosophy” considered God among the
                 possible causes of the fundamental things in the universe. Tracing
                 the regress of causes back in time as an infinite chain, Aristotle
                 postulated a first cause or “uncaused cause.” Where every motion
                 needs a prior mover to explain it, he postulated an “unmoved first
                 mover.” These postulates became a major element of theology
                 down to modern times.
                                                       Metaphysics          51


   Metaphysics is the division of philosophy which includes ontol-
ogy, or the science of being, and cosmology, or the science of the
fundamental causes and processes of things. The primary mean-




                                                                                 Chapter 2
ing of metaphysics is derived from those discussions by Aristotle
which later commentators suggested should be read before Aris-
totle's great works on Physics and other subjects.
   For medieval philosophers, metaphysics was understood as the
science of the supersensible. Albertus Magnus called it sci-
ence beyond the physical. Thomas Aquinas narrowed it to the
cognition of God. Aquinas argued that 1) God had given man the
power of reason, 2) God had used reason to create the universe, so
that 3) man can use reason alone to understand the world.
  John Duns Scotus disagreed with Aquinas, arguing that God’s
omnipotence is not constrained by reason. God has freedom of
the will, so only study of the world as it has been created can yield
knowledge of the world and thus God. Scotus was arguably the
origin of British empiricism, just as Aquinas was the source of
Continental rationalism.
   René Descartes began a turn from what exists to knowledge
of what exists. He changed the emphasis from a study of being to a
study of the conditions of knowledge or epistemology. For empir-
icists in England like John Locke and David Hume, metaphysics
includes the “primary” things beyond psychology and “second-
ary” sensory experiences. They denied that any knowledge was
possible apart from experimental and mathematical reasoning.
Hume thought metaphysics is sophistry and illusion.
   If we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics,
   for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning con-
   cerning quantity or number? No. Does it contain any experimental
   reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence? No. Commit it
   then to the flames: for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illu-
   sion.16

  16   (Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, section XII)
            52       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   In Germany, Immanuel Kant’s Critiques of Reason claimed
                 a transcendental and noumenal realm for pure, or a priori, reason
                 beyond the merely phenomenal. The phenomenal realm is deter-
Chapter 2




                 ministic, matter governed by Newton’s laws of motion. The nou-
                 menal is the metaphysical realm of the “things themselves” along
                 with freedom, God, and immortality. Kant also identified ontol-
                 ogy not with the inaccessible things themselves but what we can
                 think - and reason - about the things themselves. In either case, he
                 thought metaphysical knowledge might be impossible for “finite”
                 minds.
                    The notion that metaphysics transcends experience and the
                 material world led to nineteenth-century positivists like August
                 Comte and Ernst Mach, and twentieth-century empiricists
                 like Rudolf Carnap and Moritz Schlick, also denying the
                 possibility of metaphysical knowledge.
                    Naturalism is the anti-metaphysical claim that there is nothing
                 in the world beyond the material (including energy), that every-
                 thing follows “laws of nature,” and that these laws are both causal
                 and deterministic. So “supernatural” appears to imply the free-
                 dom to break the laws of nature. Information philosophy denies
                 the supernatural. But it defends immaterial information as that
                 which constitutes the human spirit, or soul, the “ghost in the
                 machine.” And it defends ontological chance as the generator of
                 novel possibilities that are not determined by the “fixed past.”
                    Positivism is the claim that the only valid source of knowledge
                 is sensory experience, reinforced by logic and mathematics.
                 Together these provide the empirical evidence for science. Com-
                 tean positivism rejected metaphysics and theology as obsolete
                 earlier phases in the development of knowledge.
                    Mach’s positivism claimed that science consists entirely of
                 “economic summaries” of the facts (the results of experiments).
                 He rejected theories about unobservable things like Ludwig
                 Boltzmann’s atoms, just a few years before Albert Einstein
                 used Boltzmann’s work to prove that atoms exist.
                                               Metaphysics           53

  The logical positivism of Bertrand Russell and Ludwig
Wittgenstein claims that all valid knowledge is scientific
knowledge, though science is often criticized for “reducing” all




                                                                          Chapter 2
phenomena to physical or chemical events. The logical positivists
may have identified ontology not with the things themselves but
what we can say - using concepts and language - about the things
themselves. Logical positivists and the logical empiricists of the
Vienna Circle asserted that all knowledge is scientific knowledge,
that it is derived from experience, i.e., from verifiable observa-
tions. They added the logical analysis of language as a tool for
solving philosophical problems. They divided statements into
those reducible to simpler statements about experience and those
with no empirical basis, which they called “metaphysical” and
“meaningless.”
   Most analytic language philosophers of the mid-twentieth
century continued to deny traditional metaphysics, which P. F.
Strawson famously called “obscure and panicky.” But starting
in the 1970’s a new group of analytic-language metaphysicians
defended a new materialist and determinist metaphysics grounded
in modal thinking about possible worlds.
  See metaphysicist.com for discussions of the work of David
Armstrong, Michael Burke, David Chalmers, Rod Chisholm,
Peter Geach, David Lewis, E. Jonathan Lowe, Trenton Merricks,
Huw Price, Willard van Orman Quine, Michael Rea, Nicholas
Rescher, Alan Sidelle, Ted Sider, Richard Taylor, Peter Unger,
Peter van Inwagen, David Wiggins, and Timothy Williamson.
        54   Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 3




                                 l o g y
                            Onto




                                                                This chapter on the web
                                        informationphilosopher.com/problems/ontology
                                                       Ontology         55


Ontology
  Ontology asks the question “what is there?”
   Eliminative materialism claims that nothing exists but mate-




                                                                         Chapter 3
rial particles, which makes many problems in ancient and modern
philosophy difficult if not insoluble. To be sure, we are made of
the same material as the ancients. With every breath we take, we
inspire 10 to 20 of the same molecules of air that sustained Aris-
totle. The total matter and energy of the universe is a fixed or
“conserved” quantity
   But information is not a fixed quantity. The stuff of thought and
creativity, information has been increasing since the beginning of
the universe. Information is an abstract entity. Digital information
is just bits of data, yet it is capable of representing any physical
object or process and arguably can also represent abstract con-
cepts.
   The ontological status of abstract concepts is a completely dif-
ferent question from the ontology of concrete physical objects,
though these questions have often been confounded in the history
of philosophy.
   Information philosophy provides distinct answers to these two
ontological questions. Physical objects are pure material or par-
ticles of energy that exist in the world of space and time. Abstract
concepts (like redness) are pure information, neither matter nor
energy, although they need matter for their embodiment and
energy for their communication. For example, the abstract idea
of “two” is embodied in any two objects. The idea of a circle is
embodied in a round object. Redness is embodied in the red pho-
tons being emitted or reflected from an object. The arrangement
of material objects, whether continuous matter like the wood in
a table top, or the momentary position of billiard balls, is pure
information.
  The ancients sometimes said that these abstract concepts do
not “exist,” but rather are said to “subsist.” Information philosophy
        56       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             claims that the “form” of an object can not be separated from the
             matter and so deserves to be ontological, even metaphysical?
               The contrast between physical objects and abstract concepts can
             be illustrated by the difference between invention and discovery.
Chapter 3




                We discover physical objects through our perceptions of them.
             To be sure, we invent our ideas about these objects, their descrip-
             tions, their names, theories of how they are structured and how
             they interact energetically - with one another and with us. But
             we cannot arbitrarily invent the natural world. We must test our
             theories with experiment. The experimental results select those
             theories that best fit the data, the information coming to us from
             the world. This makes our knowledge of an independent external
             world scientific knowledge.
                By contrast, we humans invent many abstract concepts such as
             the names we give to objects. We know that these cultural con-
             structs do not exist somewhere in nature as physical structures
             before we create them. Cultural knowledge is conventional, rela-
             tive to and dependent on the society that creates it.
                However, some of our invented abstract concepts seem to
             clearly have an existence that is independent of us, like the num-
             bers and the force of gravity.
                Consider the shape of a given object. The abstract representa-
             tion of the shape in the mind, or in a computer model, is (quanti-
             tatively) much less information than the total information in the
             shape of the physical object.
               But when the representation is accurate, it is isomorphic with a
             proper subset of the information in the object itself. We can assert
             that at least this similar information is in the world and should be
             included in our physical ontology.
             The Metaphysicist’s Approach
               Rather than simply ask “Do abstract entities like numbers and
             properties exist,” a metaphysicist prefers to ask in what way they
             might exist that is different from the way in which “concrete”
             objects exist.
                                                        Ontology           57

 Concrete objects can be seen and touched by our senses. They are
material, with causal relations that obey the physical laws of nature.
   Abstract entities are immaterial, but some of them can still play
a causal role, for example when agents use them to decide on their




                                                                            Chapter 3
actions, or when chance events (particularly at the quantum level)
go this way instead of that.
   Just as the mind is like software in the brain hardware, the abstract
information in a material object is the same kind of immaterial stuff
as the information in an abstract entity, a concept or a “non-existent
object.” Some philosophers say that such immaterial things “sub-
sist,” rather than exist.
   Broadly speaking, the distinction between concrete and abstract
objects corresponds to the distinction between the material and the
ideal. Ideas in minds are immaterial. They need the matter of the
brain to be embodied and some kind of energy to be communi-
cated to other minds. But they are not themselves matter or energy.
Those “eliminativists” who believe the natural world contains only
material things deny the “existence” of ideas and immaterial infor-
mation.
   Some ideas may be wholly fictitious and nonsensical, whether
mere possibles or even impossibles, like the round square, but most
ideas correspond to actual objects or processes going on in the
world. In either case, we can usually specify the informational con-
tent of the idea. Some anti-metaphysicians like to say that names of
non-existent objects are “meaningless.” But this is wrong. There is
a wealth of meaningful information in our knowledge base about
unicorns, for example.
   Metaphysicists identify abstract entities with the information
contained in them. They may be concepts that did not exist in
the world until they were invented. Or the information may have
existed in material structures and so we say they were discovered.
For example, the idea of the moon includes the concepts of a dis-
tinct shape, color, and even the appearance of a face.
  Many such ideas are mind-independent. Consider properties of
the moon. Most observers agree the shape is round and the color is
        58       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             white. (Actually, the moon is blacker than most any terrestrial black
             object. It only appears white compared to the blackness of space.)
             Some metaphysicians deny the existence of a universal property
             such as roundness or whiteness. But metaphysicists see the informa-
Chapter 3




             tion needed to specify circularity and the wavelengths of radiation
             that correspond to whiteness. And that information is embodied
             in the moon, just as a software program is embodied in computer
             hardware, and a mental idea is embodied in a brain.
               Many ideas or concepts are created by human minds by “pick-
             ing out” some of the information in physical objects. Whether such
             concepts “carve nature at the joints” (Plato, Phaedrus, 265e) depends
             on their usefulness in understanding the world.
               Plato’s Theory of the Forms held that an Idea like the circle pre-
             exists material beings, where Aristotle argued that the Ideas are
             abstractions from the most general properties, for example, in all
             the actual circles.
                Information philosophy restores so-called “non-existent objects”
             to our ontology. They consist of the same kind of information that
             provides the structure and process information of a concrete object.
             What we call a “concept” about an object is some subset of the infor-
             mation in the object, accurate to the extent that the concept is iso-
             morphic to that subset. By “picking out” different subsets, we can
             sort objects, e.g., into sets or “natural kinds.”
               Information philosophy settles deep philosophical issues about
             absolute and relative identity. All material objects are self-identical,
             despite concerns about vague boundaries. All objects have relations
             with other objects that can be interpreted as relative identities. All
             objects are identical to other objects in some respects and different
             qua other respects.
             Continuous or Discrete?
                Is the fundamental nature of reality continuous fields or discrete
             particles? What about space and time? Are they perhaps also digi-
             tal and discrete and only appear to be continuous? The Academic
             Skeptic argument about growth said that even the smallest mate-
             rial change destroys an entity and another entity appears. A change
                                                                Ontology         59

in the instant of time also destroys every material object, followed
instantaneously by the creation of an almost “identical” object.
   The Skeptics argued that an individual cannot survive material
change. When any material is subtracted or added, the entity ceases




                                                                                  Chapter 3
to exist and a new numerically distinct individual comes into exis-
tence. By contrast, the Stoics saw the identity of an individual as
its immaterial bundle of properties or qualities that they called the
“peculiarly qualified individual” or ἰδίος ποιὸν.
   The Stoics were following Aristotle. Like him, they called the
material substance or substrate ὑποκείμενον (or “the underlying”).
They believed the material substrate is “transformed” when matter
is lost or gained. The Stoics suggested these changes should be
called “generation (γενέσεις) and destruction (φθορὰς).” They said
it is wrong to call material changes “growth (αὐξήσεις) and decay
(φθίσεις).” These terms were already present in Aristotle, who said
that the form, as essence, is not generated. He said that generation
and destruction are material changes that do not persist. The Stoics
argued that the peculiarly qualified individual does persist. Aristotle
commented on his use of words about persistence:
      It is therefore obvious that the form (or whatever we should call the
      shape in the sensible thing) is not generated—generation does not apply
      to it—nor is the essence generated; for this is that which is induced in
      something else either by art or by nature or by potency. But we do cause
      a bronze sphere to be, for we produce it from bronze and a sphere; we
      induce the form into this particular matter, and the result is a bronze
      sphere...
      For if we consider the matter carefully, we should not even say with-
      out qualification that a statue is generated from wood, or a house from
      bricks; because that from which a thing is generated should not persist,
      but be changed. This, then, is why we speak in this way.1
   The basic definition of persistence is to show that an object is the
same object at different times. Although this may seem trivially obvi-
ous for ordinary objects, information philosophy shows that there is
strictly no such thing as identity over time. The “same” object at two
different times contains different information (minimally, its time
coordinate in four-dimensional space-time has changed). Metaphy-
sicians say it is better considered as two objects that are not abso-
lutely identical.

  1       Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book VII, § vii & viii.
        60          Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Willard van Orman Quine’s ontology proposed that we con-
             sider an object as existing in “stages.” Quine’s student, David Lewis
             argues that at every instant of time, every object disappears, ceases
             to exist, to be replaced by a very similar new entity.
Chapter 3




                As we saw in chapter 2, Lewis proposes temporal parts as a solu-
             tion to the problem of persistence. He calls his solution “perdur-
             ance,” which he distinguishes from “endurance,” in which the whole
             entity exists at all times. Lewis says:
                   Our question of overlap of worlds parallels the this-worldly problem of
                   identity through time; and our problem of accidental intrinsics paral-
                   lels a problem of temporary intrinsics, which is the traditional problem
                   of change. Let us say that something persists iff, somehow or other, it
                   exists at various times; this is the neutral word... Something perdures iff
                   it persists by having different temporal parts, or stages, at different times,
                   though no one part of it is wholly present at more than one time; whereas
                   it endures iff it persists by being wholly present at more than one time.
                   Perdurance corresponds to the way a road persists through space; part
                   of it is here and part of it is there, and no part is wholly present at two
                   different places. Endurance corresponds to the way a universal, if there
                   are such things, would be wholly present wherever and whenever it is
                   instantiated. Endurance involves overlap: the content of two different
                   times has the enduring thing as a common part. Perdurance does not.2
                Lewis’s perduring road parts do not exactly persist. They are
             intrinsically different parts. The enduring entity does persist sim-
             pliciter.
                In their thinking about persistence, many science-minded meta-
             physicians have been inspired by Einstein’s theory of special relativ-
             ity. The idea of a four-dimensional manifold of space and time sup-
             ports the idea that the “temporal parts” of an object are as distinct
             from one another as its spatial parts. This raises questions about its
             continued identity as it moves in space and time. But what if space
             and time are not themselves continuous?
                As to the more common sense view of endurance, it is metaphysi-
             cally necessary, both logically and in terms of an information analy-
             sis, the case that everything is identical to itself. Self-identity is a
             necessary truth. If you exist, you do not exist necessarily, but you are
             necessarily self-identical at each instant of time.
               2       On the Plurality of Worlds, p. 202
                                                        Ontology          61

   And if you exist, you are very nearly identical to yourself a
moment ago. But because your information content is a strong
function of time, you at time t + 1 is not exactly equal to you at
time t. This will make the perdurantists happy, but the change in




                                                                           Chapter 3
information is such a tiny fraction of your total that endurance
theorists are closer to the truth in the problem of persistence.
   But will this continuity of the preponderance of the intrinsic
information in an entity be continuous if there is a “gap” in the
time itself? Can we fall back to the pre-Socratic insight of Par-
menides, who said that if there is nothing between two objects,
they must be in contact? This felt like nonsense in the case of
space, is it the same with the time?
Meta-Ontology
   The deepest of all ontological questions for information phi-
losophy is the meta-ontological question, does information exist?
Does it help if we change the question and look for another way
information might exist, different from the way matter exists?
   Some say form - information subsists. But this feels like a verbal
quibble. We can say that whatever it consists of, it is not matter. But
this only says what it is not. More wordplay, ways of talking.
   Information consists of numbers, ideas, thoughts, composites
of simples, arrangements of matter, its organization, order out of
chaos, software in the hardware, above all, it is communications
between entities. But is it “nothing but,” nothing over and above
the matter itself?
  Quantificationally, information is increasing in the universe
while matter (with energy) is a conserved and constant quantity.
  Quintessentially, information is the metaphysical and
ontological locus of possibility and chance.
   Quantum mechanically, the one irreducible mystery is how a
purely abstract probability wave can acausally move information,
if not matter, from one place to another at speeds faster than light.
        62   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 4




                                   Wi l l
                              Free




                                                         This chapter on the web
                                            informationphilosopher.com/freedom
                                                                 Free Will   63


Free Will
   In our 2011 book Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy, our mind
model was a combination of a rudimentary experience recorder
and reproducer (ERR)1 and our two-stage model of free will. Recent




                                                                              Chapter 4
information analysis of the mind and the mind-body problem
has greatly strengthened our mind model. We now see the mind
as immaterial information, the “software in the hardware” of the
material brain, which we view as a biological information processor.
   Five years ago, we saw the quantum randomness in the first stage
as adding “uncaused” events to fit a picture of “event causality”
and to attack the “causal closure” of the eliminative materialists.
   Now that our mind model is unapologetically immaterial, it is
in fact an example of the kind of metaphysical entities that the
famous philosopher P. F. Strawson rejected as “panicky metaphys-
ics - uncaused causes, immaterial minds, non-empirical noume-
nal selves, non-event agent causes, and prime movers unmoved.”
We now endorse the idea of agent causality,2 in which the mind
has causal powers over the material world.
   We argue that freedom of the will begins in the pre-deliberative
thoughts of the agent. Although Albert Einstein was a strong
believer in determinism, he saw our thoughts and theories as “free
creations of the human mind.” These creative thoughts bring new
information into the universe. New information emerges3 from the
material and biological worlds to become part of the mental or
ideal world, even as it is embodied in the material world.
   Without alternative possibilities for an open future, there can
be no new information in the universe, in biology, or in human
minds. But there continues to be new information, in stars still
forming, in the evolution of new species, and in creative minds.
  1    See Appendix E.
  2    See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/agent-causality.html
  3    See chapter 27 on emergence and appendix F on cosmic creation..
        64     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             The Two-Stage Model of Free Will
                Our two-stage model is now the most plausible explana-
             tion, not only for human free will, but also for creativity, cited
             in the American Psychological Association’s Review of General
             Psychology as supporting the Campbell-Simonton BVSR model of
Chapter 4




             creative thought.4
                Given the “laws of nature” and the “fixed past” just before a
             decision, many philosophers wonder how a free agent can have
             any possible alternatives. This is partly because they imagine a
             timeline for the decision that shrinks the decision process to a
             single moment.




                Collapsing the decision to a single moment between the closed
             fixed past and the open ambiguous future makes it difficult to see
             the role of free thoughts of the mind - which bring new informa-
             tion into the universe - followed by the willed and adequately
             determined action in a temporal sequence, as shown here.




                But the two-stage model is not limited to a single step of gener-
             ating alternative possibilities followed by a single step of determi-
             nation by the will. It is better understood as a continuous process
             of possibilities generation by what we call the micro mind (parts
             of the brain that leave themselves open to noise) and adequately
             determined choices made from time to time by the macro mind
             (the same brain parts, perhaps, but now averaging over and filter-
             ing out the noisiness that might otherwise make the determina-
             tion random).
               4    Review of General Psychology, APA, 2013, Vol 17, No 4, 374
                                                         Free Will       65

  In particular, note that a special kind of decision might occur
when the macro mind finds that none of the current options are
good enough for the agent’s character and values to approve. The
macro mind then might figuratively say to the micro mind, “Think
again!” Thus we can say that the agent has control over the gen-




                                                                          Chapter 4
eration of alternative possibilities, without controlling the specific
new idea that may come to mind




   Many philosophers have puzzled how an agent could do oth-
erwise in exactly the same prior circumstances. Since humans
are intelligent organisms, and given the myriad of possible cir-
cumstances, it is impossible that an agent is ever in exactly the
same circumstances. The agent’s memory (stored in the experience
recorder and reproducer) of earlier similar circumstances guaran-
tees that.
   The two-stage model may make an artificial temporal separa-
tion between micro-mind creative randomness and macro-mind
deliberative evaluation. These two capabilities of the mind can
clearly be going on at the same time. That can be visualized by the
occasional decision to go back and think again, when the available
alternatives are not good enough to satisfy the demands of the
agent’s character and values, or by noticing that the subconscious
micro mind might be still generating possibilities while the macro
mind is in the middle of evaluations.
   Finally, not all decisions in the two-stage model end with an
adequately determined “de-liberation” or perhaps better we can
call it simply self-determination. Many times the evaluation of the
possibilities produces two or more alternatives that seem more or
less of equal value.
   In this case, the agent may choose randomly among those
alternatives, yet have very good reasons to take responsibility for
whichever one is chosen. This is related to the ancient liberty of
indifference.
        66       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                I like to call such a decision an “undetermined liberty,” because it
             remains undetermined at the moment of the decision. Though not
             determined by the deliberations, we can say that the agent “deliber-
             ately” chooses at random between equal options.
Chapter 4




               Undetermined liberties include Robert Kane’s Self-Forming
             Actions, although Kane limits his SFAs to “torn” decisions between
             moral and self-interested alternatives.
             Neuroscientific Evidence for the Two-Stage Model
               Benjamin Libet’s famous experiments are widely cited by com-
             patibilists and determinists as showing that the decision has been
             made a long time before the conscious will can act. We shall inter-
             pret them as supporting the temporal sequence in the two-stage
             model of free will, creating new information in the first stage.
                The original discovery that an electrical potential (of just a few
             microvolts - μV) is visible in the brain long before the appearance of
             conscious will was made by Kornhuber and Deecke (1964). They
             called it a “Bereitschaftspotential” or readiness potential.




               Figure 4-1. Kornhuber and Deecke “readiness potential”

                The neurobiologist John Eccles had speculated that the subject
             must become conscious of the intention to act before the onset of
             this readiness potential. Benjamin Libet decided to test Eccles’s idea.
                                                            Free Will       67

   Libet’s 1983 experiments measured the time when the subject
became consciously aware of the decision to move the finger. Libet
created a dot on the screen of an oscilloscope circulating like the
hand of a clock. The subject was asked to note the position of the
moving dot when he/she was aware of the conscious decision to
move a finger or wrist..




                                                                             Chapter 4
   As shown on the RP diagram, Libet found that although con-
scious awareness of the decision preceded the subject’s finger motion
by only 200 milliseconds (the up arrow), the rise in the readiness
potential was clearly visible at about 550 milliseconds before the flex
of the wrist (down arrow). The subject showed unconscious activity
to flex about 350 milliseconds before reporting conscious awareness
of the decision to flex. Indeed an earlier very slight rise in the readi-
ness potential can be seen as early as 1.5 seconds before the action.
  Of course the kinds of deliberative and evaluative processes that
are essential for free will involve much longer time periods than
those studied by Libet. Nevertheless, we can correlate the begin-
nings of the readiness potential (350ms before Libet’s “conscious
will” time “W” appears) with the early stage of the two-stage model,
when alternative possibilities are being generated, in part at random.




  Figure 4-2. Readiness potential and the two-stage model

   The early stage may be attributed to the subconscious, which
is capable of considering multiple alternatives (William James’
        68          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             “blooming, buzzing confusion”) that would congest the low-data-
             rate single stream of consciousness.
                Alfred Mele criticized the interpretation of the Libet results on
             two grounds. First, the appearance of the RP a half-second or more
             before the action in no way makes the RP the cause of the action.
Chapter 4




             It may simply mark the beginning of forming an intention to act.
             In our two-stage model, it corresponds to the agent’s thoughts that
             generate possible options, which may create new information.
                Libet himself argued that even if a decison has been made, there
             is enough time after the W moment (a window of opportunity per-
             haps 50 ms) to veto the action, but Mele’s second criticism points
             out that such examples of “free won’t” would not be captured in
             Libet experiments, because the recording device is triggered by the
             action (typically flicking the wrist) itself.
               Thus, although all Libet experiments ended with the wrist flick-
             ing, we are not justified in assuming that the rise of the RP (well
             before the moment of conscious will) is a cause of the wrist flicking.
               Libet knew that there were very likely other times when the RP
             rose, but which did not lead to a flick of the wrist. All such events
             could create immaterial information about new possibilities, but
             might not be acted upon immediately. Libet noted that in normal
             decisions we might deliberate all day.
                   We should also distinguish between deliberations about what choice of
                   action to adopt (including preplanning of when to act on such a choice),
                   and the final intention to actually “act now.” One may, after all, deliberate
                   all day about a choice but never act... However, conscious will definitely
                   can control whether the act takes place. We may view the unconscious
                   initiatives for voluntary actions as “burbling up” unconsciously in the
                   brain. The conscious will then selects which of these initiatives may go
                   forward to an action, or which ones to veto and abort so no act occurs.5
                We conclude that Libet’s neuroscientific experiments may be
             interpreted as supporting the two-stage model. We know little about
             what goes on in the early rise of the readiness potential. But only
             a dogmatic determinist would claim that it already contains and
             directly causes any later decision.
               5       B. Libet, Mind Time, pp.148-149
                                                               Free Will       69


History of the Free Will Problem6
  In our research on the history of the free will problem, we have
identified several thinkers who developed two-stage solutions to
the classical problem of free will, first William James, then Henri
Poincaré, Jacques Hadamard, Arthur Holly Compton, Karl




                                                                                Chapter 4
Popper, Daniel Dennett, Henry Margenau, Robert Kane,
David Sedley and Anthony Long, Roger Penrose, David
Layzer, Julia Annas, Alfred Mele, John Martin Fischer, Ste-
phen Kosslyn, Storrs McCall and E. J. Lowe, John Searle, and
Martin Heisenberg.7
  Some of course were more clear and comprehensive about the
two stagesthan others, but our goal is to give them all credit.8
  Recently we discovered a possible two-stage argument many cen-
turies before William James.
  Titus Lucretius Carus is our main source for the work of
Epicurus, who provided the first argument for chance with his
“swerve” of the atoms. Lucretius eloquently made Epicurus’ case.
Shortly after describing the swerve, he says:
   “If all motion is always one long chain, and new motion arises out of the
   old in order invariable, and if first-beginnings do not make by swerving
   a beginning of motion so as to break the decrees of fate, whence comes
   this free will?”9
   But now we have found evidence that Lucretius made the case
for alternative thoughts coming to mind before a willed decision,
and the possible new ideas sound very much like Epicurus’ random
swervings.
   Now listen, and hear what things stir the mind, and learn in a few words
   whence these things come into the mind. In the first place I tell you
   that many images of things are moving about in many ways and in all
   directions.10

  6    Doyle, 2011, chapter 7 is a 60-page history of the problem
  7    See Doyle, 2011, chapter 12, for these two-stage solutions.
  8    Also see informationphilosopher.com/freedom/two-stage_models.html
  9    De Rerum Natura, Book 2, 251
  10   De Rerum Natura, Book 4, 722
        70          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               This also sounds a great deal like William James’ “blooming,
             buzzing, confusion” of the subconscious and Libet’s “burbling up.”
                even in things plainly visible you can observe that, it is just as if the
                thing were all the while withdrawn and far removed from you. Then
                what wonder is it, if the mind misses everything except what it is itself
Chapter 4




                intent on?11
                Lucretius again sounds like James, who explains choice as the
             focusing of attention. Next comes the will (voluntas).
                Next I will say how it comes about that we can carry onwards our steps
                when we please...I say in the first place images of movement come in
                contact with our mind, and strike the mind, as I said before, After this
                comes will; for no one ever begins anything until the intelligence has
                first foreseen what it wills to do.12
               So Lucretius may have long ago captured the essence of the
             temporal sequence in our two-stage model.
               The classic problem of free will is to reconcile an element of free-
             dom with the apparent determinism in a world of causes and effects,
             a world of events in a great causal chain.
               Determinists deny any such freedom.
                Compatibilists redefine freedom. Although they say that our will
             is determined by prior events in the causal chain (including our rea-
             sons, motives, etc.), our will is in turn causing and determining our
             actions. Compatibilists say that determinism of our actions by our
             will allows us to take moral responsibility for our actions. This is
             correct. The second stage of our model makes us responsible.
                Libertarians think the will is free when a choice can be made that
             is not pre-determined or necessitated by prior events. The will is free
             when alternative choices could have been made with the same pre-
             existing conditions.
               Freedom of the will allows us to say, “I could have chosen (and
             done) otherwise.”
                In a deterministic world, everything that happens follows ineluc-
             tably from natural or divine laws. There is but one possible future.
             We cannot have chosen otherwise,
                In the more common sense view, we are free to shape our future,
             to be creative, to be unpredictable.
               11     De Rerum Natura, Book 4, 815
               12     De Rerum Natura, Book 4, 881
                                                             Free Will    71

   From the ancient Epicureans to modern quantum mechani-
cal indeterminists, some thinkers have suggested that chance or
randomness is an explanation for freedom, an explanation for the
unpredictability of a free and creative act. A truly random event
would break the causal chain and nullify determinism, providing




                                                                           Chapter 4
room for human freedom.
   Freedom of human action does require the randomness of abso-
lute unpredictability, but if our actions are the direct consequence
of a random event, we cannot feel responsible. That would be mere
indeterminism, as unsatisfactory as determinism.
  Moreover, indeterminism appears to threaten reason itself, which
seems to require certainty and causality to establish truth, knowl-
edge, and the laws of nature.
   Most philosophers in all ages have been committed to one or
more of the dogmas of determinism,13 refusing to admit any indeter-
minism or chance. Aristotle said chance was “obscure to human
reason.” Chryssipus described the case of “indeterminism is true”
as a disaster for reason. David Hume found “no medium betwixt
chance and necessity.” Many theologians thought chance atheistic,
doubting God’s omniscience,
  Many scientists agree that science is predicated on strict causality
and predictability, without which science itself, considered as the
search for causal laws, would be impossible.
  For those scientists, laws of nature would not be “laws” if they
were only statistical and probabilistic. Sadly for them, all laws of
nature turn out to be thoroughly statistical and our predictions
merely probable, though with probabilities approaching certainty.
Science is irreducibly statistical.
  But fortunately, for large objects the departure from deterministic
laws is unobservable. Probabilities become indistinguishable from
certainties, and we can show there is an “adequate (or statistical)
determinism”14
  Important elements of the model have been proposed by many
philosophers since Aristotle, the first indeterminist. A number of
modern philosophers and scientists, have proposed models of free

  13   See Doyle, 2011, chapter 9, for a review of many determinisms.
  14   See informationphilosopher.com/freedom/adequate_determinism.html
        72          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             will. But none of them has been able to locate the randomness so
             as to make free will “intelligible,” as libertarian Robert Kane puts it.
                The insoluble problem for previous free-will models has been to
             explain how a random event in the brain can be timed and located
             - perfectly synchronized! - so as to be relevant to a specific deci-
Chapter 4




             sion. The answer is it cannot be, for the simple reason that quantum
             events are totally unpredictable.
                The two-stage model is not a single random event, one per deci-
             sion, but many random events in the brain as a result of ever-present
             noise, both quantum and thermal noise, inherent in any informa-
             tion storage and communication system.
                The mind, like all biological systems, has evolved in the presence
             of constant noise and is able to ignore that noise, unless the noise
             provides a significant competitive advantage, which it clearly does
             as the basis for freedom and for creativity that brings new informa-
             tion into the universe.
                Let’s see how randomness in the two-stage model is never the
             direct cause of our decisions. Decisions are always adequately, i.e.,
             statistically, but near certainly, determined by reasons and motives.
                We assume that there are always many contributing causes for
             any event, and in particular for a mental decision. In both the New-
             ell-Simon “Blackboard” model15 and Bernard Baars’ “Theater of
             Consciousness” and “Global Workspace” models,16 there are many
             competing possibilities for our next thought or action. Where do
             they come from? And, most importantly, does the agent have any
             control over their generation?
               Each of these possibilities is the result of a sequence of events
             that goes back in an assumed causal chain until its beginning in an
             uncaused event. Aristotle called this original event an arche (ἀρχῆ),
             one whose major contributing cause (or causes) was itself uncaused.
                What this means is that tracing any particular sequence of events
             back in time will come to one event - a “starting point” or “fresh
             start” - Aristotle’s origin or arche - the dreaded “causa sui.” Today we
             say it must involve quantum indeterminacy.

               15     Newell and Simon, 1972
               16     Baars, 1997
                                                                Free Will      73

  Whether a particular thing happens, says Aristotle, may depend
on a series of causes that
    “goes back to some starting-point, which does not go back to something
    else. This, therefore, will be the starting-point of the fortuitous, and
    nothing else is the cause of its generation.”17




                                                                                Chapter 4
   We can thus in principle assign times, or ages, to the starting
points of the contributing causes of a decision. Some of these may
in fact go back before the birth of an agent, hereditary causes for
example. To the extent that such random causes adequately deter-
mine an action, we can understand why hard determinists think
that the agent has no control over such actions. Of course if we can
always opt out of an action at the last moment, so we retain control,
even if the origin of the option was inherited.
   Other contributing causes may be traceable back to environmen-
tal and developmental events, perhaps education, perhaps simply
life experiences, that were “character-forming” events. These and
genetic or hereditary causes would now be present in the mind of
the agent as fixed habits, with a very high probability of “adequately
determining” the agent’s actions in many situations.
  But other contributing causes of a specific option may have been
undetermined up to the very near past, even fractions of a second
before an important decision. The causal chains for these contribut-
ing causes may originate in the noisy brain. They include the free
generation of new alternative possibilities for thought or action
during the agent’s deliberations. They fit Aristotle’s criteria for causes
that “depend on us” (ἐφ’ ἡμῖν) and originate “within us” (ἐv ἡμῖν).
   Causes with these most recent starting points are the fundamen-
tal reason why an agent can do otherwise in what are essentially (up
to that starting point) the same circumstances.
   These alternatives are likely generated from our internal knowl-
edge of practical possibilities based on our past experience. They
are stored in our experience recorder and reproducer. Those that
are handed up by the ERR for consideration to Baars’ “executive
function” in his “Theater of Consciousness” may be filtered to some
extent by unconscious processes to be “within reason.” They likely
consist of random variations of similar actions willed many times
in the past.
  17    Metaphysics Book VI 1027b12-14
        74          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Note that the evaluation and selection of one of these possibilities
             by the will is as deterministic and causal a process as anything that a
             determinist or compatibilist could ask for, consistent with our cur-
             rent knowledge of the physical world.
               Remember also that instead of strict causal determinism, the
Chapter 4




             world offers only adequate (or statistical) determinism, and it is the
             random origins of possibilities that provides libertarian freedom of
             thought and adequately determined but not pre-determined action.
               Why have philosophers been unable for millennia to accept the
             common sense view that humans are free? Partly because their logic
             and language preoccupation makes them say that either determin-
             ism or indeterminism is “true,” and the other must be “false.” This is
             the standard (but flawed) argument against free will.
                But there is a deeper concern. If the origin of possibilities is truly
             random, have we lost the control needed to assert moral responsibil-
             ity? Can the two-stage model provide a measure of control over the
             creative generation of alternative possibilities that does not make
             them pre-determined? Let us see.
             The Standard Argument Against Free Will
                Simple variations of this standard argument are found through-
             out the somewhat unsophisticated philosophical literature on free
             will,18 and even in some of the most extensively cited work, for
             example, Galen Strawson’s “Basic Argument on the Impossibility
             of Moral Responsibility.”19
               The standard argument has two parts.
               If determinism is the case, the will is not free.
               If indeterminism and real chance exist, our will would not be in
             our control, we could not be responsible for randomly caused actions.
               The two-stage model provides the two essential requirements
             needed to defeat this standard argument
                The first requirement is some indeterminism (objective chance)
             to break the causal chain of determinism and to generate creative
             thoughts and alternative possibilities for action. But this indeter-
             minism must somehow not destroy our moral responsibility. It must
             not be the direct cause of action.
               18     See Doyle, 2011, chapter 4, for dozens of examples.
               19     Philosophical Studies: Vol. 75, No. 1/2, (Aug., 1994), pp. 5-24
                                                        Free Will        75

   Thus the second requirement is that our deliberations and evalu-
ations are “adequately” (or statistically) determined, so that we can
be responsible for our choices, so that they are “up to us.”
   “Adequate” (i.e., statistical) determinism means that the indeter-
ministic alternative possibilities themselves are not the direct cause




                                                                          Chapter 4
of our actions. The cause is the agent’s decision.
   Objective chance in the generation of alternatives means that at
least some of the possibilities are not causally determined by imme-
diately preceding events, so they are unpredictable by any agency,
including us. They can then be the source of the creativity that adds
new information to the universe.
  Chance gives us the “free” in free will.
  Adequate determinism gives us the “will” in free will.
  Thoughts come to us freely. Actions go from us willfully.
  We must admit indeterminism, but not permit it to produce random
actions as some Determinists mistakenly fear.
  We must also limit the determinism, but not eliminate it as some
Libertarians mistakenly think is necessary.
   The evaluation and careful deliberation of all the available
possibilities, both ingrained habits and creative new ideas, can be
recognized as “self-determination.” This makes us the responsible
“agent cause” of our actions.
    But we must not thing that our “self-determination” was in any
way pre-determined before we began to consider our possibilities.
Self-determination is only “adequately and statistically” determined.
It is not completely immune from random noise.
   Compatibilists should be comfortable that the reasons, motives,
feelings and desires of the agent are causal factors that were evalu-
ated by the agent during the second-stage deliberations and the ulti-
mate choice of an action.
  This is all that is needed for the agent to accept what Robert
Kane calls “ultimate responsibility” for the action.
  But some event acausality is a prerequisite for any kind of agent
causality that is not pre-determined by the moments before delib-
erations begin. This acausality is the quantum indeterminism, the
        76       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             ontological chance, that accompanies the new information creation
             in the first stage of the two-stage model, where the agent freely gen-
             erates alternative possibilities for action.
                The two-stage model of free will proves that our actions are not pre-
             determined, even from moments just before we begin thinking about
Chapter 4




             freely generating new options for action.
                We can summarize our criticism of the standard argument against
             free will in a few simple lines.
                “Free Will” is really two independent stages that combine a
             limited indeterminism with a limited determinism.
               First comes the “free” generation of alternative possibilities, then
             our adequately determined “willed” actions.
               Our thoughts are free. Our actions are willed.
               First “free,” then “will.”
             Possible Worlds and Alternative Possibilities
                In the twentieth century the study of modal logic (the truth con-
             ditions for statements about necessity and possibility) led to a model
             theory involving possible worlds. The philosopher David Lewis
             maintained there are an infinite number of possible worlds, all just
             as real for their inhabitants as our actual world. The physicist Hugh
             Everett III said that the world splits in two whenever a quantum
             experiment is performed.
               Lewis and Everett were materialists and determinists. In their
             worlds everything is determined by the laws of nature and the fixed
             past. Each world has but one future. Free will is an illusion.
                But Saul Kripke, who formulated the theory of possible world
             semantics for modal logic, described the use of possible worlds as
             representations of how our actual world might be. “‘Possible worlds’
             are total ‘ways the world might have been’,” he said, which means
             they can describe the alternative possibilities of our two-stage model
             for free will.
                                                         Free Will         77

   They are “counterfactual situations” in Kripke’s sense, involving
a single individual. Suppose the agent is considering five different
courses of action. During the second stage of evaluation and delib-
eration only one of the five options (each a “possible world”) will
become actualized.




                                                                            Chapter 4
  Note that Kripke’s possible worlds are extremely close to one
another, “nearby” in the sense of their total information content,
the difference between them is very small amount of information
compared to the typical examples given in possible worlds cases.
   For typical cases of a free decision, the possible worlds require
only small differences in the mind of a single person. Kripke argued
against the thesis that mind and body (or brain) are identical. In this
example, it would only be the thoughts in the mind of the agent that
pick out the possible world that will be actualized.
Free Will and Creativity
  Creativity requires that new information come into the world. It
must be information that was not implicit in earlier states of the
world. Information is only fixed in a deterministic universe.20
  It is new information creation that explains agent causality.
  When we create new information, we do it freely. Our thoughts
are “free creations of the human mind,” as Einstein said.
  Humans are conspicuous creators and consumers of new infor-
mation structures, altering the face of planet Earth. And we create
the constructed ideal world of thought, of intellect, of spirit, includ-
ing the invention of the laws of nature, followed by the discoveries
that confirm them experimentally.
  We are authors of our lives and co-creators of our natural world.

  20    See appendix A.
        78   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 5




                             Value




                                                         This chapter on the web
                                               informationphilosopher.com/value
                                                              Value        79


Value
   Is the Good something that exists in the world? Existentialists
thought not. They thought we have freedom, but saw freedom
as absurd, because there are no values to help choose. Without
values, no evaluations. Most religions place the origin of good in




                                                                            Chapter 5
a supernatural Being. Existentialists denied that Being. “God is
dead,” they said, and thus denied any essential objective Good.
   The traditional source of normative values, of morality, of ethics,
of what one “ought to do,” has been religion. It is often said that
science, the empirical study of the natural world, cannot possibly
help us to define the good. David Hume is often cited as saying
we cannot derive “Ought” from “Is.” This is sometimes called the
“fact/value” dichotomy. Science, it is said, can help us to do what
we decide to do. It can help with prudential or instrumental deci-
sions about “means,” but not with moral decisions that depend on
the intrinsic value of “ends.”
  It is difficult to generalize about the thousands of religions
invented over the ages by their prophets and founders, but most
include a code of moral behavior. Some founders told their fol-
lowers that they had simply discovered the correct moral codes.
Some prophets claim to have been explicitly told the “truth” about
good and evil in a conversation with God, or by a mystical vision.
With founders and prophets mostly long gone today, moral codes
are typically handed down by various traditions.
   The power of the institutions that has grown up around world
religions lies entirely in their ability to limit the knowledge of their
members to their beliefs about the “truth.” Where these traditions
vary in their beliefs, and they do disagree in fundamental ways,
they cannot possibly all be right, unless all cultural beliefs are rela-
tive, which they may well be at the present time.
  Humanists think that good and evil are human inventions, that
value systems are relative to a local community or society. “Man is
the measure of all things.” Comparative ethics is the study of dis-
parate value systems in the hope of finding come commonly held
        80     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             rules, for which one can claim some universal or objective sig-
             nificance, for example, the golden rule, “Do unto others” or com-
             mandments like “Thou shall not kill.” Some philosophers make
             human life an objective good. Some make one own’s life the ulti-
             mate good. Some think the good is the maximization of pleasure,
             or happiness, or well-being, for all humans (or maybe just one
Chapter 5




             own’s family, tribe, community, or nation?),
                Modern bioethicists hope to avoid all this relativism by situat-
             ing value in all life, seeing humanism as short-sighted, if general-
             ized, self-interest. A variety of ancient religions looked to the Sun
             as the sustainer of all life and thus found an objective good outside
             of human life. They anthropomorphized the sun or the “bright
             sky” as God. Dark and night were stigmatized as evil and “fallen.”
             Echoes of these ancient views persist in our metaphors of light, of
             enlightenment, as good.
                Philosophers have ever longed to discover a cosmic good. The
             ideal source of a cosmic good is perhaps as remote as possible
             from the Earth in space and as distant in time. Many theologians
             and philosophers think it must be “outside space and time.” For
             Plato, it was a timeless Good to be found in Being itself. For his
             student Aristotle, it was a property of the first principles that
             set the world in motion. For Kant, it was a transcendental and
             “noumenal” God outside the everyday “phenomenal” world of
             experience.
               Information philosophy has found that the story of human
             evolution does not start with Darwin and DNA. It starts much,
             much earlier, at the very beginning of the universe. For those of
             you thinking that your origins and place in the universe might be
             found outside of animal evolution, beyond a mere material expla-
             nation, you might be happy to learn that your most distant begin-
             ning was in the primeval formation of immaterial, abstract infor-
             mation, a kind of metaphysical spirituality you can tie directly to
             the information content of your innermost thoughts.
                Has information philosophy discovered the cosmic good? Does
             it at least identify the prerequisite source of anything resembling
                                                               Value        81

the Good? Yes, it does. Does it resemble the Good anthropo-
morphized as a God personally concerned about our individual
goods? No, it does not. But it has one outstanding characteristic of
such a God. It is Providence. Information philosophy has discov-
ered the fundamental process in the universe that provides for our
well-being. It provides the light, it provides life, it provides intelli-




                                                                             Chapter 5
gence. For all of these things, should we not be thankful and rever-
ent toward such a creative process, attitudes humans normally feel
towards a providential god?
   Information philosophy replaces the difficult problem of “Does
God exist?” with the more tractable problem “Does Goodness
exist?” Humanists situate values in reason or human nature. Bio-
ethicists seek to move the source of goodness to the biosphere. Life
becomes the summum bonum. Information philosophers look out
to the universe as a whole, beyond the obviously beneficent Sun to
find a cosmos that grew from a chaos. The growth of that cosmos
continues today, in a cosmic creative process that formed the gal-
axies, stars, and planets, that led to life and then to the evolution
of the information-processing minds that created language and
logic. It is this process that we propose creates objective value.
   Exactly how that is possible requires a subtle understanding
of the second law of thermodynamics in an expanding and open
universe. The second law is the tendency of isolated systems to
become more disorderly, to increase the “entropy,” a quantitative
measure of disorder. When entropy increases in a closed system,
information is destroyed irreversibly.1
   A very small number of processes that we call ergodic can
reduce the entropy locally to create macroscopic information
structures like stars and planets as well as microscopic ones like
atoms and molecules. And most important to human beings, this
creative process is not only responsible for our existence, it has
made us creative individuals in its own image! In what sense? It
is that we are creative beings. We are co-creators of the world we
live in, wielding a power to create, for better or for worse, that is
unparalleled in the history of the world.
  1     See appendix B for entropy flows in the universe.
        82         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Every living thing is an information processor and communica-
             tor. But the handling of information suggests four different levels
             of processing among the animals - instinctive, learning, predictive,
             and normative (reflective).
                • The lowest organisms are created with a fixed amount of infor-
             mation that is essentially constant their entire lives. Their behav-
Chapter 5




             ioral repertoire is almost completely instinctive. They have little or
             no learning capability. Their automatic reactions to environmental
             conditions are “built in,” transmitted genetically. Information about
             past experiences (by prior generations of the organism) is only pres-
             ent implicitly in those inherited reactions.
                • Animals with a learning capability can acquire new informa-
             tion during their lifetimes. Their past experiences condition their
             current choices. Mostly habitual reactions are developed through
             experience, including instruction by parents and peers.
                • The ability to predict the future evolved in animals with an expe-
             rience recorder and reproducer (ERR) that can play back beyond the
             current situation. These animals have foresight and imagination
             that help them evaluate the future consequences of their choices.
             They can generate alternative possibilities for future actions, based
             on the playback of multiple past experiences in similar situations.
                • Normative information appears in human societies that have
             externalized and codified their past social experiences. Future
             actions are evaluated based in part on ideas about the past, in addi-
             tion to the individual’s actual experiences. Conscious deliberation
             about community and universal values influences the choice of
             behaviors.
                All four levels are emergent,2 in the sense that they did not exist
             in the lower, earlier levels of biological evolution. The emergence of
             human beings also marks the emergence of information and infor-
             mation processing that is going on outside of biological organisms.
             The storage and retrieval of information in the form of writing, then
             printing, and now the world-wide web, has enabled the transmis-
             sion of knowledge to leap over vast distances in space and time.
               2     See chapter 27 on emergence.
                                                          Value         83

   Francis Bacon saw clearly that knowledge is power. Information
philosophy defines knowledge as information that has meaning3 for
humans, in the sense that it expands the possible alternative actions
to let us choose the best means to achieve our ends. The power of
this knowledge is shown in the exponential growth of humanity on
the planet. A mere ten thousand years ago the biomass of humans
and their domesticated animals was less than one percent of the




                                                                         Chapter 5
biomass of terrestrial vertebrates. Today it is near ninety percent.
Humans have taken over the planet.
   The Sum of human knowledge will soon be accessible to anyone
in the world with a tablet computer or smartphone. We estimate
this will be nearly the entire human population by the year 2020. If
this comes to be the case, there is an opportunity to expose young
children to the most universal of human values, perhaps before they
have been indoctrinated by their local cultural values.
  This will be vehemently opposed by conservative governments
and fundamentalist religious forces whose hold on power depends
on keeping young minds closed to “outside” ideas.
   A battle rages between cosmic ergodic processes and chaotic
entropic processes that destroy structure and information. Anthro-
pomorphizing these processes as good and evil gives us a dualist
image that nicely solves the monotheistic problem of evil.” If God
is the Good, God is not responsible for the Evil. Instead, we can
clearly see an impersonal Ergod behind Providence – the cosmic
source without which we would not exist and so a proper object
of our reverence. And Entropy is the “devil incarnate,” as Norbert
Wiener described it.
   The fundamental moral guide to action found in information
philosophy is then very simple – when faced with a moral dilemma,
we ought to choose to preserve information structures against the
entropy. Beyond moral standards, the discovery of a cosmic source
of value suggests a basis for societal and legal norms.
  Celebrating the first modern philosopher, René Descartes,
we call our model for value the Ergo. For those who might want to
anthropomorphize on the slender thread of discovering a natural
  3    See chapter 11 on meaning.
        84       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             Providence, call it Ergod. No God can be God without being Ergo-
             dic, standing in opposition to forces of darkness and destruction.
                Ergodic processes are those that resist the terrible and universal
             Second Law of Thermodynamics, which commands the increase
             of chaos and entropy (disorder). Without violating the inviolable
             second law overall, ergodic processes reduce the entropy locally,
Chapter 5




             producing pockets of cosmos and negative entropy (order and
             information-rich structures). Ergo is the ultimate sine qua non.
                The idea of a moral science has a long history. John Stuart Mill’s
             Logic of the Moral Sciences was a major influence. Translated into
             German as Geisteswissenschaft, or science of the spirit, Mill’s “moral
             science” was then back-translated into English as the Human Sci-
             ences or what has become the humanities in today’s universities. Of
             course, David Hume and his great English colleague, Adam Smith,
             a hundred years before Mill, had given us great insights into what
             they saw as “natural” moral sentiments or feelings. Hume thought
             he could make a science of human nature based on laws as definite
             as Isaac Newton’s laws of motion. But this was to be a failure.
                Maybe so, but we believe a moral society should be and can be
             informed by the best scientific knowledge about human origins,
             human capacities, and our current status in the universe.
             An Information-based Moral Code?
                The first rule of an information-based morality is that all choices
             should be made so as to minimize the destruction of abstract
             information and concrete information structures. All natural pro-
             cesses increase the entropy. A very few (life, gravitation) decrease
             the entropy locally. These we call ergodic. In principle, one should
             calculate the entropy increase and the negative entropy gain for each
             choice and maximize production and preservation of information.
                Because abstract information can be duplicated and disseminated
             at near-zero cost in the information age (“information wants to be
             free”), our second rule is that we should share all information (our
             knowledge Sum) to the maximum possible extent. Practically, this
             means nourishing and educating all the world’s children, especially
                                                            Value         85

the females, who are more likely to assist in this project of nourish-
ing and education than are the males.
  By contrast, a concrete “information structure,” or “wealth” in
the form of low-entropy information-rich matter and energy, is
subject to the laws of economic scarcity. The natural distribution of
wealth and income among individuals follows statistics like Pareto’s




                                                                           Chapter 5
“80/20” rule, where the largest percentage of wealth is “normally”
concentrated in a minority of the population.
   Some inequality is the unavoidable consequence of the “normal”
distribution of human intelligence and capability due to chance. It is
also the avoidable consequence of the historically random distribu-
tion of opportunity, including the inheritance of material property.
Redistribution of wealth through a progressive taxation system is
the means to regulate income and wealth inequality to a societally
acceptable norm that allows even the least capable humans to exer-
cise their creative freedom to their limits.
A Minimum Moral/Political Message?
   Information philosophy has established that every human being
is uniquely capable of creating new information. This includes the
abstract ideas of our ancestors that have become the Sum of human
knowledge. It also includes the creation of concrete information
structures which add to the stock of material wealth, although
material objects are subject to the laws of economic scarcity. From
this, we can formulate our basic insight into human freedom and
creativity,
  Thoughts Are Free, Actions Are Willed, Self-Determined,
  Limited Only by Creative Control Over Matter and Energy.
  Everything we know and much of the material value that we enjoy
today is the product of past and present creative human beings. It is
therefore of vital interest, a core value, for human society to protect
that free creative power for everyone.
   We can say it is in the interest of future society that every human
being should have the right to exercise their ergodic freedom to
create new ideas to the maximum of their individual potential.
        86         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               This right requires a minimum standard of well-being and edu-
             cation, and a minimum of constraints on self-expression so society
             can hear those new ideas.
                The right to exercise this creative freedom comes with a respon-
             sibility, an obligation to protect that freedom and opportunity for
             others, and to see that the fruits of that creativity are distributed as
Chapter 5




             fairly as possible to all humanity, while preserving adequate prop-
             erty rights for the creator.
                This is a kind of freedom that some philosophers have only
             dreamed of. Sadly, many more have denied this creative freedom
             as logically or physically impossible. We are finite beings, they say,
             compared to the infinite powers that they mistakenly imagine are in
             charge. It is their own limited imaginations that have sadly embraced
             the idea of such infinite powers.
                The fact is that human beings are the universe’s highest form
             of pure information creator, a natural outgrowth of the universe’s
             cosmic creative process. Humans are inferior to the cosmic process
             in its power over useful matter and energy. That is the providential
             gift of the negative entropy or Ergo in the form of incoming solar
             radiation. But humans are superior to the cosmic process as the cre-
             ators of ideas. Ideas are immaterial, potentially immortal if added to
             the Sum of human knowledge.
                Additions to human knowledge mean that the lives of our descen-
             dants will almost always be richer and fuller than those of our ances-
             tors, both materially and spiritually. As Albert Einstein knew, it
             is our ideas that let us comprehend the almost incomprehensible
             nature of the universe.
                Unfortunately, as the material wealth and overall well-being of
             humanity has greatly increased, and world poverty is nearing elimi-
             nation, there is also an increase in anomie. As agricultural and
             industrial productivity has soared, without the need to struggle
             every day to provide our livelihood, we may face the danger of a life
             of leisure that lacks a sense of meaningful purpose.
               Beyond individual, family, tribe, and nation, can we develop the
             sense of a universal telos, understanding why we live, love, and die?4
               4     See the end of chapter 28 on the origins of information and life.
                                                           Value         87


An Information-based Social Contract?
   With reference to past declarations of human rights, the discov-
ery of a universal and objective standard of value by information
philosophy suggests the following elements of a universal social
contract, to be accepted by individuals reaching the age of consent,
in order to have full participation in society.




                                                                          Chapter 5
  As a person coming of age in human society, I freely consent to
the following limits on my natural free agency, in order to preserve
a more perfect society.
  As I seek maximum freedom and opportunity for myself, I will
protect equal freedom and opportunity for all other human beings.
   As I am free to think whatever thoughts come to my mind, my
self-determined actions will be responsible, limited only by the
equal rights of others.
  As I seek to gain my maximum allowable share of economic
wealth and personal well-being, I will do my best to help others earn
their own maximal shares.
   As I seek to acquire the knowledge that will ensure my own future
well-being, I will help disseminate that knowledge to the world,
insofar as knowledge is our common human creation and inher-
itance from our ancestors, and since the cosmic creation process
provides more than enough negative entropy for everyone.
  I will do nothing to others, nor advocate such things, that I do not
expect would be done to me in similar circumstances, according to
the laws of society. Liberty consists of doing anything which does
not harm others.
   I respect the limited protection of an individual’s right to their
created intellectual and material property, but eventually some ideas
become common property. These include the laws that govern our
social behaviors. Laws should forbid only actions harmful to society.
Anything which is not forbidden by law should not be prevented.
   All persons can contribute personally or through their represen-
tatives to the formation of the laws. Laws must be the same for all,
either as they protect, or as they punish.
        88       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                All persons, being equal in the eyes of the law, are equally admis-
             sible to all public places and employments, according to their capac-
             ity and without distinction other than that of their virtues and of
             their talents.
                Since the laws are our common property, I will not use my finan-
             cial or political power to change those laws in order to advance my
Chapter 5




             own personal cause, or that of my family, my business, my commu-
             nity, not even my nation. My power to change the laws I will limit
             to my powers of persuasion and my power through the ballot box to
             approve legislation.
                I will respect the right of others to hold and to express conflicting
             beliefs. But I will not impose my beliefs on others, for example, by
             insisting they be encoded as laws of society. I will not allow others
             to impose their own beliefs on me, other than by their powers of
             public persuasion.
               My right to think freely and to determine my own actions means
             that I take responsibility for them, and will accept punishment for
             my illegal acts which harm others.
                No one can be punished except under a law approved by the leg-
             islature, with information about the law published before the fact of
             any particular offending action.
                Punishment may include incarceration to prevent further physi-
             cal harm to others. Government has a monopoly on the use of force
             to prevent illegal behavior, because it is necessary for the common
             good. But that force must be only that necessary and must minimize
             harm to the offending person.
                A person is presumed innocent until proven guilty, but if arrested
             for cause, does not have the right to resist arrest by authorities.
             Resistance is itself illegal. However, if the arrest is found to have
             been unjustifiable, a person is deserving of appropriate compensa-
             tion for the harm, the loss of abstract freedom, and possibly loss of
             material value such as wages.
                No one should face arrest for an act that does no physical harm
             or dangerously threaten such harm to others. No law should prevent
             behavior simply because others find that behavior objectionable.
               No form of speech expressing unpopular opinions, however
             harmful to the feelings of others, shall be cause for arrest.
                                                                   Value    89


Information and Negative Entropy as Objective Values
   Perhaps the most radical suggestion of information philosophy
is the idea that the negative entropy flows in the universe - which
make possible the creation of all passive information structures as
well as dynamic, interactive, purposeful living things - should be
considered as an objective basis for the concept of value.




                                                                             Chapter 5
   The Nobel-prize-winning economist Nicolas Georgescu-
Roegen once proposed negative entropy as the ultimate source of
all economic value.5 Information philosophy agrees.
   Critics may complain that there can be no single criterion for the
good, that any tool can be both harmful and helpful, we ask them
to look deeper.
   A knife in the hands of a surgeon can save a life, in the hands of
a killer take one. But just look at the information implications to
judge the moral value of this example. Consider the evil in a single
thermonuclear weapon, which can destroy information structures
faster and more thoroughly than any other human invention. How
can we have built and maintain thousands of these devices, each one
capable of destroying all the lives in one of the world’s largest cities?
   Imagine a panel of ethicists choosing the better alternative in
cases of moral dilemmas. Then imagine a panel of scientists calcu-
lating the increase in entropy (destructive disorder) versus the pres-
ervation of information (negative entropy) in each case. We suggest
there would be a high correlation between moralists and scientists
on the better alternative.
  For centuries, values were considered a theological question,
something given to humanity. Then humanists began to make
human life the ultimate basis. Some philosophers assign infinite
worth to each life, to block any comparative worth analysis.
  In recent decades, bioethics has shifted the locus of values to the
earth’s biosphere and beyond to the overall environment.
   Information philosophy hopes to enlarge the sphere of ethics to
the cosmos itself, where the process of information creation appears
as a sort of divine providence.

  5     The Entropy Law and the Economic Process, Harvard, 1971.
        90   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 6




                                      Ev i l
                     o o d        and
                   G




                                                           This chapter on the web
                                           informationphilosopher.com/value/good
                                                                Good/Evil   91


Good and Evil
   The abstract philosophical Idea of the Good began with Plato,
who first defined the notion of abstract Ideas in his Theory of
Forms. At the end of Book VI of the Republic (509D-513E), Plato
describes what he called a “divided line,” at the top of which is
the “Form of the Good, followed by theories (noesis), hypotheses




                                                                             Chapter 6
(dianoia), techniques (pistis), and stories (eikasia)
   Plato describes the visible world of perceived physical objects
and the images we make of them (in our minds and in our draw-
ings, for example). The Sun, he said, not only provides the vis-
ibility of the objects, but also generates them and is the source of
their growth and nurture. Many primitive religions identify the
Sun with God, for good reason.
   Beyond this visible world, which later philosophers (especially
Immanuel Kant) would call the phenomenal world, lies an intel-
ligible world (that Kant calls noumenal). The intelligible world is
(metaphorically) illuminated by “the Good” (τον ἀγαθὸν), just as
the visible world is illuminated by the Sun.
   Plato’s Line is also a division between Mind and Body. The upper
half of the divided line is usually called Intelligible as opposed to
Visible, meaning that it is “seen” by the mind (510E). Illuminated
by “the Good,” it is seen by the mind, in Greek, the nous (νοῦς),
rather than by the eye.
   The division of Plato’s Line between Visible and Intelligible is
then a divide between the Ideal and the Material, the foundation
of most Dualisms.1 Plato may have coined the word “idea” (ἰδέα),
using it somewhat interchangeably with the Greek word for shape
or form (εἶδος). The word idea derives from the past participle
in Greek for “to have seen.” The word “wisdom” comes from the
same source.
   In many ways, Plato’s theory of immaterial forms existing out-
side space and time and providing the shape of material things
is consonant with information philosophy’s focus on immaterial
information as the basis for thought, for mind, for knowledge, and
  1    See chapter 3 for the many names of this fundamental dualism.
        92     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             for the abstractable elements of information structures in the real
             world. Plato’s distinction between Form and Matter stands at the
             beginning of the great dualism between Idealism and Material-
             ism.
                Information philosophy is a return to a kind of Idealism. It situ-
             ates the Idea of the Good in the Platonic realm of Ideas, which
Chapter 6




             we now recognize as immaterial information. And it shows how
             immaterial ideas can have causal force in the world of matter and
             energy, solving the mind/body problem, among others.
                Now the Good embodied in an information structure such as
             a material thing, a living thing, or a complex situation including
             many things, can in principle be calculated as the quantitative
             amount of negative entropy that it contains. Perhaps it is equally
             easy to see the Bad in something by measuring its destructive
             force. Think of the evil in a thermonuclear weapon, whose only
             use is to destroy a city and its population.
                But it is plain that no single monotonic value can decide
             between the goodness of two things, since values are deeply con-
             text dependent. Indeed, Kenneth Arrow’s theorem in economics
             shows that values are not strictly transitive. A can be preferred to
             B, B preferred to C, and yet C can be preferred to A.
             Information (Negative Entropy) as Objective Good?
                Nevertheless, however imperfect it may be, information, or
             more generally negative entropy, provides an objective, human-
             independent, starting point for value comparisons, without which
             all preferences are hopelessly subjective and relative to the indi-
             vidual or to the society. This is as it should be. Facts of the matter
             are questions for science. What should be or ought to be are cul-
             tural question for society or individual persons.
                Free will, for example, is a scientific question. But moral respon-
             sibility is a cultural and conventional question for society. Never-
             theless, those answering the conventional questions of right and
             wrong can consult the informational and entropic implications of
             different choices.
                                                       Good/Evil         93

   Consider utilitarianism, which hopes to achieve the “greatest
good for the greatest number.” The measure of utility in some-
thing correlates strongly with the amount of free or available
energy (negative entropy) in that thing.
Evil
   It is a sad but necessary observation to note that our definition




                                                                          Chapter 6
of Evil as the creation of Entropy or Disorder - that is, the destruc-
tion of Information or Negative Entropy - means that the greater
of the dualistic forces at work in the universe, at least in quantita-
tive terms, is not the Cosmos but the Chaos.
   The unavoidable Second Law of Thermodynamics, the Entropy
Law, has been confirmed in the kinetic theory of gases by Ludwig
Boltzmann with his H-Theorem, and in statistical mechanics
and quantum mechanics by Albert Einstein with his analysis of
fluctuations in the entropy.
   As the universe evolves, the increase in the total entropy, the
disorder and chaos, is unstoppable. Fortunately, there are impor-
tant places where the entropy is reduced locally, leaving behind
information structures, pockets of negative entropy or cosmos.
   The established fact of increasing entropy led many scientists
and philosophers to assume that the universe we have is “running
down” to a “heat death.” They think that means the universe began
in a very high state of information, since the second law requires
that any organization or order is susceptible to decay. The infor-
mation that remains today, in their view, has always been here.
There is “nothing new under the sun.”
   But the universe is not a closed system. It is in a dynamic state
of expansion that is moving away from thermodynamic equilib-
rium faster than entropic processes can approach it. The maxi-
mum possible entropy is increasing much faster than the actual
increase in entropy. The difference between the maximum pos-
sible entropy and the actual entropy is potential information.
        94       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Creation of information structures means that in parts of the uni-
             verse the local entropy is actually going down. Our Sun-Earth
             system is one such place. All life depends on the flow of negative
             entropy from Sun to Earth, as Ernst Schrödinger told us.
Chapter 6




               Figure 6-1. Photons from the sun are our major source of negative entropy.

                It is a necessary evil that creation of negative entropy (the Good)
             is always accompanied by radiation of an even larger amount of
             positive entropy (the Bad) away from the local structures to distant
             parts of the universe. Ultimately, it goes to the night sky and away
             through our transparent universe to the most distant cosmic micro-
             wave background.




               Figure 6-2. Positive and negative entropy flows to the earth.

                As the universe expands, both positive and negative entropy
             are generated. The normal thermodynamic entropy, known as the
             Boltzmann Entropy, is the larger darker arrow. The negative entropy,
             often called the Shannon Entropy, is a measure of the information
             content in the evolving universe.
                                                      Good/Evil          95

A Statistical Comparison with Societal Norms
    The pre-Socratic philosopher Protagoras famously said that
“man is the measure of all things.” The relativism of good and evil,
of right and wrong, is a great problem in post-modern society. Any
particular action may be judged good in some circumstances, evil in
others. No single monotonic criterion of value can possibly serve in
all cases. So what does the information theory of value amount to?




                                                                          Chapter 6
  It is a claim about how an independent panel of ethicists, includ-
ing a full range of traditional sources from humanists to theists
who cite ancient religious doctrines, would judge a large number of
moral choices.
   An information-based ethics claims that if a second panel of
judges consisted of scientists with expertise in chemical thermody-
namics were asked to consider the same list of choices, there would
be a significant statistical correlation between those deemed good
by the traditional panel and those found by the second panel to pre-
serve the most information, or to produce the least destruction of
information, the least increase in entropy and disorder.
   So the moral advice from information philosophy is very simple.
When confronted with a moral desicion, take the alternative that
minimizes the increase in disorder, that minimizes the destruction
of information.
   Since living things are rich in information, this coincides with a
morality that regards life as an ultimate good, but it does not go the
extreme of regarding each life as of infinite worth, which is designed
to make value comparisons impossible when lives are involved..
        96   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 7




                            d a  n d
                         Go tality
                           m o r
                        Im




                                                            This chapter on the web
                                           informationphilosopher.com/value/ergod
                                                              God        97


God and Immortality
  Most of the world’s religions have some concept of gods or a
God, with some notable exceptions such as Buddhism.
  Theologians claim to have discerned the essential attributes of a
monotheistic God, such as omniscience (perfect foreknowledge),
omnipotence (unlimited power), omnipresence (present every-




                                                                          Chapter 7
where), omnibenevolence (perfect goodness), and a necessary
and eternal existence.
   Information philosophy offers a simple test of the “revealed
truth” of these attributes, specifically the visions by inspired
thinkers that have no empirical evidence. Although these visions
are in the realm of “pure ideas,” we can say that if every world reli-
gion agreed completely on the attributes of God, it would increase
their believability. As it is, the comparative study of religions with
the incredible diversity of their claims, renders the idea of God as
implausible as Santa Claus.
   At the present time, arguments like these will carry little weight
with the believers in a religion, most of whom have little exchange
of knowledge with those of other faiths. This can be expected to
change with the reach of the Internet via smartphones to most of
the world’s population by 2020.
   In theism, God is the creator and sustainer of the universe. In
deism, God is the creator, but not the sustainer of the universe,
which is now assumed to be running itself following deterministic
laws of motion. Open theism denies that God’s foreknowledge has
already determined the future. Monotheism is the belief in the
existence of one God or in the oneness of God. In pantheism, God
is the universe itself. Polytheists hold that there are many gods.
For atheists, no gods exist.
  God is sometimes conceived as an immaterial being (without
a body), which information philosophy accepts, since God is
quintessentially an idea, pure information. Some religions think
an avatar of God has come to earth in the past. Some religions
        98     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             see God as a personal being, answering human supplications and
             prayers. A God intervening in human affairs is thought to be the
             source of all moral norms. Logical “proofs” of God’s existence are
             based on various of these assumed attributes.
                Now that information philosophy and physics has identified the
             essential attributes and properties of the cosmic creation process,1
             the problem for theologians is to reconcile their views of their
Chapter 7




             gods with these new discoveries.
             No Creator, But There Was/Is A Creation
                Modern cosmology confirms that the universe came into exis-
             tence at a definite time in the past, some 13.8 billion years ago.
             Although this does not need the Creator some religions want, it
             does confirm a creation process. Because this process continues
             today (indeed human beings are co-creators of the world), deists
             are wrong about a creative act at the beginning followed by a
             mechanical clockwork universe tending to itself ever since.
                So “creationism” is wrong. What about “intelligent design?”
             This is the ancient notion that the “essence” or idea of some things
             was there before the thing itself came into existence. Since all
             information structures, first cosmological and then biological,
             were “emergent,”2 at least some of their peculiar specific informa-
             tion did not pre-exist them. The “existentialists,’ from Nietzsche
             to Sartre, were correct in this respect, but their idea that “God is
             dead” was absurd.
                Now a metaphysicist might argue that the laws of nature, how
             things behave, might pre-exist, or come into existence simul-
             tansously with, the first matter and energy. But laws, beginning
             with the Heraclitean logos, contain nothing specific about future
             arrangements of matter and energy that is information.
               Theodicy (The Problem of Evil)
               The problem of evil is only a problem for monotheists who see
             their God as omnipotent. “If God is Good, He is not God. If God
               1    See appendix F.
               2    See chapter 27..
                                                             God       99

is God, He is not Good.”3 The information philosophy solution
to the problem is a dualist world with both entropic destruction
and ergodic creation. If ergodic information is an objective good,
then entropic destruction of information is “the devil incarnate,”
as Norbert Wiener put it.
Omniscience and Omnipotence Contradictory?
   The idea of God as an omniscient and omnipotent being has an




                                                                        Chapter 7
internal logical contradiction that is rarely discussed by the theo-
logians. If such a being had perfect knowledge of the future, like
Laplace’s demon, who knows the positions, velocities, and forces
for all the particles, such a God would be perfectly impotent,
because the future is already determined. That is, if God had the
power to change even one thing about the future, his presumed
perfect knowledge would have been imperfect. Omniscience
entails impotence. Omnipotence entails some ignorance. Prayer
is useless.
   The discovery by Albert Einstein of ontological chance poses
an even greater threat to the omniscience of God and the idea
of foreknowledge. The great mathematicians who invented prob-
ability always regarded chance as atheistic. The use of statistics
was simply to make estimates of outcomes of many independent
events when detailed knowledge of those events was not possible
because of human ignorance. Ontological chance means that even
God cannot know some things.
   For example, in quantum physics, if knowledge exists of which
slot a particle will go through in a two-slit experiment, the out-
come of the experiment would be different. The characteristic
interference caused by the wave function passing through both
slits disappears.
The Ergod
   There is absolutely nothing supernatural about the cosmic
creation process. But it is the source of support for human life.
And many theologically-minded thinkers have long assumed that
life and mind were a gift to humanity from a divine providence.
  3    from J.B., a play by Archibald MacLeish
        100       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 The physical product of the cosmic creation process is all the
              negative entropy in the universe. While thermodynamics calls it
              “negative,” information philosophy sees it as the ultimate positive
              and deserving of a better name. So we call it the Ergo, which ety-
              mologically suggests a fundamental kind of energy (“erg” zero),
              e.g., the “Gibbs free energy,” G0, energy that is available to do work
              because it has low entropy.
Chapter 7




                 We co-opted the technical term “ergodic” from statistical mechan-
              ics as a replacement for anti-entropic, and because it contains the
              highly suggestive “ergod.
                 An anthropomorphization (or theomorphization) of the process
              that creates all the energy with low entropy that we call Ergo has a
              number of beneficial consequences. Most all human cultures look
              for the source of their existence in something “higher” than their
              mundane existence. This intuition of a cosmic force, a providence
              that deserves reverence, is validated in part by the discovery of what
              we can provocatively call “Ergod,” as the ultimate source of life.
                Such an Ergod has the power to resist the terrible and universal
              Second Law of Thermodynamics, which commands the increase of
              chaos and entropy (disorder).
                Without violating that inviolable Second Law overall, the Ergod
              reduces the entropy locally, creating pockets of cosmos and negative
              entropy (order and information-rich structures). All human life,
              and any possible extraterrestrial life, lives in one of these pockets.
                 Note that the opposition of Ergod and Entropy, of Ergodic pro-
              cesses and Entropic processes, coincides with the ancient Zarathus-
              trian image of a battle between the forces of light (Ahura Mazda)
              and darkness (Angra Manyu), of good and evil, of heaven and hell.
              Many religions have variations on this dualist theme, and the three
              major Western religions all share the same Biblical source, probably
              incorporated into Judaism during the Babylonian exile.
                The Ergod is “present” and we can say enthusiastically is “in us.”
              The Ergod’s work is to create new information, so when we create
              and share information we are doing the Ergod’s work.
                                                             God         101

The Problem of Immortality
   The two basic kinds of immortality available today may not sat-
isfy those looking for an “afterlife,” but they are both very real and
important, and there is a third, medical technology solution visible
on the horizon that should satisfy many persons.
  The first is least satisfying - partial immortality of your genes
through children. This is of no significance to the childless.




                                                                           Chapter 7
   The second is the ancient notion of fame or kleos (κλέος) among
the Greeks. When Homer sang of Achilles and Odysseus, it was to
give them undying fame, which they have today among many liter-
ate persons.
  A third kind of immortality will result from a solution to the
problem of aging, almost certainly from stem cell research, which
should allow vital organ replacement, and from a cure for runaway
cancer cells, a devastating entropic force.
  This should satisfy even Woody Allen, who famously said,
  I don’t want to achieve immortality through my work.
  I want to achieve it through not dying.
  The second kind we call “information immortality.” It is more
realizable than ever with the development of world-wide literacy
through print and now through the world-wide web, which makes
the Information Philosopher available anywhere. In five years time,
a majority of the world’s population will be carrying a smartphone
and thus able to read this work.
  The great online Wikipedia will be capable of having something
about everyone who has made a contribution to human knowledge.
  If we don’t remember the past, we don’t deserve to be remembered
by the future.
        102   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 8




                                  o l o g y
                      Ep    istem




                                                             This chapter on the web
                                             informationphilosopher.com/knowledge
                                                   Epistemology           103


Epistemology
  Epistemology asks, “how do we know what there is?”
   Immaterial information provides a new ground for
epistemology, the theory of knowledge. We know something
about the “things themselves” when we discover an isomorphism
between our abstract ideas and concrete objects in the material
world. Information philosophy goes beyond the logical puzzles




                                                                            Chapter 8
and language games of analytic philosophy. It identifies knowl-
edge as information in human minds and in the external artifacts
of human culture.
    Abstract information is the foundation – the metaphysical
ground – of both logic and language as means of communication.
It is the part of a dualism parallel to the material substrate that the
Greeks called ὑποκείμενον - the “underlying.” It gives matter its
form and shape. Form informs.
   Knowing how we know is a fundamentally circular problem
when it is described in human language, as a set of logical propo-
sitions. And knowing something about what exists adds another
complex circle, if the knowing being must itself be one of those
things that exists.
   These circular definitions and inferences need not be vicious
circles. They may simply be a coherent set of ideas that we use
to describe ourselves and the external world. If the descriptions
are logically valid and/or verifiable empirically, we think we are
approaching the “truth” about things and acquiring knowledge.
   How then do we describe the knowledge itself - an existing
thing in our existent minds and in the existing external world?
An information epistemology does it by basing everything on the
abstract but quantitative notion of information.
   Information is stored or encoded in physical and biological
structures. Structures in the world build themselves, following
natural laws, including physical and biological laws. Structures in
the mind are partly built by biological processes and partly built
by human intelligence, which is free, creative, and unpredictable.
        104     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Knowledge is the Sum of information created and stored in
              minds and in human artifacts like stories, books, and internet-
              worked computers.
              The History of Epistemology
                Although the English word “epistemology” is relatively new
              (coined in the 19th century), it has been known for centuries as
              the problem of knowledge (Erkenntnisproblem in German), and
              appears in the earliest philosophical works - by the Presocratics,
Chapter 8




              Plato and Aristotle, and especially by the Skeptics, who doubted
              that it could be proved that knowledge is possible.
                Sophists
                 The great sophist Gorgias challenged the many physicists
              (φυσικοι) who lectured and wrote on “what there is” in treatises
              called “Peri Physis” (Περι Φύσις) - roughly, About Nature, or the
              Nature of the Physical World.
                 The content of a typical physicist/philosopher lecture in Gorgias’
              time was usually in three parts:
                Things exist
                You can know what things exist
                You can tell others about what exists
                Gorgias is reported to have dazzled and delighted his audiences
              by proving the opposites, by using nearly identical arguments:
                Nothing exists
                If by chance something did exist, you could not know anything
              about it
                If you did accidentally learn something about it, you could not
              communicate your knowledge to others
                The lesson we can take away from Gorgias is that arguments,
              especially verbal reasoning alone, can be used to prove anything
              by clever rhetoricians. Logical and linguistic arguments can tell us
              nothing “true” about the physical world.
                This is the problem of knowledge. How can we know - how can
              we be certain about - what we know? It is related closely to the
                                                           Epistemology          105

question of what abstract concepts and physical objects (ontology
and cosmology) exist in the universe - what are “the things them-
selves” - for us to know.1 How is what we perceive through our
senses related to the physical things and the abstract concepts that
our reason tells us lies behind the laws of nature (metaphysics).
  Plato/Socrates
  In his Theaetetus, Plato tells us that Socrates considered,
but ultimately rejected, three possibilities for what knowledge




                                                                                   Chapter 8
(ἐπιστήμη) is and how we come to have it.
  • The first is perception (αἴσθησις). Our perceptions are “true”
(ἀληθῆ), at least to us, a kind of private knowledge. But they may
be dreams or illusions. (160D)
   • The second is true (ἀληθῆ) opinion or belief (δόξαν). Socrates
asserts that Protagoras’s relativistic argument that “man is the
measure of all things,” means “what is true is what is true for
me.” But “myriad” others may properly judge your opinion false
(ψευδῆ).(170D)
    • The third is true belief that had some reasons (λόγος) or jus-
tification (συλλογισμῶ), a rational explanation for the belief. True
(or right) opinion accompanied by reason is knowledge. (δόξαν
ἀληθῆ μετὰ λόγου ἐπιστήμην εἶναι) (202C)
   This third possibility that knowledge is “justified true belief ”
has come down to modern times as the three-part “traditional”
theory of knowledge. Although Socrates’ “negative” dialectic never
established any certain knowledge, Plato believed that Socrates’
method of inquiry (ἔλεγχος) is a way to achieve knowledge.
   Nevertheless, the Theaetetus ends with Socrates’ utter rejection
of perception, true belief, or even true belief combined with rea-
sons or explanations as justification. Socrates says:
      “And it is utterly silly, when we are looking for a definition of knowl-
      edge, to say that it is right opinion with knowledge, whether of differ-
      ence or of anything else whatsoever. So neither perception, Theaete-
      tus, nor true opinion, nor reason or explanation combined with true
      opinion could be knowledge (epistéme).”2

  1       See chapter 3 on ontology.
  2       Plato’s Theaetetus, (210A-B)
        106       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Aristotle
                 Aristotle revised his master Plato’s theory of Forms and Ideas.
              Although he too sought the fundamental essences of things and
              ideas (their Being - τὸ ὄν), for Aristotle all things were a combina-
              tion of form (εἴδος) and matter (ὑλῆ), and understanding how real
              physical things change (their Becoming) was as important as know-
              ing their essences (their Being).
                 In his Metaphysics, Aristotle dealt with the problem of knowl-
Chapter 8




              edge (epistemology) and with the question of Being (ontology of
              both physical and abstract things). The opening line of Book I of
              the Metaphysics is “All men desire knowledge by nature.” (πάντες
              ἄνθρωποι τοῦ εἰδέναι ὀρέγονται φύσει.) He uses the word to know
              (εἰδέναι ) based on “to have seen (the form).”
                  Aristotle sharpened the use of language (dialectic) and logic as
              our means of knowing to a level still in use today. He analyzed sub-
              ject-predicate sentences and puzzled over the relationship between
              being or essence and the copula “is.” He elucidated the simplest
              rules of logic - needed for the reasoning (συλλόγος) behind jus-
              tification of knowledge - the Law of Identity (A is A), the Law of
              Non-Contradiction, and the Law of the Excluded Middle. And he
              developed the rules for logical inference, identifying many types of
              syllogism. Socrates had already identified the simplest syllogism -
              S is M, M is P, therefore S is P.
                 But Aristotle went beyond pure reason and the Platonic dialec-
              tic. He added the need for demonstration (ἀποδειξις) to discover
              the cause (ἀιτια) and find an explanation of a phenomenon. This
              was the beginning of empirical knowledge, the observations and
              experiments that form the basis of modern science, as opposed to
              the kind of personal and subjective knowledge available directly to
              our perception, intuition, or reflective introspection.
                 Aristotle identified four basic causes (material, formal, efficient,
              and final) and said that chance might be a fifth cause. Not every-
              thing happens of causal necessity, but some things are just as chance
              will have it, he said.
                                                  Epistemology             107

   He distinguished certain a priori knowledge, for example logic
and mathematics, which was true by necessity, from the merely
probable and contingent a posteriori knowledge of ethics and poli-
tics. He denied that the truth of a proposition about the future
entailed the necessity of a future event (as claimed by the actualist
Diodorus Cronus). The future is open and contingent.
   For Aristotle, there were different methods of inquiry and dif-
ferent kinds of knowledge depending on the subject matter, for
example knowledge of the things themselves in the external world




                                                                             Chapter 8
(ontology and metaphysics) that we would call today the physical
sciences, and knowledge about people (ethics and politics) that
today we would call the social sciences. We might add psychology,
especially the subjective and reflective knowledge of self by intro-
spection. And although he wanted to be more empirical than Plato,
he held onto some necessary truths or first principles that were self-
evident. He also recognized “theses” (θέσισ) and “axioms” (ἄξιος).
   And Aristotle distinguished many kinds of logical argument.
When the premises are true and certain (he does not explain how
this can be the case except for those that are self-evident “first prin-
ciples” - ἀρχὴ or πρῶτων), and when the deductive syllogism is cor-
rect, the conclusions must follow. Aristotle calls this a demonstra-
tion, the truth of it is apodeictic (ἀπόδειξις), a logical proof. The
resulting knowledge is demonstrative knowledge (ἀποδεικτικὲω
ἐπιστήμην).
  Aristotle realized that not all reasons given to justify beliefs could
themselves have reasons without an infinite regress or circular argu-
ment, so he proposed that some reasons could be “self-evident”
axioms, worth believing on their own merits or because they are
popular opinion.
  Returning to Plato here, Aristotle says that all parts of this dem-
onstration - premises, deductions, and conclusions - are necessary.
When the premises are popular opinion, their truth merely prob-
able, the argument is dialectical. When the premises are false, the
argument is sophistical, and can prove anything. Much of modern
epistemology feels disturbingly sophistical.
        108         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Skeptics
                 Shortly after Aristotle, Pyhrro of Ellis reacted to the many
              methods of inquiry (σκέπσις) and their knowledge claims by deny-
              ing all of them. His skeptical followers argued that happiness and
              serenity can be had by avoiding unjustified dogmatic knowledge
              claims and simply follow traditional customs as a guide to life.
                Plato’s Academy itself came to adopt skepticism under
              Arcesilaus in the third century. Arcesilaus doubted that the senses
Chapter 8




              could discover truths about the physical world. Skeptics, especially
              Carneades, who followed Arcesilaus as leader of the Academy,
              denied the claims of their opponent Stoics as mere dogmatism.
                 Philo of Larissa, the last leader of Academic Skepticism in
              Athens, escaped the Mithradatic wars and went in 88 BCE to Rome
              where he mentored Marcus Tullius Cicero. Cicero gave us per-
              haps the best ancient comparison of the Stoic, Epicurean, and Skep-
              tical schools of philosophy in his dialogue De Natura Deorum (On
              the Nature of the Gods), which was David Hume’s model for his
              Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. and a source for his own
              mitigated skepticism.
                 Aenesidemus, the first-century leader of Academic skepticism in
              Alexandria, qualified the obvious self-referential error in the skepti-
              cal claim that nothing could be known. He encouraged a return to
              Pyrrho’s suspension (εποχή) of any judgment. Aenesidemus identi-
              fied ten tropes or modes of knowing by perception through different
              senses, which he showed can be mutually inconsistent. Epistemo-
              logical justification of any absolute objective knowledge is therefore
              impossible.
                According to Sextus Empiricus,3 these ten tropes were reduced
              by Agrippa to five
                     • Disagreement among the philosophers
                     • An infinite regress of justification
                     • Relativity - concepts are meaningful only in some context
                     • Hypotheses cannot be self-evident
                     • Circular reasoning

                3     Outlines of Pyrrhonism, 1.164-77
                                                Epistemology            109

  And finally, Sextus Empiricus says (1.178-79) the reasons to
suspend judgment can be reduced to only the first two. He says that
nothing can be apprehended through itself (immediate knowledge)
or through another thing (mediate knowledge) is shown by the
controversies among the philosophers. And the infinite regress of
reasons is caused by the lack of a criterion for truth (κριτεριόν τῆσ
ἀληθείας). These two problems are still very much with us today,
   An infinite regress arises when we ask what are the justifications




                                                                          Chapter 8
for the reasons themselves.
   For the reasons to count as knowledge, they must themselves be
justified with reasons for the reasons, etc., ad infinitum.
  Stoics
   Chrysippus, the greatest and most prolific of the Stoic leaders,
separated the idea of necessity in certain knowledge from necessity
in human actions, without denying the Stoic belief in physical deter-
minism and fate. He helped to develop propositional logic, a lan-
guage advance on Aristotle’s predicate logic that Gottlob Frege
revived in the nineteenth century as the propositional calculus.
  Chrysippus saw logic as the core of a divine reason that rules
the universe. He saw Laws of Nature are synonymous with the
Laws of God, since Stoics identified God with Nature. In his time,
Chrysippus’ logic was considered superior to Aristotle’s.
The Search for Knowledge Turns Inward
  “What can I know with certainty?” asked René Descartes.
What is it that cannot logically be doubted? Starting with his famous
“Cogito, ergo sum,” Descartes said he could not doubt his own
existence, then - since “God is no deceiver” - he could not be wrong
about his perceptions. This is despite Plato, who knew perceptions
can be illusions, such as the stick appearing bent in the water.
   Descartes shifted the emphasis of knowledge from the external
world to his internal thoughts, and began an effort to find indubita-
ble truths as foundations for all knowledge. Descartes’ introspective
“quest for certainty” changed the focus of problem of knowledge
to what twentieth-century philosophy would come to call “founda-
tionalism and “internalism”.”
        110         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Even if Descartes could have arrived at subjective knowledge
              that he personally could not doubt, such knowledge would be inac-
              cessible to others. And others would be properly skeptical of his
              egocentric knowledge claims.
                 Gottfried Leibniz argued that certainty could be had for neces-
              sary truths that are “true in all possible worlds.” Leibniz’s Principle of
              Sufficient Reason was a claim that knowledge of the physical future
              was implicit in the fact that every event has a sufficient cause. This
Chapter 8




              is despite Aristotle, who knew that future events might or might not
              happen, for example, the famous “sea battle.”
                David Hume, skeptical that anything could be proved true by
              induction, declared causality to be simply a matter of repeated
              conjunctions of apparent cause and effect. With his empirical
              colleagues, John Locke and George Berkeley, he denied any
              knowledge of the “things themselves” behind our perceptions. We
              have only the sense impressions of Locke’s “secondary qualities.”
                 Hume, following Leibniz, admitted as knowledge only two things,
              analytical mathematical logical reasoning, and empirical facts. This
              is essentially the analytic-synthetic knowledge distinction.
                    “If we take into our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics,
                    for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning concern-
                    ing quantity or number? No. Does it contain any experimental reason-
                    ing concerning matter of fact and existence? No. Consign it then to the
                    flames: For it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.”4
                Despite his skepticism about causality, Hume’s “naturalism” con-
              vinced him of the practical truth of strict causal determinism.
                 “What can I know?” asked Immanuel Kant. Faced with the
              skepticism of Hume which put into doubt all phenomenal knowl-
              edge gained by perception alone, Kant postulated a noumenal world
              accessible to the mind by introspection. There the “things them-
              selves” exist along with God, human freedom, and immortality. But
              since they are outside the phenomenal world - the physical world
              governed by strict causal deterministic laws of motion - Kant’s claim
              to knowledge was as weak as Hume’s skeptical claim was strong.
                4       Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, section XII
                                               Epistemology            111

   Kant accepted Hume’s (and Aristotle’s) distinction between
abstract analytic a priori knowledge and experimental or empirical
synthetic a posteriori knowledge. But he claimed that the human
mind imposed certain categories of understanding on the world,
leading to some necessary empirical truths, or what he called syn-
thetic a priori knowledge. Among these are that space must neces-
sarily be Euclidean, that “7 + 5 = 12” is mathematically necessary,
and that the deterministic laws of Newton must be strictly true.




                                                                         Chapter 8
   Although all these “truths” have been found empirically to be
false, modern developmental psychology finds that some ideas are
indeed “built-in” to the mind, as Kant held. Infants are born able
to recognize continuity, contiguity, causality, and form. These con-
ceptual abilities are transmitted genetically and are immediately
available. They do not need a set of prior experiences from which
to abstract. Konrad Lorenz described them as the experiences of
our ancestors. What is a priori for ontogeny in the phenotype was
a posteriori for the phylogeny of the genotype. Thus Locke’s tabula
rasa dictum that everything that is known comes first through the
senses is wrong.
  The nineteenth-century hermeneuticists Schleirmacher and Dil-
they argued for some knowledge accessible in non-scientific ways.
They claimed that cultural knowledge can only be appreciated and
understood by someone immersed in the culture.
   Charles Sanders Peirce defined knowledge - truths about the
real world - as that knowledge that would eventually be agreed upon
“intersubjectively” by a community of inquirers who follow an open
scientific method of hypothesis, deduction, and experimental test-
ing of predictions by means of observations.
   As to Descartes’ search for indubitable certain knowledge, Peirce
agreed that any knowledge should be doubted. But, explaining
Descartes’ two errors, Peirce says first that everything cannot be
doubted at the same time. And second, that nothing is ever certain
because the method of science always leaves open the possibility
for improvements in our knowledge. Peirce’s pragmatic “truth” is
something that is only asymptotically approached over time by the
intersubjective agreement of an open community of inquirers.
        112       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Peirce’s “pragmatic” philosophy identified truth with beliefs that
              informed action and had valuable consequences. This led to John
              Dewey’s idea of truth as “warranted assertability,” with the warrants
              to be found in the empirical consequences.
                Bertrand Russell declared that science is the only source of
              knowledge, “What science cannot discover, mankind cannot know.”
              This came to be called “scientism.”
                  Logical empiricists, following Russell’s student and colleague
Chapter 8




              Ludwig Wittgenstein, could never agree on the method of jus-
              tification. The Vienna Circle philosophers, Rudolf Carnap and
              Moritz Schlick, never could get general agreement on what con-
              stitutes the “verification” of a proposition about the world.
                 A. J. Ayer, who sat in on some Vienna Circle meetings, put their
              ideas forward in his book Language, Truth, and Logic. He said (again
              following Hume and Aristotle) that two kinds of propositions are
              meaningful - analytic sentences (tautologies and definitions of lan-
              guage terms) or statements that can be empirically verified.
                Karl Popper denied that “verification” could ever lead to certain
              knowledge, but argued that even one negative experimental result
              can “falsify” a proposition.
                 In the early 1950’s, Willard van Orman Quine challenged the
              ancient analytic-synthetic distinction, arguing that in the end the
              “truth” of analytic statements, the proofs of mathematical theorems,
              and the use of logic, also depend on some empirical verification.
                 The key idea of Quine’s empiricism is to deny the existence of any
              a priori knowledge of the world (or of words - statements, proposi-
              tions), whether analytic or synthetic. As Peirce had said, nothing is
              logically and necessarily true of the physical world. Logical truths
              like the Principles of Non-Contradiction and Bivalence (Excluded
              Middle) might be true in all possible worlds, but they tell us nothing
              about our physical world, unless they are applicable and empirically
              verified.
                                                    Epistemology              113

  Gettier Problems
   In 1963, Edmund Gettier published two logical counterex-
amples to knowledge defined as justified true belief. His counterex-
amples were true, but not for the reasons cited as the evidence for
justification. So the result is a justified false belief, or perhaps simply
not knowledge.
   The conditions postulated in Gettier-type examples are extraor-
dinarily unlikely to occur, but the mere possibility demonstrates the




                                                                                Chapter 8
difficulty of making logical arguments about contingent real world
situations. The most sophisticated linguistic analysis is problematic
as a source of “truth” or justification.
  There is a technical similarity between Gettier cases and Frank-
furt-type examples of an agent who apparently acts “freely” but a
counterfactual demon ensures that there is only one possibility for
action. In 1969 Harry Frankfurt developed logical counterex-
amples to the traditional idea that alternative possibilities are a pre-
requisite for free agency, because compatibilism had no alternatives.
   Gettier cases artificially construct a “true” situation which is not
true for the apparent reasons. Frankfurt cases artificially construct
a “free” action in which the agent actually is not free to choose the
apparent alternative possibilities. Gettier and Frankfurt cases have
spawned a vast philosophical literature in the past few decades. But
they have produced little advance in understanding either knowl-
edge or freedom. They are little more than clever examples of the
sophistry in today’s analytic language philosophy.
   Skepticism alone should have indicated that logical proofs of
knowledge, or logical analyses of any justification scheme for
knowledge, were bound to fail. Gettier and Frankfurt cases are
applied skepticism or sophistry that cast doubt on the likely valid-
ity of common sense justifications and knowledge, by developing
extremely unlikely if not implausible cases. They depreciate the
value of the central project of epistemology, which is to help us to
know (if only in a virtuous circle) when our arguments for knowl-
edge are as strong as we can make them.
        114       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Epistemology Returns to “Externalist” Justification
                 Until the 1960’s, debates in epistemology were primarily divided
              between Cartesian foundationalist and coherentist theories of justi-
              fication, both of which focused on egocentric subjective “internal-
              ist” theories.
                 Until Descartes’s turn inward, theories of knowledge had assumed
              that justification included the relation of beliefs to objects and events
              in the world. Descarte’s “internalist” turn continued well into the
Chapter 8




              twentieth century, with most epistemologists endorsing his “foun-
              dationalist” theory of knowledge. They included C.I. Lewis (1946),
              Roderick Chisholm, John Pollock (1986), Richard Foley (1987),
              Paul Moser (1989), William P. Alston (1989), and Robert Audi
              (1993).
                 But several philosophers moved toward an “external” view of
              epistemology. As early as the 1920’s, Frank Ramsey had proposed
              the idea of reliability, which depends on some kind of external
              causal process. He said that a belief was knowledge if it was (i) true,
              (ii) certain, and (iii) obtained by a reliable process.
                 In 1967, Alvin Goldman amplified the Ramsey view, endors-
              ing both a “causalist” theory of knowledge and what he called
              “reliabilism.”He claimed that justification for a belief is to be found
              in the natural cause of the belief.
                In 1971, Fred Dretske offered what he called “Conclusive Rea-
              sons” as a form of justification. They included evidence, grounds,
              and reasons.
                 In 1973, David Armstrong called for a return to what he called
              “externalism,” defined as “a certain relation holding between the
              believer and the world.” For example, one can not only believe, but
              know, that the room is hot because the excessive heat one feels is the
              cause of one’s belief. Armstrong further divided externalist theories
              into “causal” (like Goldman) and “reliability” (like Dretske and
              Ramsey) theories.
                There are other externalist theories, including naturalism, evi-
              dentialism, and evolutionary epistemology.
                                                             Epistemology          115

    Epistemology Naturalized
   In the late 1960’s, Willard van Orman Quine argued that
epistemology, the justification of knowledge claims, should be
“naturalized.” All knowledge claims should be reduced to verifi-
cation by the methods of natural science. “For suppose we hold,”
he says, “with the old empiricist Peirce, that the very meaning of a
statement consists in the difference its truth would make to possible
experience.” Quine wrote:




                                                                                     Chapter 8
     “The Vienna Circle espoused a verification theory of meaning but did
     not take it seriously enough. If we recognize with Peirce that the mean-
     ing of a sentence turns purely on what would count as evidence for its
     truth, and if we recognize with Duhem that theoretical sentences have
     their evidence not as single sentences but only as larger blocks of theory,
     then the indeterminacy of translation of theoretical sentences is the nat-
     ural conclusion.
     “Philosophers have rightly despaired of translating everything into
     observational and logico-mathematical terms. They have despaired of
     this even when they have not recognized, as the reason for this irreduc-
     ibility, that the statements largely do not have their private bundles of
     empirical consequences. And some philosophers have seen in this irre-
     ducibility the bankruptcy of epistemology. Carnap and the other logi-
     cal positivists of the Vienna Circle had already pressed the term “meta-
     physics” into pejorative use, as connoting meaninglessness; and the
     term “epistemology” was next. Wittgenstein and his followers, mainly
     at Oxford, found a residual philosophical vocation in therapy: curing
     philosophers of the delusion that there were epistemological problems.
     “Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter
     of psychology and hence of natural science. It studies a natural phenom-
     enon, viz., a physical human subject...
     “The old epistemology aspired to contain, in a sense, natural science; it
     would construct it somehow from sense data. Epistemology in its new
     setting, conversely, is contained in natural science, as a chapter of psy-
     chology. But the old containment remains valid too, in its way... There
     is thus reciprocal containment, though containment in different senses:
     epistemology in natural science and natural science in epistemology.”5
   Although Quine’s reciprocal containment suggested that epis-
temology might still play a foundational role in scientific under-
standing, his work appeared to many to reduce epistemology to
psychology. Quine seemed to deny the normative role of traditional
epistemology to justify all knowledge, including scientific knowl-
edge. An information epistemology can restore that role.
5        Ontological Relativity and Other Essays 1969, pp.80-3
        116         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                An Information Epistemology?
                 Second only to Kant‘s “scandal” that philosophers cannot
              logically prove the existence of the external world, it is scandalous
              that professional philosophers are in such profound disagreement
              about what it means to know something. They may not all be wrong,
              but few of them are likely to be right.
                 This is especially dismaying for those epistemologists who still
              see a normative role for philosophy that could provide a founda-
Chapter 8




              tion, perhaps even a priori, for scientific or empirical, a posteriori
              knowledge.
                 Information epistemology avoids the traditional identification of
              knowledge with “belief.” Belief is a psychological state that may be,
              and often is, disjoint from knowledge. We may empirically verify
              that a person knows something by analyzing her behavior, without
              her consciously articulating or holding a belief in that knowledge.
              A famous example is the difference between linguistic competence
              and mere performance, knowing the grammatical rules for one’s
              language without being able to state those rules. Those rules have
              been learned tacitly, by multiple trials and errors, and stored in a
              person’s mind, in our experience recorder and reproducer (ERR).6
                 Human knowledge is not only information stored in the mind. It
              is also recorded in human artifacts like stories, books, buildings, and
              internetworked computers. Knowledge is information that forms
              the basis for human thoughts and actions. In information philoso-
              phy, knowledge is information that is “actionable,” meaning that if
              we act on the basis of the information, our actions will have fruitful
              consequences. The validity or pragmatic “truth” of knowledge is to
              be found in those consequences.
                 Since information is also stored in animal minds, we can reject
              the exceptionalist fiction that only humans can have knowledge.
              Where humans are indeed exceptional is their ability to communi-
              cate their knowledge - and their reasons for their knowledge - sym-
              bolically by means of language.
                Information is stored or encoded in information structures.
              Although structures in the material world build themselves,
                6     See Appendix E for details.
                                               Epistemology            117

following natural laws, they do not assemble themselves. This is the
material first world of information philosophy.
   In our second world, biological systems are cognitive systems in
the sense that they also process and communicate knowledge (infor-
mation). They bring purpose into the universe. They are “teleo-
nomic.” They cannot be reduced to the laws of physics and chem-
istry. They are not machines, which must be assembled. Biological
systems assemble themselves, using their internal knowledge. This




                                                                         Chapter 8
is the biological second world of information philosophy.
  Structures in the mind are partly built by biological processes
and partly built by human intelligence, which is free, creative, and
unpredictable. The information in mental structures is uniquely
mobile. It is not confined to its structure. As knowledge, it is the
immaterial stuff of thought - our ideal third world.”
   A majority of the Sum of unique human knowledge may now be
stored external to our minds. Even collectively, we don’t know (in
the sense of having it in mind) all that we know. But we (including
almost anyone in the world) can look it up extremely quickly.
   Among the sources of knowledge are the theories and experiments
of natural scientists, who collaborate to establish our knowledge
of the external world, social scientists who study our cultures,
and psychologists, cognitive scientists, and neuroscientists, who
investigate our personal subjective worlds.
   To the extent of the correspondence, the isomorphism, the one-
to-one mapping, between structures (and processes) in the world
and representative information structures in our minds, we can
claim to have knowledge of the world, and of other minds.
   Such knowledge claims are not based on logical arguments about
justification, but on the pragmatic truth that the knowledge has
consequences that can be empirically or “naturally” confirmed.
  Information epistemology is a naturalized epistemology.
        118   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 9




                                     r s a l s
                             U  nive




                                                                This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/problems/one-many
                                                       Universals         119


Universals
   A “universal” in metaphysics is a property or attribute that is
shared by many particular objects (or concepts). It has a subtle
relationship to the problem of the one and the many.
  It is also the question of ontology.1 What exists in the world?
Ontology is intimately connected with epistemology - how can we
know what exists in the world?
   Knowledge about objects consists in describing the objects




                                                                            Chapter 9
with properties and attributes, including their relations to other
objects. Rarely are individual properties unique to an individual
object. Although a “bundle of properties” may uniquely charac-
terize a particular individual, most properties are shared with
many individuals.
  The “problem of universals” is the existential status of a given
shared property. Does the one universal property exist apart from
the many instances in particular objects? Plato thought it does.
Aristotle thought it does not.
  Consider the property having the color red. Is there an abstract
concept of redness or “being red?” Granted the idea of a concept of
redness, in what way and where in particular does it exist? Nomi-
nalists (sometimes called anti-realists) say that it exists only in the
particular instances, and that redness is the name of this property.
Conceptualists say that the concept of redness exists only in the
minds of those persons who have grasped the concept of redness.
They might exclude color-blind persons who cannot perceive red.
   Realism is the view that a “reality” of physical objects, and pos-
sibly of abstract concepts like redness, exists in an external world
independently of our minds and perceptions.
  Platonic Realism is the view that abstract things like numbers,
perfect geometric figures, and other things that Plato called the
Forms or the Ideas, have a real and independent existence, though
they are not material objects.
  1     See chapter 3.
        120     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 But for his student, Aristotle, these “universals” exist only in the
              concrete objects which share some property. For him, the univer-
              sal idea of a perfect circle is a shared property of the many actual
              circles in nature.
                  Naive realists think that we can access concrete physical objects
              directly and fully with our perceptual sense data. This is some-
              times called the “copy theory.” Our perceptions are fully appre-
              hending the physical objects, so that the content of a perception
              is the same as the object of perception. In information philosophy
Chapter 9




              terms, naive realism mistakenly assumes that the information in
              the perceived sense data (or the representation in the mind) is
              (quantitatively) equal to (a copy of) the information in the physi-
              cal object. In the case of the abstract concept of redness, it may
              be that the copy-theory is most tenable. The perception of a red
              object may in a strong sense bring the concept of redness into
              existence (at least in the observer’s mind).
                  Historically, realism is a metaphysical claim about this indepen-
              dently existing world where redness might be found. Since Aristo-
              tle’s Metaphysics, two kinds of metaphysical questions (ontologi-
              cal and epistemological ) are raised - what exists, and how can we
              know what exists.
                 The ontological status of abstract concepts is a completely dif-
              ferent question from the ontology of concrete material objects,
              though these questions have often been confounded in the history
              of philosophy.
                 Information philosophy provides distinct answers to these two
              ontological questions. Material objects exist in the world of space
              and time. They are information structures embodied in matter
              and interacting with energy. Abstract concepts (like redness) are
              pure information, neither matter nor energy, although they need
              matter for their embodiment and energy for their communica-
              tion.
                The contrast between physical objects and abstract concepts can
              be illustrated by the difference between invention and discovery.
                                                        Universals         121

   We discover physical objects through our perceptions of them.
To be sure, we invent our ideas about these objects, their descrip-
tions, their names, theories of how they are structured and how
they interact energetically - with one another and with us. But
we cannot arbitrarily invent the natural world. We must test our
theories with experiment. The experimental results select those
theories that best fit the data, the information coming to us from
the world. This makes our knowledge of an independent external
world scientific knowledge.




                                                                             Chapter 9
   By contrast, we humans invent abstract concepts like redness.
We know that these cultural constructs exist nowhere in nature as
physical structures. We create them. Cultural knowledge is rela-
tive to and dependent on the society that creates it.
   However, some of our invented abstract concepts seem to
clearly have an existence that is independent of us, like the num-
bers and the force of gravity.
   Critical realists, like scientists, start with observations and sense
data, but they add hypotheses and experiments to develop theo-
ries about the physical objects and the abstract concepts in the
external world. Nevertheless, the abstract representation in the
mind is (quantitatively) much less information than the informa-
tion in the physical object represented.
  The idea of an independent reality claims that the reality known
exists independently of the knowledge of it.
   The British empiricists John Locke and David Hume argued
that what we were “given” in our perceptions of sense data is lim-
ited to so-called “secondary qualities.” These are properties that
produce the sensations in the observer’s senses - color, taste, smell,
sound, and touch. Knowledge that comes from secondary quali-
ties does not provide objective facts about things “in themselves.”
   Immanuel Kant described these secondary qualities as “phe-
nomena” that could tell us nothing about the “noumena,” which
the empiricists called the “primary qualities.” These are proper-
ties the objects have that are independent of any observer, such
as solidity, extension, motion, number and figure. These quali-
ties exist in the thing itself (Kant’s “Ding an sich”). Kant thought
        122       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

              that some of these qualities can be determined with certainty, as
              “synthetic a priori” truths. Some of these qualities are analytic truths,
              defined by the logical meanings of linguistic terms. For example, a
              round circle cannot be a square.
              The One and the Many
                Some philosophers are monists, arguing that the world must
              be a unity, one unchanging thing, and that all the multiplicity and
              change that we see is mere illusion.
Chapter 9




                 Some are dualists, puzzled how the immaterial One (usually Mind
              or the Ideal) can possibly interact with the material Many (the Body
              or the World). There are other kinds of dualists, but the idealism/
              materialism divide has a long history in philosophy under dozens of
              different names through the ages.
                 Some philosophers prefer triads, triplicities, or trinities as their
              fundamental structures, and in these we may find the most sensi-
              ble way to divide the world as we know it into “worlds,” realms, or
              orders.
                 Those who divide their philosophy into four usually arrange it
              two by two (Schopenhauer, Heidegger, Derrida - who did it in jest,
              and against Christian trinities). There are a few who think a pentad
              has explanatory power. Another handful look to the mystical seven
              (the number of planets and thus days of the week) for understand-
              ing.
                 Since the Pythagoreans drew their triangular diagram of the tet-
              ractus, ten has been a divine number for some. Aristotle found ten
              categories. The neo-Platonist Kabalists have ten sephiroth. In string
              theory, there are ten dimensions reflecting the components of Ein-
              stein’s general relativity equations.
                 The most important philosopher since Aristotle, Kant, structured
              his architectonic into twelve categories, arranged four by three.
                We will scrutinize these architectures to see if the thinkers divide
              their worlds the same way, whatever names they call their divisions.
              There is a surprising amount of agreement among them, consider-
              ing their disagreements on terminology.
                                                           Universals        123

   Over the centuries many philosophers have seen a fundamental
dualism. Most have invented their own names for this dualism. Not
all have meant the very same things, but the great similarities allow
us to collect all these dualisms into a quasi-chronological table,
where similarities and slight differences become more clear.
   Of course many have claimed to be monists. “All is One,” they
said, as they generally reduce the physical world to the ideal world,
or vice versa. “Neutral monists” argue that the ideal and physical
worlds are somehow both something else. But the underlying dual-
ism remains in these monistic claims.




                                                                               Chapter 9
  Many philosophers saw the need for the two sides to work
together.
  Immanuel Kant wrote,
   Gedanken ohne Inhalt sind leer.
   Anschauungen ohne Begriffe sind blind.
  Charles Sanders Peirce rewrote this as,
   If Materialism without Idealism is blind,
   Idealism without Materialism is void.
  With a nod to Kant and Peirce, we can say,
   Concepts without Percepts are empty.
   Percepts without Concepts are blind.
  And although freedom and values are not a dualism, they too
require one another and we can observe
   Freedom without Values is Absurd (as Continental Existentialists like
   Jean-Paul Sartre thought).
   Values without Freedom are Worthless (as British Utilitarians and later
   Positivists may have thought).
  The founder of quantum mechanics. Niels Bohr, saw the wave-
particle dual nature of quantum mechanics as connected to many
other “complementary” philosophical dualisms.
        124       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 We have compiled a semi-chronological list of various philosoph-
              ical terms used through the ages that seem highly correlated with
              the fundamental ideal-material duality.

              The ONE                                               The MANY
                          Monism                               Pluralism
              IDEALISM                                          MATERIALISM
                            Being                       Becoming
Chapter 9




                                  Necessity Contingency
                                   Plato’s Divided Line
              Theories (noesis)                           Techniques (pistis)
              Hypotheses (dianoia)                           Stories (eikasia)
                          Eternal                       Ephemeral
              ESSENCE                                               EXISTENCE
                         Universals                Accidentals / Particulars
                                  Aristotle’s Four Causes
                 Final Cause Formal Cause      Efficient Cause Material Cause
              Realism                                             Nominalism
                         Intelligible                          Sensible
                                             Form Content
                          Universal                           Particular
              Absolute                                                     Relative
              RATIONALISM                                          EMPIRICISM
                                        MIND BODY
              a priori                                                 a posteriori
              Certainty                                                Probability
                       Intellect - Innate              Tabula Rasa - Learned
                                            Nature Nurture
                          Analytic                           Synthetic
                                                     Universals          125


                 Kant’s Transcendental Critique
Noumena                                              Phenomena
    Concepts/Thoughts                      Percepts/Senses
        Freedom                             Determinism
                    Subject Object
    Dialectical IDEALISM    Dialectical MATERIALISM
                 Superstructure Base




                                                                           Chapter 9
Romanticism                                                Positivism
Transcendentalism                                        Pragmatism
       Supernaturalism                       Naturalism
Phenomenology                    Behaviorism/Existentialism
                    Linguistic Analysis
Ideal Language                            Ordinary Language
          Intension                      Extension
              Sense/Semantic Meaning/Pragmatic
Autonomy                                             Mimesis
                   Deduction Induction
           Theory                       Experiment
Consistency                                 Correspondence
                Quantum Complementarity
WAVE                                                      PARTICLE
             Possible                           Actual
Thought                                                       Action
   Intension and Extension describe two ways of indicating the
meaning of a word or name. Intension assumes the word has an
intrinsic, essential meaning, perhaps simply by definition and thus
“analytic.”
   Extension is the set of existing objects in the world to which the
word corresponds. There is a special kind of definition called “osten-
sive” which defines a word by pointing to those objects. Because
extension involves things in the world it is called “synthetic.”
        126       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 The mathematician Gottlob Frege distinguished intension and
              extension by the German words Sinn und Bedeutung (which usually
              translate as Sense and Reference, though Denotation is better).
                 Vienna Circle philosophers, notably Rudolf Carnap, described
              intension and extension as semantisch and pragmatisch (semantic
              and pragmatic).
                 Willard van Orman Quine used the terms Meaning and Ref-
              erence for intension and extension, conflicting with Frege’s terms.
              But note that Frege conflicts with the ancient intelligible/sensible
Chapter 9




              distinction. Words are ambiguous tools to describe objects. And
              language should therefore not be the primary tool for philosophical
              analysis.
              Philosophical Triads
                After dualisms, the next most popular philosophical architec-
              tonic structures are triads, triplicities, or trinities.
                Some philosophers describe their triads as three “worlds,” just as
              dualism is often described in terms of an Ideal World and a Material
              World. The deep philosophical (and scientific) question is - do these
              divisions “carve nature at the joints,” as Plato put it in the Phaedrus,
              (265e)?
                 We analyze examples, and find that the three worlds are most
              often simply the canonical Ideal/Material dualism with an interpo-
              lated third world corresponding to a human world (or more broadly,
              the biological world), with its obvious connection to the world of
              “subjective?” ideas above and the “objective” material world below.
                Gottlob Frege’s Three Realms
                  An External Realm of Public Physical Things and Events
                  An Internal Subjective Realm of Private Thoughts
                  An “Objective” Platonic Realm of Ideal “Senses” (to which sentences
                  refer, providing their meaning)
                Karl Popper’s Three Worlds (clearly influenced by Frege)
                  World I - “the realm of physical things and processes”
                  World II - “the realm of subjective human experience”
                  World III - “the realm of culture and objective knowledge” - of human
                  artifacts (our Sum)
                                                   Universals         127

  Charles Sanders Peirce’s triad of Objects - Percepts - Con-
cepts is in the same order as Frege and Popper.
   In information philosophy, we divide the world into three funda-
mental parts, the material, the ideal (ideas are the same kind of
abstraction as pure information), and the biological/human, a
middle world that combines ideality and materiality. In these three
worlds, information emerges in different ways. They are symbolized
in our tri-color I-Phi logo.
  •The Physical/Material World (lower/green) - Ilya




                                                                        Chapter 9
Prigogine’s “order out of chaos,” when the matter in
the universe spontaneously forms information struc-
tures.
   •The Biological/Material World (middle/red) -
Erwin Schrödinger’s “order out of order,” when the biological
information structures form purposeful (“teleonomic”) self-repli-
cating organisms that depend on or “feed on” a negative entropy
stream from the sun.
  •The Mental/Immaterial/Ideal World (upper/blue) - Bob Doyle’s
abstract “information out of order,” when organisms with minds
process and externalize information, communicating it to other
minds and storing it in the environment.
  Merlin Donald’s three levels of Culture Emergence.
  •Mimetic: the “copycat” or “monkey see, monkey do” ability of
primates facilitated transfer of learning, ritual
  •Mythic: language in humans, mental/brain development is influ-
enced by social network of speakers generating symbols for ideas
  •Informatic: External storage of knowledge - writing, printing,
computers, Internet
        128       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

              Three Sources for Authoritative Knowledge
                •The Tradition - Knowledge is inherited, handed down, from
              the great thinkers of the past (compare Frege’s “Objective” Platonic
              Realm of Ideal “Senses” to which sentences “refer,” providing their
              meaning)
                 •The Modern - Knowledge is created by Reason, by providing a
              rational account (logos) of how things are, augmented by modern
              empirical science since the Enlightenment
Chapter 9




                 •The Post-Modern - all knowledge is “relative” to the culture that
              invented it. For conservative post-moderns, science can establish
              knowledge about an objective external world. For radical post-
              moderns, “anything goes”, even science “invents or creates reality.”
              There are no grounds/foundations for cultural knowledge that can
              “justify true beliefs.”
              Types of Triads
                Levels: Material - Biological/Human - Ideal
                (physis - bios/nomos - logos)
                Inner Levels: Body - Brain - Mind/Spirit
                Plato: Truth - Goodness - Beauty
                Aristotle/Kant: Epistemology - Ethics - Aesthetics
                 Number: One - Two/Many - All (unity - duality/plurality -
              totality)
                Person: I - You - We (self - other - society/community)
                Truth: Correspondence - Coherence - Consistency
                (empirical - conventional/pragmatic - logical)
                Time: Past - Present - Future
                Family: Father - Mother (chauvinists changed to Spirit) - Son
                Dialectic: Thesis - Antithesis - Synthesis (Aufhebung new Thesis)
                Hume’s Relations: Similarity - Contiguity - Causality
                (form - space - time)
                                                         Universals      129

  Medieval Trivium: Grammar - Rhetoric - Logic
  Rhetoric: Simile - Metonym - Metaphor
  Language - Syntax - Semantics - Pragmatics
  Peirce: Objects - Percepts - Concepts
  Peirce’s Semiotics: Icon - Index - Symbol
  Peirce’s Symbol: Ground - Object - Interpretant
  Peirce’s Science: Abduction (hypothesis) - Induction - Deduction




                                                                           Chapter 9
  Grounds: Tradition - Modern - Postmodern
  Beliefs: Naturalism - Humanism - Spiritualism
  Matter: Solid - Liquid - Gas (earth - water - air)
  Time: Beginning - Middle - End (archos - physis/nomos - telos)
  Journey: Eden - Fall - Atonement (home - travels - homecoming)
  Life: Birth - Life - Death
A Few Tetrads
  Classical kinds of matter: Earth - Water - Air - Fire
  (anticipating today’s solid - liquid - gas - plasma)
   Plato’s Divided Line: Stories - Techniques - Hypotheses - Theories
(eikasia - pistis - dianoia - noesis)
   Aristotle’s Causes: Material cause - Efficient cause - Formal cause
- Final cause (He considered chance to be a possible fifth cause.)
  Graeco-Roman Four Temperaments (or humors): Choleric
(yellow bile), Melancholic (black bile), Sanguine (blood), and Phleg-
matic (phlegm)
  Medieval cosmology: Earth (below us) - Water (with us) - Air
(above us) - Stars (beyond us)
  The medieval scholastic Quadrivium: Math - Geometry - Music -
Astronomy (number - space - time - motion)
  Schopenhauer’s Fourfold Root of Sufficient Reason
  Heidegger’s Geviert (2x2): Earth - Mortals - Heavens - Gods
  Derrida’s Jeu des Cartes
         130   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 10




                                c t i o n
                           Indu




                                                                This chapter on the web
                                        informationphilosopher.com/problems/induction
                                                       Induction         131


The Problem of Induction
   Francis Bacon described “genuine Induction” as the new
method of science. Opposing his new idea to what he thought
Aristotle’s approach had been in his Organon (as misinterpreted
by the medieval Scholastics), Bacon proposed that science builds
up knowledge by the accumulation of data (information), which
is of course correct. This is simply the empirical method of col-
lecting piece by piece the (statistical) evidence to support a theory.
   The “problem of induction” arises when we ask whether this




                                                                           Chapter 10
form of reasoning can lead to apodeictic or “metaphysical” cer-
tainty about knowledge, as the Scholastics thought. Thomas
Aquinas especially thought that certain knowledge can be built
upon first principles, axioms, and deductive or logical reason-
ing. This certain knowledge does indeed exist, within a system of
thought such as logic or mathematics. But it can prove nothing
about the natural material world.
  Bacon understood logical deduction, but like some proto-
empiricists among the Scholastics (notably John Duns Scotus
and William of Occam), Bacon argued in his Novum Organum
that knowledge of nature comes from studying nature, not from
reasoning in the ivory tower.
   Bacon likely did not believe certainty can result from inductive
reasoning, but his great contribution was to see that (empirical)
knowledge gives us power over nature, by discovering what he
called the form of nature, the real causes underlying events.
   It was of course David Hume who pointed out the lack of cer-
tainty or logical necessity in the method of inferring causality
from observations of the regular succession of “causes and effects.”
His great model of scientific thinking, Isaac Newton had cham-
pioned induction as the source of his ideas. This is as if his laws of
motion were simply there in the data from Tycho Brahe’s exten-
sive observations and Johannes Kepler’s elliptical orbits.
  “Hypotheses non fingo,” Newton famously said, denying the laws
were his own ideas. Although since Newton it is a commonplace
         132     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               that the gravitational influence (“action at a distance”) of the Sun
               causes the Earth and other planets to move around their orbits,
               Hume’s skepticism led him to question whether we could really
               know, with certainty, anything about causality, when all we ever
               see in our inductive study is the regular succession of events.
                  Thus it was Hume who gave us the “problem of induction” that
               has bothered philosophers for centuries, spilling a great deal of
               philosophical ink. Hume’s skepticism told him induction could
               never yield a logical proof. But Hume’s mitigated skepticism saw
               a great deal of practical value gained by inferring a general rule
Chapter 10




               from multiple occurrences, on the basis of what he saw as the uni-
               formity of nature. It is reasonable to assume that what we have
               seen repeatedly in the past is likely to continue in the future.
                   While Hume was interested in causal sequences in time, his jus-
               tification of induction also applies to modern statistical thinking.
               We infer the frequency of some property of an entire population
               in the future from the statistics of an adequately large sample of
               that population in the present.
                  The information philosopher’s solution to this problem (more
               properly a “pseudo-problem,” to use the terminology of twenti-
               eth-century logical positivists, logical empiricists, and linguistic
               analysts) is easily seen by examining the information involved
               in the three (or four) methods of reasoning - logical deduction,
               empirical induction, mathematical induction (actually a form of
               deduction), and what Charles Sanders Peirce called “abduc-
               tion,” to complete one of his many philosophical triads.
                  Mathematical induction is a method of proving some prop-
               erty of all the natural numbers by proving it for one number, then
               showing that if it is true for the number n, it must also be true
               for n + 1. In both deduction and mathematical induction, the
               information content of the conclusion is often no more than that
               already in the premises. To be sure, the growth of our systems of
               thought such as logic, mathematics, and perhaps especially geom-
               etry, has generated vast amounts of new knowledge, new informa-
               tion, when surprising new theorems are proved within the system.
                                                      Induction        133

And much of this information has turned out to be isomorphic
with information structures in the universe. But the existence of
an isomorphism is an empirical, not a logical, finding.
  The principal role of deduction in science is to derive, logically
or mathematically, predictable consequences of the new theory
that might be tested by suitable experiments. This step simply
draws out information already present in the hypothesis. Theory,
including deductions and predictions, is all done in the realm of
ideas, pure information.




                                                                         Chapter 10
   Abduction is the creative formation of new hypotheses, one step
(rarely the first) in what some philosophers of science in the twen-
tieth century described as the scientific method - the hypothetico-
deductive-observational method. It can be described more simply
as the combination of theories and experiments. Observations
are very often the spur to theory formation, as the old inductive
method emphasized. A scientist forms a hypothesis about pos-
sible causes for what is observed.
   Although the hypothesis is an immaterial idea, pure informa-
tion, the abduction of a hypothesis creates new information in the
universe, albeit in the minds of the scientists.
   By contrast, an experiment is a material and energetic interac-
tion with the world that produces new information structures to be
compared with theoretical predictions. Experiments are Baconian
accumulations of data that can never logically “prove” a theory
(or hypothesis). But confirmation of any theory consists entirely
of finding that the statistical outcomes of experiments match the
theory’s predictions, within reasonable experimental “error bars.”
The best confirmation of any scientific theory is when it predicts
a phenomenon never before seen, such that when an experiment
looks, that phenomenon is found to exist.
   These “surprising” results of great theories shows the extent to
which science is not a mere “economic summary of the facts,” as
claimed by Ernst Mach, the primary exponent of logical positiv-
ism in science.
         134       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Mach had a great influence on the young Albert Einstein, who
               employed Mach’s idea in discovering his special theory of relativ-
               ity. The positivists insisted on limiting science to “observable”
               facts. Atoms were not (yet) observable, so despite the great chemi-
               cal theories of John Dalton explaining molecules, the great sta-
               tistical mechanical work of James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig
               Boltzmann explaining thermodynamics, it remained for Einstein
               to predict the observable effects of atomic and molecular motions
               on the motions of visible particles like pollen seeds in a liquid.
                  The experimental measurements of those visible motions, with
Chapter 10




               exactly the extent of motion predicted by Einstein, confirmed the
               physical reality of atoms. The motions had been observed, almost
               eighty years earlier, by Robert Brown. Einstein’s 1905 work was a
               paradigmatic example of the scientific method - first a “free creation
               of the human mind,” as he called it and his other extraordinary the-
               ories - next the deduction of mathematically exact predictions from
               the theory, and finally the 1908 confirming experiments by Jean
               Perrin.
                  In information philosophy terms, the abstract immaterial infor-
               mation in the Einstein theory of Brownian motion, was found to be
               isomorphic to material and energetic information structures in the
               universe.
                  In his early years, Einstein thought himself a disciple of Mach, a
               positivist. He limited his theories to observable facts. Special relativ-
               ity grew from the fact that absolute motions are not observable.
                  But later when he realized the source of his greatest works were
               his own mental inventions, he changed his views. Here is Einstein
               in 1936,
                   “We now realize, with special clarity, how much in error are those theo-
                   rists who believe that theory comes inductively from experience. Even
                   the great Newton could not free himself from this error (“Hypotheses
                   non fingo”)...
                   “There is no inductive method which could lead to the fundamental
                   concepts of physics. Failure to understand this fact constituted the basic
                   philosophical error of so many investigators of the nineteenth century. It
                   was probably the reason why the molecular theory and Maxwell’s theory
                   were able to establish themselves only at a relatively late date. Logical
                   thinking is necessarily deductive; it is based upon hypothetical concepts
                                                                    Induction               135

    and axioms. How can we expect to choose the latter so that we might
    hope for a confirmation of the consequences derived from them?
    “The most satisfactory situation is evidently to be found in cases where
    the new fundamental hypotheses are suggested by the world of experi-
    ence itself. The hypothesis of the non-existence of perpetual motion as
    a basis for thermodynamics affords such an example of a fundamental
    hypothesis suggested by experience; the same holds for Galileo’s prin-
    ciple of inertia. In the same category, moreover, we find the fundamental
    hypotheses of the theory of relativity, which theory has led to an unex-
    pected expansion and broadening of the field theory, and to the super-
    seding of the foundations of classical mechanics.”1
   And here, Einstein wrote in his 1949 autobiography,




                                                                                              Chapter 10
    “I have learned something else from the theory of gravitation: No ever
    so inclusive collection of empirical facts can ever lead to the setting up
    of such complicated equations. A theory can be tested by experience, but
    there is no way from experience to the setting up of a theory. Equations
    of such complexity as are the equations of the gravitational field can
    be found only through the discovery of a logically simple mathemati-
    cal condition which determines the equations completely or [at least]
    almost completely.”2
  Werner Heisenberg told Einstein in 1926 that his new quan-
tum mechanics was based only on “observables,” following the
example of Einstein’s relativity theory that was based on the
fact that absolute motion is not observable. For Heisenberg,
the orbital path of an electron in an atom is not an observable.
Heisenberg said of his first meeting with Einstein,
    “Einstein himself discovered the transition probabilities between states
    in the Bohr atom, ten years before this conversation with Heisenberg.
    I defended myself to begin with by justifying in detail the necessity for
    abandoning the path concept within the interior of the atom. I pointed
    out that we cannot, in fact, observe such a path; what we actually record
    are frequencies of the light radiated by the atom, intensities and tran-
    sition-probabilities, but no actual path. And since it is but rational to
    introduce into a theory only such quantities as can be directly observed,
    the concept of electron paths ought not, in fact, to figure in the theory.
    “To my astonishment, Einstein was not at all satisfied with this argument.
    He thought that every theory in fact contains unobservable quantities.
    The principle of employing only observable quantities simply cannot be
    consistently carried out. And when I objected that in this I had merely
    been applying the type of philosophy that he, too, had made the basis
   1      “Physics and Reality,” Journal of the Franklin Institute, Vol.221, No.3, March,
1936. pp. 301, 307
   2      “Autobiographical Notes,” in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, Ed. Paul
Arthur Schilpp, 1949, p.89
         136          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     of his special theory of relativity, he answered simply “Perhaps I did use
                     such philosophy earlier, and also wrote it, but it is nonsense all the same.”
                     Thus Einstein had meanwhile revised his philosophical position on this
                     point. He pointed out to me that the very concept of observation was
                     itself already problematic. Every observation, so he argued, presupposes
                     that there is an unambiguous connection known to us, between the phe-
                     nomenon to be observed and the sensation which eventually penetrates
                     into our consciousness. But we can only be sure of this connection, if we
                     know the natural laws by which it is determined. If however, as is obvi-
                     ously the case in modern atomic physics, these laws have to be called in
                     question, then even the concept of “observation” loses its clear meaning.
                     In that case it is theory which first determines what can be observed.
Chapter 10




                     These considerations were quite new to me, and made a deep impression
                     on me at the time; they also played an important part later in my own
                     work, and have proved extraordinarily fruitful in the development of the
                     new physics.”3
                  Since philosophy has made the “linguistic turn” to abstract
               propositions, the problem of induction for today’s philosophers is
               subtly different from the one faced by David Hume. It has become
               an epistemological problem of “justifying true beliefs” about propo-
               sitions and thus lost the connection to “natural philosophy” it had
               in Hume’s day. Information philosophy hopes to restore at least the
               “metaphysical” elements of natural philosophy to the domain of
               philosophy proper.
                  In contemporary logic, epistemology, and the philosophy of sci-
               ence, there is now the problem of “enumerative induction” or uni-
               versal inference, an inference from particular statements to general
               statements. For example, the inference from the propositions p1,
               p2,... pn, which are all F’s that are G’s, to the general inference that all
               F’s are G’s.
                  This is clearly a purely linguistic version of the original problem.
               Divorcing the problem of induction from nature empties it of the
               great underlying principle in Hume, Mill, and other philosophers,
               namely the assumption of the uniformity of nature, which alone can
               justify our “true?” belief that the sun will come up tomorrow.
                 In information terms, the problem of induction has been reduced,
               even impoverished, to become only relations between ideas. Perhaps

                 3       Encounters with Einstein, 1983, pp.113-4
                                                         Induction           137

“ideas” is too strong, much of philosophy has become merely logical
relations between statements or propositions. Because of the inher-
ent ambiguity of language, sometimes philosophy appears to have
become merely a game played using our ability to make arbitrary
meaningless statements, then critically analyze the resulting con-
ceptual paradoxes.
   Karl Popper famously reprimanded Ludwig Wittgenstein’s
claim that there are no real philosophical problems, only puzzles
and language games.




                                                                               Chapter 10
Induction and the Scientific Method
   We can conclude that induction corresponds roughly to the
gathering of large numbers of observations or experiments, which
today are seen as the statistical basis for accepting a scientific theory.
Induction is supplemented today with abduction, which is the free
creation of theories or hypotheses to be tested against the results of
experiments. Deduction is a third tool that allows predictions to be
derived logically and mathematically from the theory.
  Freely developed theories are then seen to generate predictions
about alternative possibilities and probabilities.
  Experimental facts provide the statistical evidence that either
confirms or denies those predictions.
  Theories are probabilities. Experiments are statistics.
         138   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 11




                             n i n g
                         Mea




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                        informationphilosopher.com/knowledge/meaning
                                                       Meaning         139


The Problem of Meaning
   The “meaning” of any word, concept, or object is different for
different individuals, depending on the information (knowledge)
about the word, concept, or object currently available to them. All
meaning is “contextual” and the most important context is what
is currently in the individual’s mind. This obviously includes the
immediate external context, for example, a puzzling word being
heard or read is surrounded by text, both explicitly and implicitly.
Explicit text includes the words preceding the word whose mean-
ing is not yet clear. Structural linguists call this the diachronic




                                                                         Chapter 11
dimension. Implicit words are synonyms and other words that
might come to mind as substitutes for the questionable word. This
is the synchronic dimension - those alternative words that could
substitute with little change in meaning.
   How exactly does our information-based model of the mind
generate meaning? It is the past experiences that are reproduced
(played back) from the experience recorder and reproducer (ERR)
that provide most of the meaningful context for a word or object.
For example, if the agent has had no past experiences that resem-
ble the current experience in some way, the agent may not find any
meaning at all. The simplest case would be a new word, seen for
the very first time. Worst case would be listening to an unknown
foreign language.
   If the word is not isolated, the meanings of familiar surrounding
text may bring back their own past uses clearly enough to allow
the agent to guess the meaning of the new word, in that context.
In any case this fresh experience with the word will be stored away
along with that context for future reference.
   The problem of the “Meaning of Meaning” has a rich history
in the past century or two of analytic language philosophy. Three
centuries ago, Gottfried Leibniz hoped for an ambiguity-free
ideal language with exactly one term for each concept. It would
reduce language to a kind of mathematics where the meaning of
complex combinations of terms could be “calculated” precisely. In
         140     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               the middle of the nineteenth century, John Stuart Mill tried to
               simplify proper nouns by insisting that they are just names for the
               things we are talking about in sentences or propositions. Nouns
               are subjects, predicates are the attributes of the subject.
                  Leibniz and Mill were inspirations for Bertrand Russell,
               whose logical positivism imagined “logical atoms” of meaning
               that could be combined following strict rules to form complex
               concepts - “logical molecules.” But Russell and the great logician
               Gottlob Frege tangled over exactly how words describe, denote,
               or refer to concepts and objects. How do words mean?
Chapter 11




                  Is the absolute meaning to be found in the dictionary defini-
               tions of how a word refers to an object, independent of the inten-
               tions of a speaker or inferences of the hearer? Frege distinguished
               between the straight reference of a word and what he called the
               “sense.” Why does the statement “Aristotle is the author of De
               Anima” carry more information than the identity statement “Aris-
               totle is Aristotle.” Our information theory of meaning finds the
               answer in the reader’s past experience (or none) of De Anima.
                  Russell’s young collaborator in early logical positivism, Ludwig
               Wittgenstein, eventually broke with Russell and insisted that
               meaning depends on the use to which a word is being put. There
               is no objective independent meaning for a word as the object it
               “stands for.” Wittgenstein’s relativism became more extreme when
               Jacques Derrida showed how the meaning of a word can be
               deferred and “disseminated,” shifting according to words follow-
               ing it in time - in the diachronic dimension.
                  Charles Sanders Peirce, and the great linguist and inventor
               of structuralism, Ferdinand de Saussure, had accepted straight-
               forward connections between words and objects, like Peirce’s triad
               “concept-percept-object” and Saussure’s dual “signifier/signified”
               (s/S) for an arbitrary symbol and its object. These were captured
               in the C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards book, “The Meaning of
               Meaning,” as their “semantic triangle,” symbol (word), reference
               (thought/concept), and object.
                                                                   Meaning   141

  Willard van Orman Quine thought he could escape ambi-
guities in meaning. In his book Word and Object, he urged the
“naturalizing” of epistemology by focusing on the empirical con-
nections made by speakers when they say what they mean. Favor-
ing extensionality over intentionality, he said to look at how a
speaker of another language shows what a word means, or how a
baby learns the meaning of new words, by a process of behavioral
conditioning and ostension (pointing at things). Quine said one
may not be a behaviorist in psychology, but cannot avoid being
a behaviorist in linguistics. But behaviorists are determinist and
materialist.




                                                                               Chapter 11
   Post-moderns like Derrida and Roland Barthes showed that
fundamental ambiguities of language cannot be removed, that the
dictionary definitions summarizing the past uses in a community
of discourse only trap meaning in a “circle of signifiers” without a
referent object (s/Z). New uses are always being created, a conse-
quence of our theory of humans as “co-creators” of our universe.
   Are we then living in a Humpty Dumpty world of “When I
use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean - neither more
nor less.” H. P. Grice insisted that the intentions of the “utterer”
are carrying the meaning. Or do we need to consider the “reader
response” to any text, where meaning is generated by the reader
and any supposed author intentions are deliberately ignored.
   In Claude Shannon’s theory of the communication of infor-
mation, the emphasis is on the new information arriving at the
receiver carried in the message from the sender. But Shannon
never claimed the meaning was carried in the message itself. So it
is with our information theory of meaning.
  The information theory of meaning starts with the information
model of the mind, which asserts that the immaterial mind is the
abstract information being processed by the brain. The brain is a
material information structure, which works as a biological infor-
mation processor and experience recorder.1
  The meaning in a message incoming to the mind (which could
be just a perception of sensations from the environment and not
  1    See appendix E on the experience recorder and reproducer.
         142         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               necessarily words from another human being with intentions) is
               completely dependent on the past experiences of the agent that are
               brought to mind by the content of the message. This nicely cap-
               tures the subjectivism or relativism of meaning, since it so greatly
               depends on the content of the individual’s mind.
                  Our model for the mind also gets close to answering Thomas
               Nagel’s provocative question “What Is It Like To Be a Bat?”2 The
               past experiences reproduced by the ERR, complete with their feel-
               ings, depends on what has been recorded and what can be repro-
               duced (played back). A frog cannot play back the experience of con-
Chapter 11




               cave objects flying by, because the frog’s eye has filtered them out,
               preventing them from reaching the frog’s brain and its experience
               recorder.
                  The bat’s current experiences are beyond human comprehension
               just because we lack the past experiences of what life has been like
               for a bat.
               Meaning in the Theory of Information
                  Although Shannon’s 1948 theory of the communication of infor-
               mation explicitly denied that it had anything to do with the mean-
               ing of the information communicated, other information theorists
               made efforts to connect abstract information with real objects, with
               their structural content, and even with concepts that humans use to
               “represent” objects and concepts.
                 Donald MacKay, R.A. Fisher, and Dennis Gabor had inde-
               pendently made efforts before Shannon, just at the end of World
               War II, to define an “amount of information.”3
                  Gabor suggested that a signal occupying an elementary area of
               Δf Δt = 1 could be regarded as a ‘unit of information’, which he
               termed a ‘logon’. Multiplied by Planck’s constant h, this corresponds
               to Heisenberg’s minimum uncertainty in a physical measurement.
                  Fisher had proposed a measure of ‘information’ in a statistical
               sample, which in the simplest case amounted to the reciprocal of
               the variance. MacKay interpreted Fisher’s measure as the “weight
               of evidence,” proposing that for a probability of 1/2, it should be
               termed a “metron.”
                 2     Mortal Questions, p.165
                 3     Information, Mechanism, and Meaning, pp. 4-5
                                                                Meaning    143

   MacKay defined his “amount of information” as the number of
yes/no questions that need to be answered to extract the informa-
tion in a “representation,” which he defined as a structure which has
some abstract features in common with something else it purports
to represent. This is very close to our definition of intrinsic informa-
tion4 and somewhat similar to the idea of “logical atomism” that
knowledge is the total of true statements, if each provides one bit.
   Of course, all these attempts to quantify intrinsic information
scientifically do not get close to the meaning or significance that
a Peircean interpretant may find in a perception or in a message,
given the surrounding context, as Roman Jakobson said would be




                                                                             Chapter 11
needed to add meaning to Shannon’s theory.
   We can use Shannon’s famous diagram on the communication of
information to integrate the thinking about meaning by many great
philosophers, linguists, and literary critics.




  Figure 11-3. Claude Shannon’s communication of informtion diagram.

   To begin with, we must think of the above flow of information
as another flow of negative entropy, the ultimate source of all value
in the universe.5 See appendix B on cosmic, solar, biological, and
human entropy flows and the second law of thermodynamics.
   We need to see Shannon’s “information source” as a speaker or
writer creating a new message that has more than just the generic
meaning or “sense” that anyone familiar with the language would
interpret in the message. It also carries the intentions of the message
sender, which may or may not be clear to the receiver.
  We must also interpret Shannon’s destination and observer as
something more than a communications device. It is an intelligent
  4     See chapter 2 on identity as intrinsic information.
  5     See chapter 5 on negative entropy as value.
         144       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               agent who will find meaning in the message by interpreting it, draw-
               ing inferences from the message content and context, which includes
               knowing the sender and thus the sender’s possible implications.
                  Edmund Husserl, perhaps following Franz Brentano, said
               meaning depends on the intentions, the implications, of a speaker.
               Among twentieth-century logicians, C.I. Lewis insisted that the
               meaning in logical implication must be more than the “material
               implication” that Russell, Wittgenstein, Carnap, and Quine saw in
               any “if p, then q” statement. In the Principia Mathematica, q is true
               even if the antecedent p is false and totally unrelated to the conse-
Chapter 11




               quent q. This turns out to work well for mathematics and computer
               logic, but is bizarre and non-intuitive for human communications.
               Lewis insisted that “strict implication” would be intensional, not
               extensional. Quine fought Lewis and historically won the argument.
                   It was the greatest American logician, Charles Sanders Peirce,
               who stressed the role of the message receiver, whom Peirce called the
               interpretant. Post-modern literary critics have come to say all mean-
               ing in a text depends only on the receiver, the “reader-response“
               theory, but this clearly goes too far. Jacques Derrida’s idea that
               the meaning of any word is diachronically deferred, his “differance,”
               is actually quite insightful. We cannot discern the meaning until a
               message is complete.
                  Most logicians follow Gottlob Frege’s distinction between the
               reference (denotation, name) and the sense (meaning) of a word.
               But few know that Frege limited the “sense” to the everyday meaning
               attached to a word by the users of the language. Frege also described
               the “idea” or “representation” (Vorstellung) that would form in the
               mind of the message receiver. This, he said, would be different in
               every mind, since it is dependent on the peculiar experiences of
               each person. This fits perfectly with our experience recorder and
               reproducer (ERR) as a model of mind, memory, and knowledge.
                  We revise Shannon’s diagram to center the “message” between
               sender and receiver and also center it vertically between the context
               below (e.g, an object) and the concept (the idea) above).
                                                                Meaning        145




                                                                                 Chapter 11
  Figure 11-4.   Shannon’s diagram enhanced with semiotic information flows.

  This reflects our triad of worlds, material, biological, and ideal as
well as Peirce’s object, percept, and concept. The various flow arrows
represent recursive paths in the complicated process of extracting
meaning
   Our information theory of meaning combines all three of Witt-
genstein’s theories - meaning as a picture (Peirce’s icon), meaning
as verification (Peirce’s abduction), and meaning as use (Peirce’s
interpretant). It is only weakly related to the logical empiricists (e.g.,
Carnap, Quine) who viewed the meaning of a word as the extension
of things in the world of which the term is “true” (independent of
any users) and to the modern logicians (e.g, Kripke and Putnam)
who think meaning is found in the necessity of naming.6
   They could at most get Frege’s “sense,” not ideas in minds,7 which,
as materialists, they dismissed as “psychological.”

  6     See chapter 2 on the metaphysics of necessity.
  7     See chapter 12 on our information model of the mind.
         146   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 12




                              Mind




                                                           This chapter on the web
                                                 informationphilosopher.com/mind
                                                              Mind        147


Mind
    Of all the problems that information philosophy may help to
solve, few are more important than the question of Mind. There is
little in philosophy and science that is more dehumanizing than
the logic chopping and sophistical word juggling that denies the
existence of both mind and consciousness.
  Some of the earliest philosophers saw an immaterial mind as
the source of eternal truths about reality that could not be based
on mere phenomena - unreliable sensations emanating from
material bodies.




                                                                            Chapter 12
   René Descartes’ dualism left room for a non-­mechanistic,
immaterial, and indeterministic human mind above and beyond
the deterministic limits set by the laws of nature, when the bodies
of all animals are reduced to living machines.
   Immanuel Kant renamed the ancient division of sensible and
intelligible worlds. The sensible he called phenomena. He located
God, freedom, and immortality in a noumenal world.
   Information philosophy hopes to show that information is itself
that immaterial “substance” above and beyond matter and energy
that the ancients, Descartes, and Kant were all looking for. Mind
is metaphysical, but not supernatural.
The Scandal in Psychology
    It’s a scandal that psychology today is a science without a subject
- it has lost its mind! In the 19th century, positivism and material-
ism left the new science of psychology dis-spirited. In the 1920’s
psychology surrendered its soul to behaviorism. In the 1950’s it
gave up consciousness, when cognitive science found no “ghost
in the machine.” Since the 1970’s it has been replaced by cognitive
science and neuroscience.
  Can there be a psychology without a psyche?
         148     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  A survey of today’s four leading textbooks on psychology
               finds only one that defines psychology as “the science of mind.”
               Another has for its main index entry, “mind, theory of, see theory
               of mind. A third, has “mind, see brain,” and the last has no entry at
               all under “mind.” Today mind is a psychologist’s taboo.
                 The assault on the mind and the study of mind by introspection
               was led by John B. Watson, who in the early twentieth century
               applied positivist ideas to psychology, reducing it to objectively
               possible observations and measurements of the motor behavior of
               animals and humans.
                  Like the positivists, Watson and later B. F. Skinner, were mate-
Chapter 12




               rialists and determinists who not only ruled out the mind and con-
               sciousness, but also free will. Although behaviorism faded with
               the retirement of Skinner, the basic position of denying free will,
               consciousness, and mind continues as the fundamental stance of
               cognitive science and neuroscience.
                  The most popular representational theory of mind today is the
               computational mind model. Leading philosophers of mind claim
               to prove that the “causal closure” of the physical world reduces
               mental events to physical events. Eliminative materialism does
               not bother to say the mind is an epiphenomenon. Mental states
               simply do not exist. Consciousness cannot be explained. It is
               explained away.
                  It is a scandal today that some academic psychologists are con-
               vincing students that they are machines, their brains are comput-
               ers, and their actions are completely determined.
               Mind as Immaterial Information
                  Information philosophy views the mind as the immaterial
               information in a brain. The material brain is seen as a biological
               information processor. Mind is software in the brain’s hardware,
               although it is altogether different from the logic gates, bit storage,
               algorithms, computations, and input/output systems of the type of
                                                           Mind       149

digital computer that is used as a “computational model of mind”
by today’s cognitive scientists.
   The “stuff ” of thought is pure information, neither matter nor
energy, though it needs matter for its embodiment and energy
for its communication. Information is the modern spirit, the soul
in the body, the ghost in the machine.
The Evolution of Information to Become Mind
   How did material substances come to be able to think? Ancient
philosophers assumed that mind and thought must be primor-
dial, perhaps prior to the creation of matter. In recent centuries




                                                                        Chapter 12
philosophers argued that mind must be an inherent “panpsy-
chist” property of all matter, because they could not identify a
time when material things acquired a mental property.
   But we can now outline the creation and evolution of informa-
tion from an initial state of the universe (with minimal, essen-
tially zero information and the most elementary of particles and
radiation) to the “information age” of today.
   The first proto-minds appear not long after the beginnings of
life. We identify the origin of life with the ability of some large
molecules to replicate and communicate information so as to har-
ness a cosmic flow of information-rich energy that we describe as
negative entropy.
   Information philosophy makes the straightforward claim that
human beings, especially their minds, are the most highly evolved
form of information generating, processing, and communicat-
ing system in the known universe. Recognizing this simple fact
provides a radically new perspective on the central problems of
psychology and philosophy of mind.
  In a very deep sense, we are information.
   The story of evolution, from a minimal information universe
origin, through 4 billion years of biology, to the information-pro-
cessing brain/mind, now contemplating the universe, can be told
in three major emergences:
         150         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 • the self-organization of elementary matter, quarks to protons
               and neutrons etc., then atoms, then galaxies, stars, and planets, all
               material information structures,
                 • the first appearance of life, information structures that create,
               process, and communicate information inside an organism and
               between generations by variation, natural selection, and heredity,
                  • the appearance of human minds, which create, process, and
               store information external to their bodies.
                   With the appearance of life, purpose entered the universe. The
               fundamental purpose of all life is to survive, at least long enough to
               replicate. For most species, all of the information needed to survive
Chapter 12




               is transmitted in the genes and the supporting biological machinery
               of the cell. To benefit from the experiences of an ancestor, those
               experiences must somehow be encoded genetically, so they show up
               as a priori, built-in capabilities of the offspring. Konrad Lorenz
               said that what is a priori for an individual (ontogeny) was a poste-
               riori for its ancestors (phylogeny).1
                  The appearance of human minds marks the beginning of sig-
               nificant amounts of knowledge stored extra-biologically. Externally
               stored information needed for human survival is transmitted cul-
               turally between the generations - parents teaching children. The
               development of the highest forms of philosophical and scientific
               thought would have been impossible without the externally stored
               information we call the Sum. Arguably, even language itself could
               not have developed. A child deprived of its senses for access to
               human culture would never speak. According to Merlin Donald,
               human culture did not develop because humans had acquired lan-
               guage to communicate. We developed language to improve on the
               primitive communication capabilities (grunting, miming, pointing,
               signing) of pre-linguistic humans.2
               An Information Mind Model
                  Our model of mind as pure information coincides with Plato’s
               “Ideas” or “Forms” as pure form, with an ontology different from
               that of matter. The immaterial Forms, seen by the intellect (nous),
               illuminated by the Good, allow us to understand the world. If this
                 1     Evolution and Modification of Behavior.
                 2     A Mind So Rare.
                                                                          Mind   151

theory of mind seems metaphysical, that is appropriate, but we do
not view the mind as non-physical. The mind is physical but it is not
material.
   After all, the information stored in our experience recorder and
reproducer is embodied. Like the information embodied in matter,
it corresponds simply to a reorganization of the matter. So we can
also accept Aristotle’s more practical view. For him, Plato’s Ideas
were mere abstractions generalized from many existent particulars.
Form without matter is empty, matter without form is inconceiv-
able, unimaginable. Kant rewrote this pre-Socratic observation
somewhat obscurely as “Thoughts without content are empty, intu-
itions without concepts are blind.”3




                                                                                   Chapter 12
   In our model of the mind, the great difference between the
mental and the material is that the information in a material object
is generally passive. The information in the mind is active, with real
causal power.4
    But there are other characteristic differences between the mental
and the material world that modern science, even neuroscience,
may never fully explain. The most important is the internal and pri-
vate first-person point of view, the essential subjectivity, the “I” and
the “eye” of the mind, its capability of introspection and reflection,
its intentionality, its purposiveness, its consciousness. The mind
records an individual’s experiences as internal information struc-
tures in the ERR and then can play back these recordings to com-
pare them to new perceptions, new external events. The recordings
include an individual’s emotional reactions to past experiences, our
feelings. The reproduction of recorded personal experiences, stimu-
lated by similarities in current experience, provide the core of “what
it’s like to be” an individual.
   The external and public physical world, by contrast, is studied
from the third-person point of view. Although putatively “objective,”
science in fact is the composite “intersubjective” view of the “com-
munity of inquirers,” as Charles Sanders Peirce put it. Although
this shared subjectivity can never directly experience what goes on
in the mind of an individual member of the community, science
is in some sense the collective mind of the physical world. It is a
pale record of the world’s experiences, because it lacks the emo-
  3     Critique of Pure Reason, 2nd ed. Second Part, I, Transcendental Logic,
  4     See the discussion of agent causality in chapter 4.
         152         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               tional aspect of personal experience. The physical world itself has
               no sense of its history. It does not introspect or reflect. It lacks con-
               sciousness, that problem in philosophy of mind second only to the
               basic mind-body problem itself. We see consciousness as based on a
               highly evolved experience recorder and reproducer (ERR) that even
               the lowest organisms may have.
                  Aristotle, in his Book III, Parts IV and V, of De Anima (On the
               Soul), perhaps the most controversial and confusing part of his
               entire corpus, says that the soul (psyche) or mind is immaterial. He
               was right. For Aristotle, Intellect (nous) is that part of the soul whose
               active thinking gives it a causal (aition) power (dynamis) over the
Chapter 12




               material (hyle) body (soma). This claim anticipates the mind-body
               problem of René Descartes. How exactly does an immaterial thing
               (substance) or property exert a causal force on the material body?
                   It is sometimes forgotten that Descartes made the mind the locus
               of undetermined freedom. For him, the body is a deterministic
               mechanical system of tiny fibres causing movements in the brain
               (the afferent sensations), which then can pull on other fibres to acti-
               vate the muscles (the efferent nerve impulses). This is the basis of
               stimulus and response theory in modern physiology (reflexology).
               It is also the basis behind connectionist mind models. An appropri-
               ate network need only connect the afferent to the efferent signals.
               Descartes said no thinking mind is needed for animals (or comput-
               ers where inputs completely determine outputs).
                 The popular idea of animals as machines included the notion
               that man too is in part a machine - the human body is thought to
               obey strictly deterministic causal laws. But for Descartes man also
               has a soul or spirit that is exempt from determinism and thus from
               what is known today as “causal closure.” But how, we must ask, can
               the mind both cause something physical to happen and yet itself be
               acausal, exempt from causal chains? This is the problem of mental
               causation.5
                  Since Immanuel Kant, this problem has become even more
               severe. The freedom in Kant’s noumenal world - outside space and
               time - has no apparent connection with his deterministic phenom-
               enal world. For Kant, causality is a category of understanding appli-
               cable only to the phenomenal world. In a similar vein, the twenti-
                 5     See chapter 16.
                                                           Mind          153

eth-century philosopher Gilbert Ryle called the concept of mind
a “category mistake.”6
   Information philosophy hopes to solve the mind/body prob-
lem, the “hard problem” of consciousness, the problem of other
minds, and the problem of mental causation, not by postulating a
non-physical world, but instead a world that answers to the ancient
description of “metaphysical,” because it is non-material. This meta-
physical world is the locus of everything Aristotle included in his
first philosophy, the laws of thought and today the laws of physics.
    The metaphysical world of information is abstract, not concrete,
intangible, yet with causal power as Aristotle thought. The mate-




                                                                           Chapter 12
rial world is made up in part of information structures. (We shall
see that most of the matter in the universe is chaotic and contains
little or no information.) But material information structures, from
the galaxies, stars, and planets, to all of life on the planet, can be
perceived because of their information content. What we see is
their abstract information which we then re-present as information
structures in the mind/brain. To the extent that the information in
the mind is isomorphic with the information in the object, we can
say that a subject has knowledge of the external world. To the extent
that information in other minds is isomorphic, we have intersubjec-
tive shared knowledge, something very difficult to show with words
or logic alone.
  Information philosophy goes “beyond logic and language.”
  6    The Concept of Mind.
         154   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 13




                                 - B o d y
                         M i n d
                                b  l e m
                          Pro




                                                                This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/problems/mind-body
                                                          Mind-Body    155


The Mind-Body Problem
   Information philosophy views the mind as the immaterial
information in the brain, which is seen as a biological information
processor. Mind is software in the brain’s hardware.
  The “stuff ” of thought is pure information. Information is nei-
ther matter nor energy, though it needs matter for its embodiment
and energy for its communication.
   In ancient philosophy, mind and body formed one of the clas-
sic dualisms,1 like idealism versus materialism, the problem of the
one (monism) or the many (pluralism), the distinction between




                                                                         Chapter 13
essence and existence, between universals and particulars,
between the eternal and the ephemeral.
   When mind and body are viewed today as a dualism, it is
because the mind is considered to be fundamentally different
from the material brain, though perhaps not another “substance.”
We propose an easily understandable and critically important
physical difference between matter and immaterial information.
Whereas the total amount of matter is conserved, the universe
is continuously creating new information - by rearranging exist-
ing matter into new information structures. The total amount of
information (a kind of order) in the universe is increasing, despite
the second law of thermodynamics, which requires that the total
amount of disorder (entropy) is also increasing.2
   Matter, along with energy (mc2), cannot increase. It is con-
served, a constant of the universe. Information is not conserved.
As information grows, it is the source of genuine novelty in the
universe. The future is not determined by the past and present,
because the future contains unpredictable new information. New
information is continuously created.
   If mind and matter then are to be considered part of a dualism,
it will not be a “material substance” dualism, but it can still be
a “physical substance” dualism, since mind and matter are both
physical and are “substantial,” in the sense of having real causal
  1    See chapter 3 for more on dualisms.
  2    See appendices A and B for how this is possible.
         156     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               power. We recognize that something immaterial with causal
               power also fits the description of metaphysical. See chapter 2 on
               metaphysics.
                  A mind-body dualism coincides with Plato’s “ideas” as pure
               form, distinct from matter. The ontology and the nature of an idea
               is different from that of matter. The ancients asked about the exis-
               tential status of Platonic Ideas. On the other hand, monists may
               see both mind and body as pure physicalism, since information
               embodied in matter corresponds to a mere reorganization of the
               matter. This was Aristotle’s more practical view. For him, Plato’s
               Ideas were mere abstractions generalized from many existent par-
Chapter 13




               ticulars.
                  Mind-body as a “problem” is generally traced to René Des-
               cartes, who asked how the immaterial mind (or soul) could
               influence the material body. Would not the interaction between
               the two have to partake somehow of the character of both? Des-
               cartes famously identified the tiny pineal gland as the point of
               contact between mind and body.
                 Importantly, Descartes also made the mind the locus of free-
               dom. He saw the body as a mechanical system of tiny fibres caus-
               ing movements in the brain (the afferent sensations), which then
               can pull on other fibres to activate the muscles (the efferent nerve
               impulses). This is the basis of stimulus and response theory in
               modern physiology(reflexology).
                  The popular idea of animals as machines included the notion
               that man too is a machine - the body obeys strictly determinis-
               tic causal laws - but that man has a soul or spirit that is exempt
               from determinism and thus from what is known today as “causal
               closure.” But how can the mind both cause something physical to
               happen and yet itself be exempt from causal chains?
               Interactionists
                 In modern times some philosophers and scientists have pro-
               posed interactionist models and have also attempted to locate
               specific parts of the brain (beyond Descartes’ pineal gland), for
               example at the synapses between neurons, where quantum effects
                                                    Mind-Body          157

might be important. The neuroscientist John Eccles and philos-
opher Karl Popper considered such models in their articles and
books over many years.
    Attempts to use the mysterious properties of quantum mechan-
ics to explain the mysterious problems of consciousness and
psycho-physical relations between mind and body have resolved
little, since they explain one mystery with another mystery.
  Information philosophy identifies the (immaterial) mind with
the incredible biological information processing going on in the
brain. This processing operates on two levels.
  At the macro level, the mind/brain is adequately determined to




                                                                         Chapter 13
make its decisions and resulting actions in ways that are causally
connected with the agent’s character and values. It is everything
that determinist and compatibilist philosophers expect it to be.
   At the micro level, the mind/brain leaves itself open to signifi-
cant thermal and quantal noise in its retrieval of past experiences.
This generates creative and unpredictable alternative possibilities
for thought and action. This is our best hope for a measure of lib-
ertarianism.
   Our mind/brain model emphasizes the abstract information
content of the mind. Information is neither matter nor energy,
yet it needs matter for its concrete embodiment and energy for
its communication. Information is the modern spirit, the ghost in
the machine.
  Because it is embodied in the brain, this mind can control the
actions of a body that is macroscopic and is normally unaffected
by its own quantum level uncertainty (excepting when we want to
be creative and unpredictable.
   Thus our mind-body model explains how an immaterial, “free,”
unpredictable, and creative mind can control the adequately
determined material body through the self-determinate and
responsible actions selected by the will from an agenda of alterna-
tive possibilities.
         158       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Moreover, since some “mental events” are large enough informa-
               tion structures to be adequately determined, these mental events
               can act causally on lower biological and physical levels in the hierar-
               chy, in particular, the mind can move the body and all its contained
               physical particles, thus solving the mind-body problem.
                  A specific example of the mind causing an action, while not itself
               being caused by antecedent events is the following. Faced with a
               decision of what to do next, the mind considers several possible
               alternatives, at least some of which are creatively invented based on
               random ideas that just “come to mind.” Other possible alternatives
               might be familiar options, even habits, that have frequently been
Chapter 13




               done in earlier similar situations.
                  Some of these mental alternatives are new information that show
               up as “neural correlates” - brain neurons firing. When the alterna-
               tives are evaluated and one is selected, the selected action results
               in still other neurons firing, some of which connect to the motor
               cortex that signals muscles to move the body.
                  Apart from the occasional indeterministic generation of new
               information in the creative new alternative ideas, this whole causal
               process is adequately determined and it is downwardly causal.
               Mental events are causing physical body events.
               The Mind-Brain Identity Theory
                  In the mid-twentieth century a number of philosophers proposed
               a monistic and physicalistic solution to the mind-body problem by
               simply identifying the mind and brain as one physical thing, subject
               to the normal laws of physics.
                   Holistic critics attacked this view as reducing the mind to the
               brain, leaving the mind merely an epiphenomenon or illusion. This
               fit well into the reductionist program of the logical empiricists of the
               Vienna Circle, who promoted the idea of the Unity of Science. All
               events should be reducible to physical events, and in particular, all
               explanations should be traceable to causes originating in the physi-
               cal material components of the universe.
                                                                  Mind-Body           159

    The first philosophers to argue for an identity of mind (or con-
sciousness) and brain include Ullin T. Place, Herbert Feigl, and
J.J.C.Smart (1959).
   Place explicitly describes “consciousness as a brain process,” spe-
cifically as “patterns” of brain activity. He does not trivialize this
identity as a succession of individual “mental events and physical
events” in some kind of causal chain. He compares this identity to
the idea that “lightning is a motion of electrical charges.”3
   Feigl’s work was independent of Place’s, but he said that the fun-
damental idea had been held by many earlier materialist (monist)
thinkers. He thought it was stated clearly by Vienna Circle philoso-
pher Rudolf Carnap in 1925. Feigl describes his own thesis:




                                                                                        Chapter 13
      The identity thesis which I wish to clarify and to defend asserts that the
      states of direct experience which conscious beings “live through” and
      those which we confidently ascribe to some of the higher animals, are
      identical with certain (presumably configurational) aspects of the neural
      processes in these organisms.4
  Smart clarified and extended the identity theory of Place.
      When I say that a sensation is a brain process or that lightning is an
      electric discharge, I am using “is” in the sense of strict identity. (Just as
      in the — in this case necessary — proposition “7 is identical with the
      smallest prime number greater than 5.”) When I say that a sensation is
      a brain process or that lightning is an electric discharge I do not mean
      just that the sensation is somehow spatially or temporally continuous
      with the brain process or that the lightning is just spatially or temporally
      continuous with the discharge.5
   Smart is a strong materialist. He says “A man is a vast arrange-
ment of physical particles, but there are not, over and above this,
sensations or states of consciousness.” (ibid.) Compare Anthony
Cashmore, who says in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences that we are “just a bag of chemicals.”6
Eliminative Materialism
  Philosophers who accept the idea that all laws of nature are deter-
ministic and that the world is causally closed still cannot under-
  3       British Journal of Psychology, 47, pp.44-50 1956
  4       Concepts, Theories, and the Mind-Body Problem , Feigl, 1958, p.150
  5       Philosophical Review, 68 pp.141-156 (1959)
  6       PNAS, vol. 107, no. 10, p. 4500
         160       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               stand how an immaterial mind can be the cause of an action. On this
               view, every physical event is reducible to the microscopic motions
               of physical particles. The laws of biology are reducible to those of
               physics and chemistry. The mind is reducible to the brain, with no
               remainder.
                 These philosophers of mind are content to simply eliminate the
               mind. Psychology without a psyche!
                  For these philosophers of mind, essentially no progress has been
               made on the mind-body problem since Descartes. “Reductionists”
               who accept “causal closure” think that every brain event must have
               been determined by causes coming “bottom-up” from the brain’s
Chapter 13




               atoms and molecules. Any additional mental cause should be
               excluded, according to Jaegwon Kim.
                  Since the early twentieth century, quantum mechanics adds the
               possibility that some processes are indeterministic, but random
               quantum-mechanical events have generally been thought to be
               unhelpful by philosophers of mind. Adding indeterminism to
               mental events apparently would only make our actions random and
               our desires the product of pure chance. If our willed actions are not
               determined by anything, they say, we are neither morally respon-
               sible nor truly free. Whether mental events are reducible to physi-
               cal events, or whether mental events can be physical events with-
               out such a reduction, the interposition of indeterministic quantum
               processes apparently adds no explanatory power. And of course if
               mental events are epiphenomenal, they are not causally related to
               bodily actions. Epiphenomenal access to quantum physics would
               not help.
                  Mental causation is a special case of the more general problem
               of downward causation, for example the downward control of the
               motions of a cell’s atoms and molecules by supervening biological
               macromolecules. Is the molecular biology of a cell reducible to the
               laws governing the motions of its component molecules, or are there
               emergent laws governing motions at the cellular level, still different
               laws at the organ level, at the organism level up to the mental level?
                 Emergent properties or laws at the higher levels of a physical-
               chemical-based biological system would have to prevent those
               higher levels from being reduced to the properties and laws of the
                                                             Mind-Body   161

base physical level? These emergent properties are not a new kind
of “stuff,” but they are nevertheless often described as an emergent
dualism, specifically a property dualism.
   Is it illogical to deny reductionist ideas of bottom-up causa-
tion (because of indeterministic quantum noise) and yet to defend
adequately determined downward causation (because quantum
effects are averaged out by macroscopic objects)? The arguments
are subtle and depend on the complementary roles of determinism
(Schrödinger evolution of the wave function) and indeterminism
(wave-function collapse) in quantum physics.
  Perhaps the most critically important emergent law of all is the




                                                                           Chapter 13
abstract idea of determinism itself. Determinism in the macroscopic
world emerges from the indeterministic microscopic quantum
world by averaging over vast numbers of atoms and molecules. Even
before quantum mechanics, Ludwig Boltzmann knew that the
macroscopic gas laws were only adequately or statistically deter-
mined by the average motions of extremely large numbers of mole-
cules.




  Figure 13-5. A taxonomy of philosophy of mind positions.

  Idealism claims that all is mind, perhaps a Western panpsychism
or Eastern philosopical ideas like Advaita Vedanta or Mahayana
Buddhism? The neutral monism of William James, Ernst Mach,
         162       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               and Bertrand Russell is closely related to Carl Jung’s “dual-
               aspect” monism. They are looking for a basic underlying substance.
                  Baruch Spinoza claimed mind and body are one ontological
               substance. The mind-brain identity theory of Herbert Feigl, J. J.
               C. Smart, and U. T. Place is a materialism and an epiphenome-
               nalism. Daniel Dennett, the Churchlands (Paul and Patricia),
               Francis Crick, Christof Koch, and Jaegwon Kim are elimina-
               tive materialists.
                  Donald Davidson’s anomalous monism may be a non-reduc-
               tive physicalism? Property dualisms assume just one substance, so
               are in a sense monistic. Karl Popper and John Eccles’ interac-
Chapter 13




               tionism and Joseph Levine’s “explanatory gap” are modern forms
               of Cartesianism.
                  Gottlieb Leibniz’s pre-established harmony is psycho-phys-
               icalism or psycho-physical parallelism. It denies interactionism,
               which remains unexplained. In later years, Leibniz’ monadology
               leaned toward a monism. Occasionalists are parallelists who say
               God creates an interaction when needed. Galen Strawson’s real-
               istic physicalism or “realistic monism” resembles Arthur Stanley
               Eddington’s panpsychism.
                  Panpsychists can hold that there is a material world, but that every
               material object has some mentality. David Chalmers has leaned
               toward panpsychism in recent years. Other panpsychists include
               Michael Lockwood, William Lycan, and Thomas Nagel. They
               argue that panpsychism removes the need to identify a time and
               place for the emergence of the mind.
                 For over 20 years, Henry Stapp has attempted to reconcile
               Werner Heisenberg’s quantum mechanics, especially the “free
               choice” of the experimenter, with Alfred North Whitehead’s
               idea that quantum theory and his process philosophy might explain
               panpsychism. Today “Quantum Whiteheadians” include Stuart
               Hameroff, Roger Penrose, and Abner Shimony.
                 Non-reductive physicalism is an emergent dualism in which
               mental events are physical and have causal powers over brain events
               and the material body.
                                                     Mind-Body             163

   The information philosophy mind model is a dualist non-reduc-
tive physicalism. The mind is physical, but immaterial. Thoughts
have causal powers because they are considered as freely gener-
ated alternative possibilities for actions by a will that is adequately
determined by the agent’s reasons, motives, desires, feelings, etc. - in
short, by the agent’s character.
Mind/Body and the ERR
   As opposed to the philosophers above who identify the mind
with the brain, we look to those philosophers and scientists such
as Popper and Eccles who have proposed interactionist models and
have also attempted to locate specific parts of the brain, for example




                                                                             Chapter 13
at the synapses between neurons, where quantum effects might be
important.
  But all the attempts to use the mysterious properties of quantum
mechanics to explain the mysterious problems of consciousness and
psycho-physical relations between mind and body have been just
that, explaining one mystery with another mystery.
   Information philosophy identifies the immaterial mind with the
incredible biological information processing going on in the brain.
What we might call pre-processing is happening in the experience
recorder, which is growing new synapses in the brain where neurons
have fired in response to current experiences.
  Abstract information, the stuff of the mind, is being embodied in
those newly wired neurons.
  What we might call post-processing is when the experience repro-
ducer is stimulated to generate those older patterns of information
that most resemble current experience, because they lie in nearby
neurons of the brain.
  Reproducing information is likely to be very noisy and thus the
source of genuinely new alternative possibilities.
  The experience recorder and reproducer (ERR) is both mind and
body, both information and its embodiment. Although the ERR
implements both levels, it does not make them identical.
         164   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 14




                                         n e s s
                      Cons         cious




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                      informationphilosopher.com/problems/consciousness
                                                Consciousness           165


Consciousness
   Consciousness can be defined in information terms as a prop-
erty of an entity (usually a living thing but we can also include
artificially conscious machines or computers) that interacts with
the information (especially reacting to any changes in the infor-
mation) in its environment and in itself.
    We can define this as information consciousness.
   Thus an animal in a deep sleep is not conscious because it ignores
changes in its environment. And robots may be conscious in our
sense. Artificial intelligence normally has artificial consciousness
in our sense. Even the lowliest control system using negative feed-
back (a thermostat, for example) is in a minimal sense conscious




                                                                          Chapter 14
of (aware of, exchanging information about) changes in its envi-
ronment.
   This definition of consciousness fits with our model of the mind
as an experience recorder and reproducer (ERR).1 The ERR model
stands in contrast to the popular cognitive science or “computa-
tional” model of a mind as a digital computer or connectionist
neural network modeled with logic gates. No algorithms or stored
programs are needed for the ERR model, although we do see mind
as software in the brain hardware.
   Our consciousness model assumes that neurons that get wired
together during an organism’s experiences, in multiple sensory
and limbic systems, are such that later firing of even a part of
those wired neurons (caused by a new experience that resembles
an original experience in one or more ways) can stimulate firing
of all or part of the original complex.
  If the neural correlate of consciousness is neurons firing, firing
them again can reproduce consciousness of the past.
   Whereas Donald Hebb famously argued that “neurons that
fire together wire together,” our experience recorder and repro-
ducer (ERR) model assumes that “neurons that have been wired
together will fire together.”
1        See appendix E for details.
         166     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               The Binding Problem
                  Neuroscientists are investigating how diverse signals from
               multiple pathways can be unified in the brain. The ERR offers a
               very simple and specific insight into this “binding” problem. We
               also hope to shed some light on the question of philosophical
               “meaning”2 of any given information structure, beyond the
               obvious relevance (survival value) for the organism of remember-
               ing past experiences.
                  There is a great deal of controversy about whether most living
               things have some form of consciousness. Defining consciousness
               as interactions, with exchanges of meaningful information, espe-
               cially exchanges that involve coding and decoding and transla-
               tions between symbolic systems, may allow applications to bio-
Chapter 14




               logical subsystems like organs and organelles.
                  A higher-level conscious being is constantly recording informa-
               tion about its perceptions of the external world, and most impor-
               tantly for ERR, it is simultaneously recording its feelings. Sensory
               data such as sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and tactile sensations
               are recorded in a sequence along with pleasure and pain states,
               fear and comfort levels, etc.
                  All these experiential and emotional data are recorded in asso-
               ciation with one another. This means that when the experiences
               are reproduced (played back in a temporal sequence), the accom-
               panying emotions are once again felt, in synchronization.
                  The capability of reproducing experiences is critical to learning
               from past experiences, so as to make them guides for action in
               future experiences. We see the ERR model as the minimal mind
               model that provides for such learning by living organisms.
                  The ERR model does not need a single “central processor unit”
               (CPU) or even several “parallel processors.” It does not use com-
               puter-like “data retrieval,” based on the “address” of the data, to
               reproduce past experiences. All that is required is that past experi-
               ences “play back” (are reproduced) whenever they are stimulated
               by present experiences that resemble the past experiences in one
               or more ways. When the organism repeats past experiences by
               acting them out, they can become “habitual” behaviors, “subcon-
               scious” information structures.
                 2    See chapter 11.
                                                          Consciousness          167

  It is critical that the original emotions also play back, along with
any variations in current emotions that are experienced on play-
back. ERR might then become an explanatory basis for condition-
ing experiments, classical Pavlovian and operant conditioning,
and in general a model for associative learning.
  Bernard Baars’s Global Workspace Theory uses the meta-
phor of a “Theater of Consciousness,” in which there is an audi-
ence of purposeful agents calling for the attention of the executive
on stage.3
   In the ERR model, vast numbers of past experiences clamor for
the attention of the central executive at all times, whenever any-
thing in current experience has some resemblance.




                                                                                   Chapter 14
   If we define “current experience” as all afferent perceptions plus
the current contents of consciousness itself, we get a dynamic self-
referential system with plenty of opportunities for negative and
positive feedback.
  William James’s description of a “stream of consciousness”
together with a “blooming, buzzing confusion” of the unconscious
appear to describe the ERR model very well.
  In the “blackboard” model of Allan Newell and Herbert
Simon, concepts written on the blackboard call up similar con-
cepts by association from deep memory structures. The ERR
model supports this view, and explains the mechanism by which
concepts (past experiences) are retrieved and come to the black-
board.
  In Daniel Dennett’s consciousness model, the mind is made
up of innumerable functional homunculi, each with its own goals
and purposes. His mind architecture is an amalgam of ideas like
Marvin Minsky’s Society of Mind, Baars’ Global Workspace, and
the Simon-Newell “Blackboard.”
  Dennett says
      “There is no single, definitive “stream of consciousness,” because there
      is no central Headquarters, no Cartesian Theater where ‘it all comes
      together’ for the perusal of a Central Meaner. Instead of such a single
      stream (however wide) there are multiple channels in which special-
      ist circuits try, in parallel pandemoniums, to do their various things,
      creating Multiple Drafts as they go.” 4
  3       In the Theater of Consciousness.
  4       Consciousness Explained, p.253.
         168         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Dennett describes the “binding problem” as a “single representa-
               tional space in the brain” where the various results come together.5
               In our consciousness model, the playback of all the combined sen-
               sations of a past experience fire exactly the same neurons wherever
               they were originally recorded, anywhere in the entire cortex, includ-
               ing the association areas, for example.
                  Dennett says the idea has been around for several years that
               human consciousness might be the activity of some sort of serial
               virtual machine implemented on the parallel hardware of the brain.6
                  But our consciousness model is not a machine at all. It is simply
               the idea that whatever we are aware of at any moment is stimulat-
               ing the firing of the complex network of neurons that were wired
               together in many similar past moments, giving the current moment
Chapter 14




               a vast collection of contextual references that supply the informa-
               tion needed for interpretation.
                  Like Dennett’s model, there is no Cartesian Theater for a “Central
               Meaner.” In the ERR as mind model, we expect the mind would
               interpret the new firing of multiply connected neurons coming
               from visual, auditory, olfactory, tactile areas, as reproducing the
               original experience (much more than a simple memory). These are
               likely pale shadows, mere “gists” of the original conscious experi-
               ence, and likely very noise-susceptible, but they provide context,
               meaning, and emotional reactions to past actions.
                  David Chalmers is a philosopher of mind whose characterization
               of consciousness as “the hard problem” has set a very high bar for
               understanding the mind. Chalmers describes his position as a nat-
               uralistic dualism. Chalmers says that the failure of supervenience
               implies that materialism - as a monistic theory of the complete con-
               tents of the world, that there is “nothing but” matter, and that the
               world is “causally closed,” for example - is “false.” We agree with this
               and believe that the reductionist arguments of Jaegwon Kim can be
               shown wrong. Chalmers says:
                 5     ibid,, p.254.
                 6     ibid, p.258.
                                                          Consciousness            169

      In our world, there are conscious experiences.
      There is a logically possible world physically identical to ours, in which
      the positive facts about consciousness in our world do not hold.
      Therefore, facts about consciousness are further facts about our world,
      over and above the physical facts.
      So materialism is false.7
  Chalmers suggests that the dualistic (non-physical) element
might be information. Indeed it might. With this idea, information
philosophy completely agrees. Mind/body is a property dualism
   Chalmers says that “physical realization is the most common way
to think about information embedded in the world, but it is not the
only way information can be found. We can also find information
realized in our phenomenology.”8
  He is quite correct. Information is neither matter nor energy. It




                                                                                     Chapter 14
needs matter to be embedded temporarily in the brain. And it needs
energy to be communicated. But information is immaterial.
  Four “Levels” of Consciousness
  • Instinctive Consciousness - by animals with little or no learn-
ing capability. Automatic reactions to environmental conditions
are transmitted genetically. Information about past experiences (by
prior generations of the organism) is only present implicitly in the
inherited reactions
  • Learned Consciousness - for animals whose past experiences
guide current choices. Conscious, but mostly habitual, reactions
are developed through experience, including instruction by parents
and peers.
   • Predictive Consciousness - The Sequencer in the ERR system can
play back beyond the current situation, allowing the organism to
use imagination and foresight to evaluate the future consequences
of its choices.
  • Reflective (Normative) Consciousness– in which conscious delib-
eration about values influences the choice of behaviors.
  All four levels are emergent, in the sense that they did not exist in
the lower, earlier levels of biological evolution.
  7       The Conscious Mind, p.123
  8       ibid. p.284
           170   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter
  Chapter




                                  e l f a n d
                                S
        1415




                              e
                            Th r Minds
                            Othe




                                                               This chapter on the web
                                                informationphilosopher.com/mind/ego
                                                           The Self        171


The Self and Other Minds
   Celebrating René Descartes, the first modern philosopher,
and his famous phrase Ego cogito, ergo sum, we call our model for
mind the Ego. It is implemented with our experience recorder and
reproducer (ERR).
   Our two-stage model for free will we call the Cogito. Our model
for an objective value, independent of humanity and earthly bio-
ethics, we call Ergo. And our model for knowledge we call the Sum.
   The Ego is more or less synonymous with the Self, the Soul, or
the Spirit - Gilbert Ryle’s “ghost in the machine.” We see it as
immaterial information. An immaterial self with causal power is
almost universally denied by modern philosophers as metaphysi-




                                                                                     1514
cal, along with related problematic ideas such as consciousness




                                                                               Chapter
and libertarian or indeterministic free will.




                                                                             Chapter
  Descartes illustrated a mechanical reflex path, from a foot feel-
ing pain from a fire, up a nerve to the pineal gland in the mind,
and back down to pull away the foot.
   It is important to note that Descartes made that gland the
                                      locus of undetermined freedom
                                      in humans. For him, the body
                                      was a deterministic mechani-
                                      cal system of tiny fibres causing
                                      movements in the brain (the
                                      afferent sensations), which then
                                      can pull on other fibres to acti-
                                      vate the muscles (the efferent
                                      nerve impulses). This is the basis
                                      of stimulus and response theory
                                      in modern physiology (reflexol-
                                      ogy). It is also the basis behind
                                      simple connectionist theories
  Figure 15-6. Descartes’ reflex arc. of mind. An appropriate neural
network (with all the necessary logical connections) need only
connect afferent to efferent signals. No thinking mind is needed
for animals. This “reflex arc” model is still common in biology.
         172         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Descartes’ suggestion that animals are machines included the
               notion that man too is in part a machine - the human body obeys
               deterministic causal laws. Although for Descartes man also has a
               soul or spirit that is exempt from determinism and thus from what
               is known today as “causal closure,” Cartesian dualism was the first
               step to eliminative materialism.
               Mind Over Matter?
                 But as all critics of Descartes do, we must ask, how can the mind
               both cause something physical to happen and yet itself be acausal,?
               How is it exempt from causal chains coming up from the body?
                  Descartes’ vision of undetermined freedom for the mind is real-
               ized since our immaterial thoughts are free, whereas our actions
               are adequately determined by our will. This combination of ideas
Chapter 15




               is the basis for our two-stage model of free will.1 It is a model of
               agent causation. New causal chains originate as ideas in our minds.
               Once evaluated and chosen they are adequately determined to lead
               to willed actions. This is a model for self-determination.
                  The “self ” or ego, the psyche or soul, is the self of this self-deter-
               mination. Self-determination is of course limited by our control
               over matter and energy, but within those physical constraints our
               selves can consider ideas, decide to act on one and take full respon-
               sibility for our actions.
                  The Self is often identified with one’s “character.” This is the basis
               for saying that our choices and decisions are made by evaluating
               freely generated alternative possibilities in accordance with our rea-
               sons, motives, feelings, desires, etc. These are in turn often the con-
               sequence of our past experiences, along with inherited (biologically
               built-in) preferences. And this bundle of motivating factors is essen-
               tially what is known as our character. Someone familiar with all of
               those preferences would be able to predict our actions with some
               certainty, though not perfectly, when faced with particular options
               and the circumstances. The self is the agent that is responsible for
               those actions.
                 1     See chapter 4.
                                                                      The Self       173

   The self is also often described as the seat of consciousness. Infor-
mation philosophy defines consciousness as attention to information
coming in to the mind and the resulting actions that are responsive
to the external stimuli (or bodily proprioceptions). Consciousness
thus depends in part on past experiences which are recalled by the
experience recorder and reproducer as responses to external stim-
uli. In this way, what it’s like to be a conscious agent depends on the
kinds of experiences that the agent can notice.
   David Hume’s so-called “bundle theory” of the self is quite con-
sistent with the information philosophy view. His fundamental
ideas of causality, contiguity, and resemblance as the basis for the
association of ideas are essential aspects of the experience recorder
and reproducer. He said,
      It is plain, that in the course of our thinking, and in the constant revolu-




                                                                                       Chapter 15
      tion of our ideas, our imagination runs easily from one idea to any other
      that resembles it, and that this quality alone is to the fancy a sufficient
      bond and association. It is likewise evident that as the senses, in chang-
      ing their objects, are necessitated to change them regularly, and take
      them as they lie contiguous to each other, the imagination must by long
      custom acquire the same method of thinking, and run along the parts of
      space and time in conceiving its objects.2
    The frog’s eye famously filters out some visual events (moving
concave images) while triggering strong reactions to others, like
sticking out a tongue to capture moving convex objects. What it’s
like to be a frog depends then on some experiences that are never
recorded and thus not meaningful to the frog. Hume might say such
perceptions have no resemblance to anything in the mind of the
frog. The frog’s self is simply not conscious of any sensations that are
filtered out of its perceptions.
The Problem of Other Minds
   The problem of other minds is often posed as just one more
problem in epistemology, that is, how can we be certain about the
existence of other minds, since we can’t be certain about anything
in the external world. But it can also be seen as a problem about
meaningful communications and agreement about shared concepts
in two minds. This makes information philosophy an excellent tool
for approaching the problem.

  2       A Treatise of Human Nature. 4.1, 2
         174       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  For some philosophers, the problem of other minds is dis-solved
               by denying the existence of the mind in general - as merely an epi-
               phenomenon with no causal powers. Other philosophers identify
               the problem with Hume’s claim that when he looked inside he saw
               no self. Our positing the self as the immaterial information about
               stored past experiences clearly helps here.
                 Still others admit that they have perceptions and sensations, but
               how could they possibly know what another person is experiencing.
               For example, I know when I feel pain, but I don’t know what is really
               happening in another person who looks to be feeling pain.
                  The standard answer here is that other persons seem in most
               respect to be similar to ourselves, and so by analogy their experi-
               ences must be similar to ours. This analogical inference is weak
Chapter 15




               because of its literal superficiality, because we don’t get an inside
               view of the other mind.
                  For information philosophy, the problem of knowledge can
               solved by identifying partial isomorphisms in external information
               structures with the pure information in a mind. This suggests the
               solution of other minds. Looked at this way, the problem of other
               minds is easier to solve than the general epistemological problem.
               The general problem must compare different things, the pure infor-
               mation of mental ideas with the information abstracted from con-
               crete external information structures. The problem of other minds
               compares concepts in minds about similar things.
                  When, by interpersonal communications, we compare the pure
               information content in two different minds, we are reaching directly
               into the other mind in its innermost immaterial nature. To be sure,
               we have not felt the same sensations nor had identical experiences.
               We have not “felt the other’s pain.” But we can plant ideas in the other
               mind, and then watch those ideas alter the other person’s actions in
               a way totally identical to what that information, that knowledge, has
               been used for in our own actions.
                                                         The Self         175

   This establishes the existence, behind the external bodily (mate-
rial) behaviors of the other person, of the same immaterial, meta-
physical mind model in the other mind, as the one in our own.
  Charles Sanders Peirce offered us a vision of an open “com-
munity of inquirers,” seeking “intersubjective agreement” to find
common ground, common ideas, and common information struc-
tures that are processing information in similar if not identical ways.
   The very first item of intersubjective agreement in that commu-
nity should be to accept the existence of minds in all the members
of the community.




                                                                            Chapter 15
         176   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 16




                                n  t a l
                            Me ion
                              u s a t
                           Ca




                                                                  This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/mind/mental_causation
                                               Mental Causation       177


Mental Causation
  The Problem of Mental Causation is a major problem in the
Philosophy of Mind. It has been with us at least since René Des-
cartes claimed that mind and body are separate substances. If
the body is material, how can an immaterial mind possibly act on
the body. More importantly, how can a “mental” action or event in
the mind be the cause of a physical action by the body?
   Mental causation is a specific case of the more general problem
of downward causation, for example the downward control of the
motions of a cell’s atoms and molecules by supervening biological
macromolecules. Is the molecular biology of a cell reducible to the
laws governing the motions of its component molecules, or are
there emergent laws governing motions at the cellular level, the
organ level, the organism level, and so on up to the mental level?




                                                                        Chapter 16
   Can emergent properties or laws at the higher levels of a phys-
ical-chemical-based biological system prevent those higher levels
from being reduced to the properties and laws of the base physical
level?1
   In the 1960’s the neuroscientist Roger Sperry claimed that
higher levels in a hierarchy could act causally on the base level.
He cited a wheel rolling downhill as an example of what he called
“downward causal control.” The atoms and molecules are caught
up and overpowered by the higher properties of the whole. Sperry
compared the rolling wheel to an ongoing brain process or a pro-
gressing train of thought in which the overall properties of the
brain process, as a coherent organizational entity, determine the
timing and spacing of the firing patterns within its neural infra-
structure. A few years later (1974), Donald Campbell coined
the phrase “downward causation.”
   The locus classicus of recent discussions of mental causation
is Donald Davidson’s 1970 essay “Mental Events,” which was
revisited in his 1993 essay, “Thinking Causes,” published together
with 15 critical essays on Davidson’s work in the 1993 book Mental
Causation, edited by John Heil and Alfred Mele.
  1    See chapter 26 for more on emergence.
         178     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Davidson claimed three things:
                 • That mental events are causally related to physical events
                 • That causal relations are normally governed by strict (deter-
               ministic) laws
                 • But that there are no such strict laws for mental events acting
               on physical events
                  Davidson’s goal is to deny the reducibility of mental events to
               physical events in the lower levels, especially to deny the physi-
               cist’s reductionist claim that the motions of the atoms and mol-
               ecules at the lowest level are causally determinative of everything
               that happens at all higher levels.
                 Information is neither matter nor energy. It is sometimes
               embodied in matter and sometimes communicated as pure
Chapter 16




               energy. It is the scientific basis for an immaterial, yet causally effi-
               cacious, mind that can control the body and affect the physical
               world. Information is the modern spirit.
                  But prominent philosopher of mind Jaegwon Kim says that
               Davidson’s goal of “non-reductive physicalism” is simply not pos-
               sible. The physical world is “causally closed,” says Kim:
                     “what options are there if we set aside the physicalist picture? Leav-
                     ing physicalism behind is to abandon ontological physicalism, the
                     view that bits of matter and their aggregates in space-time exhaust the
                     contents of the world. This means that one would be embracing an
                     ontology that posits entities other than material substances — that is,
                     immaterial minds, or souls, outside physical space, with immaterial,
                     nonphysical properties.”2
                  Kim diagrams Davidson’s view of mental events M1 and M2
               supervening on physical events P1 and P2, to illustrate his claim
               that having both mental and physical causes would be “overde-
               termination.” Mental causes are redundant and must be excluded.
                     M1                                                   M2
                     supervenes on                                        supervenes on
                     P1                         - causes -                P2


                 2       Physicalism, or Something Near Enough, p. 71
                                                    Mental Causation    179

  By causal closure of the physical world, Kim says it is the mental
events that are superfluous and must go.3
   This view of the physical and biological world as made up of
isolatable and discrete events is much too simplistic. A physical
“event” is subjectively singled out by a human observer from a
practically infinite number of biological processes and material
events at the atomic and molecular level. The idea of a single
“cause” is arbitrarily abstracted from complex processes with
enormous numbers of possible causes. A mental event is embed-
ded in a biological system beyond “astronomical” in complexity.
The Problem of Mental Causation according to Kim
   While the Cartesian mind-body problem was simply the puzzle
of how an immaterial mind could cause a material body to move,
lately the problem of mental causation has been recast as the logi-




                                                                          Chapter 16
cal resolution of one basic premise and a conclusion, which we
might call the standard argument against mental causation:
   • The only causes are physical causes. (These causes need not be
deterministic. An indeterministic quantum statistical event gives
us the probabilities for subsequent events, “causing” them in a way
that is not pre-determined.)
  • Therefore, mental events cannot cause physical events.
   But information philosophy sees mental activity just as physical
as bodily actions. The proper distinction between mind and body
is between the immaterial and the material.
The Emergence of Life from Matter and Mind from Life
   According to British Emergentism, there is a hierarchy of levels
of organizational complexity of material particles that includes, in
ascending order, the strictly physical, the chemical, the biological,
and the psychological level. As we have seen, upper hierarchical
levels have the power to influence motion in ways unanticipated
by laws governing less complex kinds and conditions concern-
ing the arrangements of particles. Emergentism is committed to
the nomological possibility of what has been called “downward
causation,” control by an upper level of the component particles
  3    Physicalism, or Something Near Enough., pp. 44-45
         180         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               of the lower levels. We can now demonstrate that the emergentists’
               hypothesis is actually realized in biological systems.4
                  An informational analysis of non-reductive physicalism must
               show exactly how information does not move in the upward direc-
               tion between hierarchical levels (fundamentally because noise in
               the lower level makes motions incoherent), but that information
               does move down as the higher-level information-processing system
               manipulates individual physical particles (maintaining a high
               signal-to-noise ratio in the upper level), as the British empiricists
               imagined.
                  Some critics think the emergentists’ claim is illogical or maybe
               physically impossible. How can causality be only “one way?” If there
               are “top-down” causes, there must be “bottom-up” causes by sym-
               metry, must there not? If the contents of the world were only the
Chapter 16




               material particles of physics and chemistry, would not this be so?
               The short answer is no. The hierarchical organization of material
               systems, from the galaxies, stars, and planets, to everyday objects
               like Sperry’s wheel, means that atoms and molecules are often con-
               trolled by causes from above.
                  The reduction of biology to molecular biology sharpens the ques-
               tion. How is it that some “living” molecules can have power, down-
               ward causal control, over others?
                  We shall see that quantum and thermal noise breaks any upwardly
               causal deterministic chains between the physics of the atomic and
               molecular level and the biophysics of the organic world. It also
               breaks any upward deterministic chains between the neurobiologi-
               cal brain and the mind, replacing them with a statistical causality
               that provides us with what William James called “some looseness
               in the joints.”
                 We present two biological processes that exhibit randomness in
               the component atoms and molecules, thus blocking any organized
               upward influences. The first is present in every biological cell. The
               other is critically important in the operation of neurons. The first
               separates the living from the simply material. The latter is at the
               mind/brain boundary.
                 4     See chapter 25 for details on emergence.
                                                   Mental Causation           181

Ribosomes Select Randomly Moving Amino Acids
   Twenty amino acids move about randomly in all cells at surpris-
ingly high speeds, the consequence of thermal and quantum noise.
Attached to some of them are lumps of transfer RNA, each with
three letters of the genetic code that identify a specific amino acid.
They bump randomly into the ribosome, a huge macromolecular
information processor built from a few strands of RNA and a com
plex of protein enzymes. The ribosome has just received a message
from the DNA in the cell nucleus and is busy decoding its meaning.




                                                                                Chapter 16
  Figure 16-7. A messenger RNA strand passes through the ribosome.

   The nucleus had received a signal that a certain protein or enzyme
was now in short supply. The signal activated a transcription process
that locates the section in the DNA gene with the sequence of three-
letter codes that describes the needed protein. Another enzyme
called a synthetase moves along the DNA, reads the nucleotide code,
and builds a strand of messenger RNA encoded with the sequence
that tells the ribosome which protein is needed.
   The long strand of messenger RNA moving through the ribo-
some above is a script, a text, sent from the cell nucleus, with the
intended purpose that the ribosome will replenish a protein. As the
thread of mRNA moves through the ribosome, each transfer RNA
adds one amino acid to the growing protein. The random motions
of the tRNAs shows us that no organized or coherent information is
present in the tRNAs that could cause something from the bottom
up to emerge at a higher level. The tRNAs do not know which pro-
tein they will soon be part of.5
  5     See informationphilosopher.com/knowledge/mental_caustion.html/#ribo
         182       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Notice the absurdity of the idea that the random motions of the
               transfer RNA molecules, each holding a single amino acid, are car-
               rying pre-determined information of where they belong in the pro-
               tein.
Chapter 16




                 Figure 16-8. A transfer RNA carries an amino acid for the growing protein.

                  Of course the DNA, the RNA enzymes encoding the message, and
               the ribosome translating it, do not have the information-processing
               power to reflect on or become conscious of what they are doing. But
               their activities are at least proto-mental, because they are very simi-
               lar to the more symbolic communications of human beings.
                  It is the information processing of the higher-level ribosome that
               is in control. As the ribosome moves along the string of mRNA,
               it reads the next three-letter codon and waits for a tRNA with the
               matching anti-codon to collide randomly. With over 60 codons for
               the 20 amino acids, it might be some time before the desired amino
               acid shows up. It is the high speed of random motions that allows
               this process to proceed rapidly. Consider the case of hemoglobin.
                 When a ribosome assembles 330 amino acids in four symmetric
               polypeptide chains (globins), each globin traps an iron atom in a
               heme group at the center to form the hemoglobin protein. This is
               downward causal control of the amino acids, the heme groups, and
               the iron atoms by the ribosome. The ribosome is an example of
                                                  Mental Causation            183

Erwin Schrödinger’s emergent “order out of order,” life “feeding
on the negative entropy” of digested food.
   When 200 million of the 25
trillion red blood cells in the
human body die each second,
300 million new hemoglobins
must be assembled in each of
200 million new blood cells.
With the order of a few thou-
sand bytes of information in
each hemoglobin, this is 10
thousand x 300 million x 200
million = 6 x 1020 bits of infor- Figure 16-9. Hemoglobin’s protein chains.
mation per second, millions of times more information processing
than today’s fastest computer CPU.




                                                                                Chapter 16
  The ribosome is an information-processing biological system that
has emerged from the lower level of chemistry and physics to exert
downward causation on the molecular components (amino acids)
needed to manufacture hemoglobin.
Ion Pumps in Neurons Select Individual Atoms
   When a single neuron fires, the active potential rapidly changes
the concentration of sodium (Na+) ions inside the cell and potas-
sium (K+) ions outside the cell. Within milliseconds, thousands of
sodium-potassium ion transporters in the thin lipid bilayer of the
cell wall must move billions of those ions, two or three at a time
between inside and outside the cell wall, to get the neuron ready to
fire again.6
   All the individual ions, atoms, and molecules in the cell are
moving rapidly in random directions. The indeterministic motions
of the ions randomly move some near a pump opening, where
quantum collaborative forces can capture them in a lock-and-key
structure. The idea that the physical/chemical base level contains
enough information in the motion of its atoms and molecules to
cause and thus explain the operations of the higher levels of life and
mind is simply absurd.
  6     See informationphilosopher.com/knowledge/mental_caustion.html/#ion
         184         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  The sodium-potassium ion pump is energized by a single ATP
               (adenosine triphosphate) molecule to execute four steps. The first is
               to capture three sodium (Na+) ions into lock-and-key matched posi-
               tions (a quantum cooperative
               phenomenon shown as spher-
               ical shapes for sodium). The
               complex of surrounding pro-
               teins then changes its config-
               uration, closing at the bottom
               and opening at the top to
               release the sodium ions out-
               side the cell membrane.
                  The pump then attracts two     Figure 16-10. The Na+/K+ ion pump
               potassium ions (K+) from the extracellular fluid, capturing them in
               the quantum cooperative bonding shapes shown scematically as
Chapter 16




               triangular pyramids. When two potassiums are captured, the sur-
               rounding protein complex again changes its configuration, closing
               at the top and opening at the bottom to release the potassiums into
               the cytosol.
                 In each four-step cycle, the available free energy (energy with
               low entropy) of a single ATP molecule has moved three sodiums
               and two potassiums across the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane.
               The ATP has lost a single phosphate group and the depleted ADP
               (adenosine diphosphate) must travel to an ATP synthase complex in
               the cell wall of nearby mitochondria to be re-energized with a new
               phosphate group attached.7
                  This emergent biological machinery of the sodium-potassium
               pump has clearly exerted downward causation on the ions, powered
               by ATP energy carriers feeding on negative entropy.
                 The sodium-potassium pump in our neurons is as close to a
               Maxwell’s Demon evading the second law of thermodynamics as
               anything we are ever likely to see.8
                 And when many motor neurons fire, innnervating excitatory
               post-synaptic potentials (EPSPs) that travel down through the thal-
                 7     See chapter 28 for the working of ATP synthase.
                 8     See informationphilosopher.com/solutions/scientists/maxwell/#demon
                                            Mental Causation              185

amus and the spinal cord where they cause muscles to contract, that
is as literal as downward causation gets between the mind and the
body. When the emergent immaterial mind decides to move the
material body, mental causation is realized as downward causation.
Information Solves the Problem of Mental Causation.
   Information philosophy understands mental events as immate-
rial thoughts, which are normally only unrealized possibilities for
action. Thoughts are embodied in the neural information structures
of the brain, where they are stored along with memories of past
experiences in the experience recorder and reproducer (ERR). As
such, they are physical and are temporarily embodied and material,
in some sense.
   But when thoughts are transferred (communicated) to other
parts of the brain, out to other minds, or for storage in the external




                                                                            Chapter 16
environment, thoughts are converted from a material substrate to
various forms of energy. Temporarily, they are quite non-material,
as philosophers for centuries have imagined thoughts in an immate-
rial mind might be. Once stored, they are again embodied in matter.
   Of course, thoughts or ideas can be unpredictably altered before
storage, by noise in the communication. They can also be altered
randomly by irreducibly indeterministic errors in the retrieval of
the information. Here lies the basis for creative mistakes, to be eval-
uated by a process of intelligent selection. (As Augustine noted,
the Latin intelligere means “to select.”)
   The information solution to the mind-body problem can be inter-
preted as providing a non-reductive physical interpretation of mind.
This model of mind supervenes on the neural brain structures that
embody the information (while it is being stored). But the intel-
lectual content of the information is not the resultant of whatever
physical processes are coming from lower layers in a hierarchical
structure. The physical brain is a plastic storage medium adequately
determined to store the information content of these immaterial
thoughts, and normally to store it accurately.
   With reference to popular (if flawed) computational theories of
mind, we note that the “software” contents of a computer program,
as well as the execution of the program, is in no way determined or
         186       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               “caused” by the computer “hardware.” Similarly, ideas are not deter-
               mined by the ink on a printed page or the pixels on a computer
               screen, but by the human minds that put them there.
               “Bottom-up” Physical Processes Are Not Deterministic
                 When small numbers of atoms and molecules interact, their
               motions and behaviors are indeterministic, governed by the rules of
               quantum mechanics.
                 However, when large numbers of microscopic particle get
               together in aggregates, the indeterminacy of the individual particles
               gets averaged over and macroscopic adequately deterministic laws
               “emerge.”
                 Determinism is an emergent property that shows up in the mac-
               roscopic world.
Chapter 16




                  The “laws of nature,” such as Newton’s laws of motion, are all
               statistical laws, however close they appear to being certain. They
               “emerge” when large numbers of atoms or molecules get together.
               For large enough numbers, the probabilistic laws of nature approach
               practical certainty. But the fundamental indeterminism of compo-
               nent atoms never completely disappears.
                 It therefore follows that physical brain events are not pre-deter-
               mined by the events in lower hierarchical levels, not events in the
               base physical level, nor in the biological level.
                  And the world is not “causally closed” by deterministic physi-
               cal laws of nature, as assumed by so many philosophers (e.g., Feigl,
               Smart, Kim).
                  Moreover, since some “mental events” are large enough informa-
               tion structures to be adequately determined, these mental events
               can act causally on lower biological and physical levels in the hierar-
               chy, in particular, the mind can move the body and all its contained
               physical particles, thus solving the mind-body problem.
                 A specific example of the mind causing an action, while not itself
               being caused by antecedent events is the following. Faced with a
                                            Mental Causation             187

decision of what to do next, the mind considers several possible
alternatives, at least some of which are creatively invented based on
random ideas that just “come to mind.” Other possible alternatives
might be familiar options, even habits, that have frequently been
chosen in many earlier similar situations.
   All these alternatives show up as “neural correlates” - brain neu-
rons firing as the experience recorder and reproducer (ERR) plays
back past experiences that in some way resemble the current situ-
ation. When the alternatives are evaluated and one is selected, the
selected action results in still other neurons firing, some of which
connect to the motor cortex that signals muscles to move the body.
   Apart from the occasional indeterministic generation of creative
new alternative ideas, this whole causal process is adequately deter-
mined and it is downwardly causal. Mental events are causing phys-




                                                                           Chapter 16
ical body events.
  Mind can move matter. Ideas can move mountains.
Molecular Machines
   The ribosomes in every cell, the ion pumps in the neuron, and
ATP synthase in the mitochondria are examples of dozens of incred-
ibly tiny molecular machines that microbiologists have been discov-
ering over the past few decades.
  Ribosomes produce quadrillions (1021) of bits of information per
second. Ion pumps move trillions of sodium and potassium ions per
second. And our mitochondria produce hundreds of trillions of the
ATP molecules. Each ATP synthase produces a few thousand ATP
molecules per minute, spinning at 10,000 RPM (faster than most of
our motors) to do so.
   Mental causation depends on these incredible machines to con-
trol the motions of physical and chemical particles that philosophers
of mind have imagined might be exerting “bottom-up” causation on
the biological and psychological levels.
   There simply is no such “causal closure of the physical world” that
is controlling our minds.
         188   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                   i o n o f
                         p re t at         n i c s
                       r
                Inte m Mech              a
Chapter 17




                 u a nt u
               Q




                                                           This chapter on the web
                                informationphilosopher.com/quantum/interpretation
                                                Interpretation         189


Information Interpretation of
Quantum Mechanics
   Our information interpretation is simply “standard quantum
physics” plus information being recorded irreversibly. Unlike
the Copenhagen Interpretation, we offer a visualization of what
is going on in quantum reality, with animations (on-line) of the
wave function evolution and the appearance of the particle, when
the wave function shrinks to its minimum possible size h3.
  The information interpretation of quantum mechanics is based
on three simple premises:
  1) Quantum systems evolve in two ways:
  • The first is the wave function deterministically exploring all
the possibilities for interaction,




                                                                         Chapter 17
  • The second is the particle randomly choosing one of those
possibilities to become actual.
   2) No knowledge can be gained by a “conscious observer”
unless new information has already been irreversibly recorded
in the universe. New information can be created and recorded in
three places:
  • In the target quantum system,
  • In the combined target system and measuring apparatus,
  • It can then become knowledge in the observer’s mind.
   3) The measuring apparatus is quantal, not deterministic or
“classical.” It need only be statistically determined and capable of
recording the irreversible information about an interaction. The
human mind is also only statistically or adequately determined.
  • There is only one world.
  • It is a quantum world, which only appears to be classical.
  • The world only appears to be determined.
  Ontologically, the quantum world is indeterministic, but in our
everyday common experience it appears be causal and determin-
         190     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               istic, the so-called “classical” world. Information physics claims
               there is only one world, the quantum world, and the so-called
               “quantum to classical transition” occurs for any macroscopic
               object of mass m that contains a large enough number of atoms.
               For large enough systems, independent quantum events are “aver-
               aged over.” The uncertainty in position x and velocity v of the large
               object becomes less than the quantum indeterminacy
                 Δv Δx ≥ h / m goes to zero as h / m goes to zero.
                  The classical laws of motion, with their apparent determin-
               ism and strict causality, emerge when objects are large enough so
               that microscopic events can be ignored, but this determinism is
               fundamentally statistical and physical causes are only probabilis-
               tic, however near they seem to certainty.
                  Information philosophy interprets the wave function ψ as a
               “possibilities” function. With this simple change in terminology,
Chapter 17




               the mysterious process of a wave function “collapsing” becomes
               a much more intuitive discussion of ψ evolving to explore all the
               possibilities (with mathematically calculable probabilities), fol-
               lowed by a single actualization, at which time the probabilities for
               all non-actualized possibilities go to zero (they “collapse”) instan-
               taneously.
                  Information physics is standard quantum physics. It accepts
               the Schrödinger equation of motion, the principle of superposi-
               tion, the axiom of measurement (now including the actual infor-
               mation “bits” measured), and - most important - the projection
               postulate of standard quantum mechanics (the “collapse” that so
               many unorthodox interpretations deny).
                  But unlike some interpretations, the conscious observer of
               the Copenhagen Interpretation is not required for a projection,
               for the wave-function to “collapse”, for one of the possibilities to
               become an actuality. What the collapse does require is an interac-
               tion between systems that creates irreversible and observable, but
               not necessarily observed, information.
                 Among the founders of quantum mechanics, almost every-
               one agreed that irreversibility was a key requirement for a
                                               Interpretation         191

measurement. Irreversibility introduces thermodynamics into a
proper formulation of quantum mechanics, and this is what the
information interpretation requires.
   Information is not a conserved quantity like energy and mass,
despite the view of many mathematical physicists, who generally
accept determinism and think information is a constant.. The uni-
verse began in a state of equilibrium with minimal information,
and information is being created every day, despite the second law
of thermodynamics. Classical interactions between large macro-
scopic bodies do not generate new information. Newton’s laws of
motion imply that the information in any configuration of bodies,
motions, and the force laws, is enough to know all past and future
configurations. Classical mechanics conserves information.
  In the absence of interactions, an isolated quantum system
evolves according to the unitary Schrödinger equation of motion.




                                                                        Chapter 17
Just like classical systems, the deterministic Schrödinger equation
conserves information.
  Unlike classical systems however, when there is an interaction
between quantum systems, the two systems become entangled
and there may be a change of state in either or both systems. This
change of state may create new information.
   If that information is instantly destroyed, as in most interac-
tions, it may never be observed macroscopically. If, on the other
hand, the information is stabilized for some length of time, it may
be seen by an observer and considered to be a “measurement.” But
it need not be seen by anyone to become new information in the
universe. The universe is its own observer!
  Compare Schrödinger’s Cat (chapter 23) as its own observer.
   For the information (negative entropy) to be stabilized, the
second law of thermodynamics requires that an amount of posi-
tive entropy greater than the negative entropy must be transferred
away from the new information structure.
   Exactly how the universe allows pockets of negative entropy
to form as “information structures” we describe as the “cosmic
         192       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               creation process.” This core two-step process has been going on
               since the origin of the universe. It continues today as we add infor-
               mation to the Sum of human knowledge.
                   Note that despite the Heisenberg principle, quantum mechani-
               cal measurements are not always uncertain. When a system is mea-
               sured (prepared) in an eigenstate, a subsequent measurement (Pau-
               li’s measurement of the first kind) will find it in the same state with
               perfect certainty.
                  What are the normal possibilities for new quantum states? The
               transformation theory of Paul Dirac and Pascual Jordan lets us
               represent ψ in a set of basis functions for which the combination of
               quantum systems (one may be a measurement apparatus) has eigen-
               values (the axiom of measurement). We represent ψ as in a linear
               combination (the principle of superposition) of those “possible”
               eigenfunctions. Quantum mechanics lets us calculate the probabili-
Chapter 17




               ties of each of those “possibilities.”
                  Interaction with the measurement apparatus (or indeed interac-
               tion with any other system) may select out (the axiom of measure-
               ment) one of those possibilities as an actuality. But for this event
               to be an “observable” (a John Bell “beable”), information must be
               created and positive entropy must be transferred away from the new
               information structure, in accordance with our two-step informa-
               tion creation process.
                  All interpretations of quantum mechanics predict the same
               experimental results. The information interpretation is no excep-
               tion, because the experimental data from quantum experiments is
               the most accurate in the history of science.
                  Where interpretations differ is in the picture (the visualization)
               they provide of what is “really” going on in the microscopic world
               - so-called “quantum reality.” Schrödinger called it Anschaulichkeit.
               He and Einstein were right that we should be able to picture quan-
               tum reality.
                  However, the Copenhagen interpretation of Niels Bohr and
               Werner Heisenberg discourages attempts to visualize the nature
               of the “quantum world,” because they say that all our experience
                                                        Interpretation             193

is derived from the “classical world” and should be described in
ordinary language. This is why Bohr and Heisenberg insisted on
some kind of “cut” between the quantum event and the mind of an
observer.
  The information interpretation encourages visualization. (See
our on-line animation of the two-slit experiment1, our EPR experi-
ment visualizations2, and Dirac’s three polarizers3 to visualize the
superposition of states and the projection or “collapse” of a wave
function.)
   Bohr was of course right that classical physics plays an essential
role. His Correspondence Principle allowed him to recover some
important physical constants by assuming that the discontinuous
quantum jumps for low quantum numbers (low “orbits” in his old
quantum theory model) converged in the limit of large quantum
numbers to the continuous radiation emission and absorption of
classical electromagnetic theory.




                                                                                     Chapter 17
   In addition, we know that in macroscopic bodies with enormous
numbers of quantum particles, quantum effects are averaged over,
so that the uncertainty in position and momentum of a large body
still obeys Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle, but the uncer-
tainty is for all practical purposes unmeasurable and the body can
be treated classically.
   We can say that the quantum description of matter also converges
to a classical description in the limit of large numbers of quantum
particles. We call this “adequate” or statistical determinism. It is the
apparent determinism we find behind Newton’s laws of motion for
macroscopic objects. The statistics of averaging over many indepen-
dent quantum events then produces the “quantum to classical tran-
sition” for the same reason as the “law of large numbers” in prob-
ability theory.
   Both Bohr and Heisenberg suggested that just as relativistic
effects can be ignored when the velocity is small compared to the
velocity of light (v / c → 0), so quantum effects might be ignorable
  1     .informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/two-slit_experiment/
  2     informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/EPR/
  3     www.informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/dirac_3-polarizers/
         194       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               when Planck’s quantum of action h → 0. But this is quite wrong,
               because h is a constant that never goes to zero. In the information
               interpretation, it is always a quantum world. As we saw, the con-
               ditions needed for ignoring quantum indeterminacy are when the
               mass of the macroscopic “classical” object is large.
                  Note that the macromolecules of biology are large enough to
               stabilize their information structures. DNA has been replicating
               its essential information for billions of years, resisting equilibrium
               despite the second law of thermodynamics The creation of irre-
               versible new information also marks the transition between the
               quantum world and the “adequately deterministic” classical world,
               because the information structure itself must be large enough (and
               stable enough) to be seen. The typical measurement apparatus is
               macroscopic, so the quantum of action h becomes small compared
               to the mass m and h / m approaches zero.
Chapter 17




                  Decoherence theorists say that the measurement problem is our
               failure to see quantum superpositions in the macroscopic world.
               The information interpretation thus explains why quantum super-
               positions like Schrödinger’s Cat are not seen in the macroscopic
               world. Stable new information structures in the dying cat reduce
               the quantum possibilities (and their potential interference effects)
               to a classical actuality. Upon opening the box and finding a dead cat,
               an autopsy will reveal that the time of death was observed/recorded.
               The cat is its own observer.
               The “Possibilities Function”
                  The central element in quantum physics is the “wave function” ψ,
               with its mysterious wave-particle dual nature (sometimes a wave,
               sometimes a particle, etc.). We believe that teaching and under-
               standing quantum mechanics would be much simpler if we called ψ
               the “possibilities function.” It only looks like a wave in simple cases
               of low-dimensional coordinate space. But it always tells us the pos-
               sibilities - the possible values of any observable, for example.
                  Given the “possibilities function” ψ, quantum mechanics allows
               us to calculate the “probabilities” for each of the “possibilities.” The
               calculation depends on the free choice of the experimenter as to
                                                       Interpretation   195

which “observables” to look for. If the measurement apparatus can
register n discrete values, ψ can be expanded in terms of a set of
basis functions (eigenfunctions) appropriate for the chosen observ-
able, say φn. The expansion is
  ψ = ∑ cn φn
  When the absolute squares of the coefficients cn are appropriately
normalized to add up to 1, the probability Pn of observing an eigen-
value n is
  Pn = | cn |2 = | < ψ | φn > | 2
   These probabilities are confirmed statistically by repeated iden-
tical experiments that collect large numbers of results. Quantum
mechanics is the most accurate physical theory in science, with
measurements accurate to fifteen decimal places.
   In each individual experiment, generally just one of the possi-




                                                                          Chapter 17
bilities becomes an actuality (although some experiments leave the
quantum system in a new superposition of multiple possibilities).
  In our information interpretation, a possibility is realized or
actualized at the moment when information is created about the
new state of the system. This new information requires that positive
entropy be carried away from the local increase in negative entropy.
   Note that an “observer” will not be able to make a “measure-
ment” unless new information exists to be “observed.” Information
must be (and is in all modern experimental systems) created and
recorded before any observer looks at the results. Measurements do
not depend directly on the mind of the observer, only indirectly
when the observer sets up the experimental apparatus and decides
what it will measure.
  This is called the “free choice” of the experimenter.4
   An information approach can help philosophers to think more
clearly about quantum physics. Instead of getting trapped in talk
about mysterious “collapse of the wave function,” “reduction of the
wave packet,” or the “projection postulate” (all important issues),

  4     informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_choice.html
         196         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               the information interpretation proposes we simply say that one of
               the “possibilities” has become “actual.”
                   It is intuitively obvious that when one possibility becomes actual,
               all the others are annihilated, consigned to “nothingness,” as Jean-
               Paul Sartre put it. And because the other possibilities may have
               been extremely “distant” from the point of actualization, their
               instantaneous disappearances looked to Einstein to violate his prin-
               ciple of relativity, but they do not.
                  Quantum theory lets us put quantitative values on the “proba-
               bilities” for each of the “possibilities.” But this means that quantum
               theory is fundamentally statistical, meaning indeterministic and
               “random.” It is not a question of our being ignorant about what is
               going on (an epistemological problem). What’s happening is onto-
               logical chance, as Einstein first showed, but as he forever disliked.
                  We can describe the “possibilities function” ψ as moving through
Chapter 17




               space (at the speed of light, or even faster, as Einstein feared?),
               exploring all the possibilities for wherever the particle might be
               found. This too may be seen as a special kind of information. In
               the famous “two-slit experiment5,” the “possibilities function” trav-
               els everywhere, meaning that ψ passes through both slits, interfer-
               ing with itself and thus changing the possibilities where the par-
               ticle might be found. Metaphorically, ψ “knows” when both slits are
               open, even if our intuitive classical view imagines that the particle
               must go through only one. The slits being open changes the prob-
               abilities associated with each of the possibilities.
               Possibilities and Information Theory
                 It is of the deepest philosophical significance that information
               theory is based on the mathematics of probability. If all outcomes
               were certain, there would be no “surprises” in the universe. Infor-
               mation would be conserved and a universal constant, as some math-
               ematicians mistakenly believe. Information philosophy requires
               the ontological uncertainty and probabilistic outcomes of modern
               quantum physics to produce new information.
                 5     informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/two-slit_experiment/
                                                 Interpretation           197

   In Claude Shannon’s theory of the communication of informa-
tion, there must be multiple possible messages in order for infor-
mation to be communicated. If there is only one possible message,
there is no uncertainty, and no information can be communicated.
   In a universe describable by the classical Newtonian laws of
motion, all the information needed to produce the next moment
is contained in the positions, motions, and forces on the material
particles.
   In a quantum world describable by the unitary evolution of the
deterministic Schrödinger equation, nothing new ever happens,
there is no new “outcome.” Outcomes are added to standard quan-
tum mechanics by the addition of the “projection postulate” or “col-
lapse of the wave function,” when the quantum system interacts
with another system.
   Information is constant in a deterministic universe. There is




                                                                            Chapter 17
“nothing new under the sun.” The creation of new information is
not possible without the random chance and uncertainty of quan-
tum mechanics, plus the extraordinary temporal stability of quan-
tum mechanical structures needed to store information once it is
created.
   Without the extraordinary stability of quantized information
structures over cosmological time scales, life and the universe we
know would not be possible. That stability is the consequence of an
underlying digital nature. Quantum mechanics reveals the architec-
ture of the universe to be discrete rather than continuous, to be digi-
tal rather than analog. Digital information transfers are essentially
perfect, whereas analog transfers are “lossy.”
   It is Bohr’s “correspondence principle” of quantum mechanics for
large quantum numbers and the “law of large numbers” of statistics
which ensure that macroscopic objects can normally average out
microscopic uncertainties and probabilities to provide the statistical
or “adequate” determinism that shows up in all our classical “laws
of nature.”
   There is no separate classical world and no need for a quantum-to-
classical transition. The quantum world becomes statistically deter-
         198       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               ministic when the mass of an object is such that h / m approaches
               zero. We conclude, contrary to the views of Bohr and Heisenberg,
               that there is no need for a separate classical world. The classical laws
               of nature emerge statistically from quantum laws. Quantum laws,
               which are therefore universally applicable, converge in these two
               limits of large numbers to classical laws. There is no “transition”
               from the quantum world to a separate classical world. There is just
               one world, where quantum physics applies universally, but its mys-
               terious properties, like interference, entanglement, and nonlocality,
               are normally invisible, averaged over, in the macroscopic world.
                  The problem for an informational interpretation of quantum
               mechanics is to explain exactly how these two convergences (large
               numbers of particles and large quantum numbers) allow continuous
               and apparently deterministic macroscopic information structures
               to emerge from the indeterministic and discontinuous microscopic
Chapter 17




               quantum world.
                  We show how the determinism in the macroscopic world is only
               a statistical or adequate determinism, the result of “averaging over”
               the large number of independent quantum events happening in
               a macroscopic object. And even more important, we must show
               how the occasional magnification or amplification of microscopic
               quantum events leads to new macroscopic information that makes
               human beings the “authors of their lives”, that makes them “co-cre-
               ators of our universe,” and that guarantees a genuinely open future
               with alternative possibilities, not in inaccessible “parallel universes”
               but in the one universe that we have.
               Other Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
                 Standard “orthodox” interpretations of quantum mechanics
               include the projection postulate, the “collapse of the wave function.”
                  Today there appear to be about as many unorthodox interpreta-
               tions that deny the collapse, as there are more standard views. We
               characterize each interpretation as deterministic or not, local or
               non-local reality, if they assume hidden variables, need a conscious
               observer, and accept particles. Their proponents are in parentheses.
                                               Interpretation          199

No-Collapse Interpretations
  Statistical Ensemble - indeterministic, non-local, no observer -
(Einstein-Born- Ballentine)
  Pilot-Wave Theory - deterministic, non-local, hidden variables,
no observer, particles - (de Broglie-Bohm, 1952)
   Many-Worlds - deterministic, local, hidden variables, no observer
- (Everett-De Witt, 1957)
  Time-Symmetric Theory - (Aharanov, 1964)
  Decoherence - deterministic, local, no particles - (Zeh-Zurek,
1970)
  Modal Interpretation - (van Frassen, 1972)
Consistent Histories - local - (Griffith-Omnès-Gell-Mann-Har-tle,
1984)




                                                                         Chapter 17
Collapse Interpretations
  Copenhagen Interpretation - indeterministic, non-local,
observer - (Bohr-Heisenberg-Born-Jordan, 1927)
  Conscious Observer - indeterministic, non-local, observer -
(Von Neumann-Wigner)
  Objective Collapse - indeterministic, non-local, no observer -
(Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber, 1986; Penrose, 1989)
  Transactional Interpretation - indeterministic, non-local, no
observer, no particles - (Cramer, 1986)
  Relational Interpretation - local, observer - (Rovelli, 1994)
Pondicherry Interpretation - indeterministic, non-local, no
observer - (Mohrhoff, 2005)Probabilities
  Information Interpretation - Our interpretation is statistical,
indeterministic, non-local, and no observer is needed. It interprets
the “collapse” of the “possibilities” function according to Dirac’s
“projection postulate.” New is the requirement for the physical
recording of information before any “observation” can be made.
         200   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                 m e nt
                          s u re
                       Mea oblem
Chapter 18




                         Pr




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                      informationphilosopher.com/problems/measurement
                                                 Measurement            201


The Measurement Problem
   The “problem of measurement” in quantum mechanics has
been defined in various ways, originally by scientists, and more
recently by philosophers of science who question the “founda-
tions” of quantum mechanics.
  Measurements are described with diverse concepts in quantum
physics such as:
   • wave functions (probability amplitudes) evolving unitarily
and deterministically (preserving information) according to the
linear Schrödinger equation,
   • superposition of states, i.e., linear combinations of wave func-
tions with complex coefficients that carry phase information and
produce interference effects (the principle of superposition),
   • quantum jumps between states accompanied by the “collapse




                                                                          Chapter 18
of the wave function” that can destroy or create information (Paul
Dirac’s projection postulate, John von Neumann’s Process 1),
  • probabilities of collapses and jumps given by the square of the
absolute value of the wave function for a given state,
   • values for possible measurements given by the eigenvalues
associated with the eigenstates of the combined measuring appa-
ratus and measured system (the axiom of measurement),
  • the indeterminacy or uncertainty principle.
   The original measurement problem, said to be a consequence of
Niels Bohr’s “Copenhagen Interpretation” of quantum mechan-
ics, was to explain how our measuring instruments, which are
usually macroscopic objects and treatable with classical physics,
can give us information about the microscopic world of atoms and
subatomic particles like electrons and photons.
   Bohr’s idea of “complementarity” insisted that a specific experi-
ment could reveal only partial information - for example, a parti-
cle’s position or its momentum. “Exhaustive” or “complete” infor-
mation requires two complementary experiments. Measurement
of both a particle’s momentum and its position can only be within
         202     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               the limits of Werner Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. This
               demands that the product of the indeterminacy in the position Δx
               multiplied by the indeterminacy in the momentum Δp be equal to
               or greater than Planck’s quantum of action h.
                  Some define the problem of measurement simply as the logical
               contradiction between two laws describing the motion of quan-
               tum systems; the unitary, information preserving, continuous,
               and deterministic time evolution of the Schrödinger equation
               versus the non-unitary, discontinuous, and indeterministic col-
               lapse of the wave function. John von Neumann saw a problem
               with these two distinct (indeed, logically opposing) processes.
                  The mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics provides
               no way to predict when the wave function stops evolving in a uni-
               tary fashion and collapses. Experimentally and practically, how-
               ever, we can say that this occurs when the microscopic system
               interacts with a measurement apparatus. or indeed just with
Chapter 18




               another quantum system.
                 Others define the measurement problem as the failure to
               observe macroscopic superpositions.
                  Decoherence theorists1 (e.g., H. Dieter Zeh and Wojciech
               Zurek, who use various non-standard interpretations of quantum
               mechanics, denying the projection postulate, quantum jumps, and
               even the existence of particles), define the measurement problem
               as the failure to observe superpositions such as Schrödinger’s Cat.
               Unitary time evolution of the wave function according to the
               Schrödinger wave equation should produce such macroscopic
               superpositions, they claim.
                  Information physics treats a measuring apparatus quantum
               mechanically by describing parts of it as in a metastable state
               like the excited states of an atom, the critically poised electrical
               potential energy in the discharge tube of a Geiger counter, or the
               supersaturated water and alcohol molecules of a Wilson cloud
               chamber. (The pi-bond orbital rotation from cis- to trans- in the
               light-sensitive retinal molecule is an example of a critically poised
               apparatus).
                 1    See chapter 22.
                                                Measurement            203

   Excited (metastable) states are poised to collapse when an elec-
tron (or photon) collides with the sensitive detector elements in
the apparatus. This collapse is macroscopic and irreversible2, gen-
erally a cascade of quantum events that release large amounts of
energy, increasing the (Boltzmann) entropy. But in a “measure-
ment” there is also a local decrease in the entropy. This negative
entropy corresponds to the information gained in the measure-
ment. The global entropy increase is normally orders of magni-
tude more than the small local decrease in entropy (an increase in
stable information or Shannon entropy) that constitutes the “mea-
sured” experimental data available to human observers.
   The creation of new information in a measurement thus follows
the same two core processes of all information creation - quan-
tum cooperative phenomena and thermodynamics. These two are
involved in the formation of microscopic objects like atoms and
molecules, as well as macroscopic objects like galaxies, stars, and




                                                                         Chapter 18
planets.
   According to the correspondence principle, all the laws of
quantum physics asymptotically approach the laws of classical
physics in the limit of large quantum numbers and large numbers
of particles. Quantum mechanics can be used to describe even the
largest macroscopic systems.
   Does this mean that the positions and momenta of macro-
scopic objects are uncertain? Yes, it does. Although the uncer-
tainty becomes vanishingly small for large objects, it is not zero.
   Noting that the momentum p is the product of mass and veloc-
ity mv, Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle, Δp Δx > h, can be
rewritten as Δv Δx > h / m. It is thus not when h is small, but when
the mass m is large enough and h / m is small enough, that errors
in the position and momentum of macroscopic objects become
smaller that can be measured.
    Niels Bohr used the uncertainty of macroscopic objects to
defeat Albert Einstein’s several objections to quantum mechan-
ics at the 1927 Solvay conference.
  2    See chapter 25.
         204          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  But Bohr and Heisenberg also insisted that a measuring appara-
               tus must be a regarded as a purely classical system. They can’t have it
               both ways. Can the macroscopic apparatus also be treated by quan-
               tum physics or not? Can it be described by the Schrödinger equa-
               tion? Can it be regarded as in a superposition of states?
                  The most famous example of macroscopic superposition is no
               doubt Schrödinger’s Cat3, which is claimed to be in a superposi-
               tion of live and dead cats, and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experi-
               ment, in which entangled electrons or photons are in a superposi-
               tion of two-particle states that collapse over macroscopic distances
               to exhibit properties “nonlocally” at speeds faster than the speed of
               light.
                  The radical treatments of macroscopic systems, by Schrödinger
               and Einstein and his colleagues, were intended to expose inconsis-
               tencies and incompleteness in quantum theory. The critics hoped to
               restore determinism and “local reality” to physics. They resulted in
Chapter 18




               some strange and extremely popular “mysteries” about “quantum
               reality,” such as the “many-worlds” interpretation, “hidden vari-
               ables,” and signaling faster than the speed of light.
                  We develop a quantum-mechanical treatment of macroscopic
               systems, especially a measuring apparatus, to show how it can create
               new information. If the apparatus were describable only by classical
               deterministic laws, no new information could come into existence.
               The apparatus need only be adequately determined, that is to say,
               “classical” to a sufficient degree of accuracy.
                 As Landau and Lifshitz described it in their 1958 textbook,
                     “The possibility of a quantitative description of the motion of an elec-
                     tron requires the presence also of physical objects which obey classi-
                     cal mechanics to a sufficient degree of accuracy. If an electron interacts
                     with such a “classical object”, the state of the latter is, generally speaking,
                     altered. The nature and magnitude of this change depend on the state of
                     the electron, and therefore may serve to characterise it quantitatively...
                     “We have defined “apparatus” as a physical object which is governed,
                     with sufficient accuracy, by classical mechanics. Such, for instance, is
                     a body of large enough mass. However, it must not be supposed that

                 3       See chapter 23
                                                               Measurement        205

      apparatus is necessarily macroscopic. Under certain conditions, the part
      of apparatus may also be taken by an object which is microscopic, since
      the idea of “with sufficient accuracy” depends on the actual problem
      proposed.
      “Thus quantum mechanics occupies a very unusual place among physi-
      cal theories: it contains classical mechanics as a limiting case [corre-
      spondence principle], yet at the same time it requires this limiting case
      for its own formulation.”4
Von Neumann’s Two Processes
  The measurement problem was analyzed mathematically in 1932
by John von Neumann. Following the work of Bohr and Heisen-
berg, he divided the world into a microscopic (atomic-level) quan-
tum system and a macroscopic (classical) measuring apparatus.
  Von Neumann explained that two fundamentally different pro-
cesses are going on in quantum mechanics.
   First, a non-causal Process 1, in which the measured electron
winds up randomly in one of the possible physical states (eigen-




                                                                                    Chapter 18
states) of the measuring apparatus plus electron.
   This process came to be called the “collapse of the wave function”
or the “reduction of the wave packet.”
   The probability for finding the electron in a specific eigenstate
is given by the square of the coefficients cn of the expansion of the
original system state (wave function ψ) in an infinite set of wave
functions φn that represent the eigenfunctions of the measuring
apparatus plus electron.
   This is as close as we get to a description of the motion of the par-
ticle aspect of a quantum system. According to von Neumann, the
particle simply shows up somewhere as a result of a measurement.
   Information physics says that the particle “shows up” only when
a new stable information structure is created, information that sub-
sequently can be observed.
  So we can also add a Process 1b. The information created in von
Neumann’s Process 1 will only be stable if an amount of positive
entropy greater than the negative entropy in the new information
  4       Quantum Mechanics, non-relativistic theory, pp.1-2
         206       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               structure is transported away, in order to satisfy the second law of
               thermodynamics.
                  Next, von Neumann’s causal Process 2, in which the electron
               wave function ψ evolves deterministically according to Schröding-
               er’s equation of motion for the wavelike aspect.
                 (ih/2π) ∂ψ/∂t = Hψ.
                  This evolution describes the motion of the probability ampli-
               tude wave ψ between measurements. The wave function exhibits
               interference effects. But the particle path itself can not be observed.
               Interference is destroyed if the particle has a definite position or
               momentum. The particle does not have a definite position between
               measurements.
                  Von Neumann claimed there is another major difference between
               his two processes. Process 1 is thermodynamically irreversible.
               Process 2 is reversible. This confirms the fundamental connection
Chapter 18




               between quantum mechanics and thermodynamics that informa-
               tion physics finds at the heart of all information creation.
                  Information physics can show quantum mechanically how Pro-
               cess 1 creates information. Something like Process 1 is always
               involved when any information is created, whether or not the new
               information is ever “observed” by a human being.
                 Process 2 is deterministic and information conserving.
                  Just as the new information recorded in the measurement appa-
               ratus cannot subsist unless a compensating amount of entropy is
               transferred away from the new information, something similar to
               Process 1b must happen in the mind of an observer if the new infor-
               mation is to constitute an “observation.”
                  It is only in cases where information persists long enough for a
               human being to observe it that we can properly describe the obser-
               vation as a “measurement” and the human being as an “observer.”
               So, following von Neumann’s “process” terminology, we can com-
               plete his theory of the measuring process by adding an anthropo-
               morphic third process.
                                                            Measurement            207

   Process 3 is a conscious observer recording new information in
a mind. For this we need two local reductions in the entropy (new
information in the measurement apparatus, new information in the
mind), both balanced by even greater increases in positive entropy
that must be transported away from the apparatus and the mind, so
the overall increase in entropy can satisfy the second law of thermo-
dynamics.
Designing a Quantum Measurement Apparatus
   The first step is to build an apparatus that allows different com-
ponents of the wave function to evolve along distinguishable paths
into different regions of space, where the different regions corre-
spond to (are correlated with) the physical properties we want to
measure. We then can locate a detector in these different regions of
space to catch particles travelling a particular path.
   We do not say that the system is on a particular path in this first
step. Knowing the position would cause the probability amplitude




                                                                                     Chapter 18
wave function to collapse. This first step is reversible, at least in prin-
ciple. It is deterministic and an example of von Neumann Process 2.
   Let’s consider a birefringent crystal separating a beam of photons
into horizontally and vertically polarized photons.5
   We need a beam of photons (and the ability to reduce the inten-
sity to a single photon at a time). Vertically polarized photons pass
straight through the crystal. They are called the ordinary ray. Hori-
zontally polarized photons, however, are deflected at an angle
though the crystal, then exit the crystal back at the original angle.
This is the extraordinary ray.




     Figure 18-11. Separating horizontal and vertical polarized photons

   Note that this first part of our apparatus accomplishes the
separation of our two states into distinct physical regions.

    5     See http://www.informationphilosopher.com/problems/measurement/#design
for an animation of the birefringent crystal experiment
         208       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  We have not actually measured yet, so a single photon passing
               through our measurement apparatus is described as in a linear com-
               bination (a superposition) of horizontal and vertical polarization
               states,
                 | ψ > = ( 1/√2) | h > + ( 1/√2) | v >             (1)
                 A Reversible Example of Process 2
                  To show that process 2 is reversible, we can add a second
               birefringent crystal upside down from the first, but inline with the
               superposition of physically separated states,




                    Figure 18-12. If we don’t measure, we can recombine the beams
Chapter 18




                  Since we have not made a measurement and do not know the
               path of the photon, the phase information in the (generally com-
               plex) coefficients of equation (1) has been preserved, so when they
               combine in the second crystal, they emerge in a state identical to the
               state they had before entering the first crystal.
               An Irreversible Example of Process 1
                  But now suppose we insert something between the two crystals
               that is capable of a measurement to produce observable informa-
               tion. We need detectors that may locate the photon in one of the
               two rays.
                 Let’s consider an ideal photographic plate capable of precipitat-
               ing visible silver grains upon the receipt of a single photon (and
               subsequent development). Today photography cannot detect single
               photons, but detectors using charge coupled devices (CCDs) are
               approaching this sensitivity.
                 We can write a quantum description of the plate as containing
               two sensitive collection areas, the part of the apparatus measuring
               horizontally polarized photons, | Ah > (shown as the upper spot),
                                                         Measurement      209

and the part of the apparatus measuring vertically polarized
photons, | Av > (shown as the lower spot).




     Figure 18-13. Two possible paths become one actual when detected.

  We treat the detection systems quantum mechanically, and say
that each detector has two eigenstates, e.g., | Ah0 >, corresponding to
  • the jump of the probability amplitude wave function | ψ > of the
photon in equation (1) into the horizontally polarized state | h >.
   • the quantum jump of the horizontal detector from | Ah0 > to
| Ah1 >.




                                                                            Chapter 18
  These two happen together, as the initial states of the detectors
are correlated with no photons, and the final state | Ah1 >, in which
the upper detector has registered a horizontal photon.
   When we actually detect the photon, say in a horizontal polariza-
tion state with statistical probability 1/2, two “collapses” or “jumps”
occur. They are correlated with the states of the sensitive detectors
in the classical apparatus.
   One can say that the photon has become entangled with the sensi-
tive horizontal detector area, so that the wave function describing
their interaction is a superposition of photon and apparatus states
that cannot be observed independently.
  | ψ > + | Ah0 >        =>      | ψ, Ah0 >        =>      | h, Ah1 >
   These jumps destroy (unobservable) phase information, raise the
(Boltzmann) entropy of the apparatus, and increase visible informa-
tion (Shannon entropy) in the form of the visible spot. The entropy
increase takes the form of a large chemical energy release when the
photographic spot is developed (or a cascade of electrons in a CCD).
  Note that the birefringent crystal and the parts of the macroscopic
apparatus other than the sensitive detectors are treated classically.
         210         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 We animate these irreversible and reversible processes on our
               website.6
                 We see that our example agrees with Von Neumann Process 1.
               A measurement which finds the photon in a specific state n is ther-
               modynamically irreversible, whereas the deterministic evolution
               described by Schrödinger’s equation is reversible.
                  We thus establish a clear connection between a measurement,
               which increases the information by some number of bits (Shan-
               non entropy), and the necessary compensating increase in the
               (Boltzmann) entropy of the macroscopic apparatus, and the cosmic
               creation process, where new particles form, reducing the entropy
               locally, and the energy of formation is radiated or conducted away
               as Boltzmann entropy.7
                  Note that the Boltzmann entropy can only be radiated away (ulti-
               mately into the night sky to the cosmic microwave background)
               because the expansion of the universe provides a sink for the
Chapter 18




               entropy, as pointed out by David Layzer. Note also that this cosmic
               information-creating process requires no conscious observer. The
               universe is its own observer.
               The Boundary between the Classical and Quantum Worlds
                  Some scientists, von Neumann and Heisenberg for example, have
               argued that in the absence of a conscious observer, or some “cut”
               between the microscopic and macroscopic world, the evolution
               of the quantum system and the macroscopic measuring apparatus
               would be described deterministically by Schrödinger’s equation of
               motion for the wave function | ψ + A > with the Hamiltonian H
               energy operator,
                 (ih/2π) ∂/∂t | ψ + A > = H | ψ + A >.
                  Our quantum mechanical analysis of the measurement appara-
               tus in the above case allows us to locate the “cut” precisely at those
               components of the “adequately classical and deterministic” appa-
               ratus that put the apparatus in an irreversible stable state providing
               new information to the observer.

                 6     informationphilosopher.com/problems/measurement/#birefringence
                 7     See appendix B for details
                                                                 Measurement   211

   John Bell drew a diagram to show the various possible locations
for what he called the “shifty split.” Information physics shows us
that the correct location for the boundary is the first of Bell’s possi-
bilities.




                                                                                 Chapter 18



     Figure 18-14. John Bell’s illustration of the “shifty split.”

The Role of the Conscious Observer
  In 1941, Carl von Weizsäcker described the measurement
problem as an interaction between a Subject and an Object, a view
shared by the philosopher of science Ernst Cassirer.
         212         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Fritz London and Edmond Bauer made the strongest case for
               the critical role of a conscious observer in 1939:
                     “So far we have only coupled one apparatus with one object. But a cou-
                     pling, even with a measuring device, is not yet a measurement. A mea-
                     surement is achieved only when the position of the pointer has been
                     observed. It is precisely this increase of knowledge, acquired by obser-
                     vation, that gives the observer the right to choose among the different
                     components of the mixture predicted by theory, to reject those which
                     are not observed, and to attribute thenceforth to the object a new wave
                     function, that of the pure case which he has found.
                     “We note the essential role played by the consciousness of the observer
                     in this transition from the mixture to the pure case. Without his effective
                     intervention, one would never obtain a new function.” 8
                  In 1961, Eugene Wigner made quantum physics even more sub-
               jective, claiming that a quantum measurement requires a conscious
               observer, without which nothing ever happens in the universe.
                     “When the province of physical theory was extended to encompass
                     microscopic phenomena, through the creation of quantum mechanics,
Chapter 18




                     the concept of consciousness came to the fore again: it was not possible
                     to formulate the laws of quantum mechanics in a fully consistent way
                     without reference to the consciousness All that quantum mechanics
                     purports to provide are probability connections between subsequent
                     impressions (also called “apperceptions”) of the consciousness, and even
                     though the dividing line between the observer, whose consciousness is
                     being affected, and the observed physical object can be shifted towards
                     the one or the other to a considerable degree [cf., von Neumann] it
                     cannot be eliminated.” 9
                 Other physicists were more circumspect. Niels Bohr contrasted
               Paul Dirac’s view, which stressed the randomness of the outcome,
               with that of Heisenberg, who stresses the observer’s “free choice” of
               what is to be measured:
                     ‘The question was whether, as to the occurrence of individual effects, we
                     should adopt a terminology proposed by Dirac, that we were concerned
                     with a choice on the part of “nature,” or, as suggested by Heisenberg, we
                     should say that we have to do with a choice on the part of the “observer”
                     constructing the measuring instruments and reading their recording.
                     Any such terminology would, however, appear dubious since, on the one

                 8       Theory of Observation in Quantum Mechanics, in Wheeler and Zurek, p.251
                 9       Remarks on the Mind-Body Question, in Wheeler and Zurek, p.169
                                                           Measurement                213

     hand, it is hardly reasonable to endow nature with volition in the ordi-
     nary sense, while, on the other hand, it is certainly not possible for the
     observer to influence the events which may appear under the conditions
     he has arranged. To my mind, there is no other alternative than to admit
     that, in this field of experience, we are dealing with individual phenom-
     ena and that our possibilities of handling the measuring instruments
     allow us only to make a choice between the different complementary
     types of phenomena we want to study.’ 10
  Landau and Lifshitz said clearly that quantum physics was inde-
pendent of any observer:
     “In this connection the ‘classical object’ is usually called apparatus, and
     its interaction with the electron is spoken of as measurement. However,
     it must be most decidedly emphasised that we are here not discussing
     a process of measurement in which the physicist-observer takes part.
     By measurement, in quantum mechanics, we understand any process
     of interaction between classical and quantum objects, occurring apart
     from and independently of any observer.” 11
  David Bohm agreed that what is observed is distinct from the
observer:




                                                                                        Chapter 18
     “If it were necessary to give all parts of the world a completely quantum-
     mechanical description, a person trying to apply quantum theory to the
     process of observation would be faced with an insoluble paradox. This
     would be so because he would then have to regard himself as something
     connected inseparably with the rest of the world. On the other hand,the
     very idea of making an observation implies that what is observed is
     totally distinct from the person observing it.” 12
   And John Bell said:
     “It would seem that the [quantum] theory is exclusively concerned
     about ‘results of measurement’, and has nothing to say about anything
     else. What exactly qualifies some physical systems to play the role of
     ‘measurer’? Was the wavefunction of the world waiting to jump for thou-
     sands of millions of years until a single-celled living creature appeared?
     Or did it have to wait a little longer, for some better qualified system...
     with a Ph.D.? If the theory is to apply to anything but highly idealised
     laboratory operations, are we not obliged to admit that more or less
     ‘measurement-like’ processes are going on more or less all the time,
     more or less everywhere? Do we not have jumping then all the time?” 13

    10    Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, Niels Bohr, p.51
    11    Quantum Mechanics, Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz, p.2
    12    Quantum Theory, David Bohm, p.584
    13    “Against Measurement,” in Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics,
p. 216)
         214       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Three Essential Steps in a “Measurement” and “Observation”
                 We can distinguish three required elements in a measurement
               that can clarify the ongoing debate about the role of a conscious
               observer.
                 1) In standard quantum theory, the first required element is the
               collapse of the wave-function. This is the Dirac projection postulate
               and von Neumann Process 1.
                  However, the collapse might not leave a determinate record. If
               nothing in the environment is macroscopically affected so as to
               leave an indelible record of the collapse, we can say that no infor-
               mation about the collapse is created. The overwhelming fraction of
               collapses are of this kind. Moreover, information might actually be
               destroyed. For example, collisions between atoms or molecules in a
               gas that erase past information about their paths.
                  2) If the collapse occurs when the quantum system is entangled
Chapter 18




               with a macroscopic measurement apparatus, a well-designed appa-
               ratus will also “collapse” into a correlated “pointer” state.
                  As we showed above for photons, the detector in the upper half of
               a Stern-Gerlach apparatus will fire, indicating detection of an elec-
               tron with spin up. As with photons, if the probability amplitude | up
               > in the upper half does not collapse as the electron is detected, it
               can still be recombined with the probability amplitude | down > in
               the lower half to reconstruct the unseparated beam.
                  When the apparatus detects a particle, the second required ele-
               ment is that it produce a determinate record of the event. But this
               is impossible without an irreversible thermodynamic process that
               involves: a) the creation of at least one bit of new information (nega-
               tive entropy) and b) the transfer away from the measuring apparatus
               of an amount of positive entropy (generally much, much) greater
               than the information created.
                 Notice that no conscious observer need be involved. We can gen-
               eralize this second step to an event in the physical world that was
               not designed as a measurement apparatus by a physical scientist,
               but nevertheless leaves an indelible record of the collapse of a quan-
               tum state. This might be a highly specific single event, or the macro-
               scopic consequence of billions of atomic-molecular level of events.
                                                Measurement             215

   3) Finally, the third required element is an indelible determinate
record that can be looked at by an observer (presumably conscious,
although the consciousness itself has nothing to do with the mea-
surement).
  When we have all three of these essential elements, we have what
we normally mean by a measurement and an observation, both
involving a human being.
   When we have only the first two, we can say metaphorically that
the “universe is measuring itself,” creating an information record
of quantum collapse events. For example, every hydrogen atom
formed in the early recombination era is a record of the time period
when macroscopic bodies could begin to form. A certain pattern
of photons records the explosion of a supernova billions of light
years away. When recorded by the CCD in a telescope, it becomes
a potential observation at a later time when an astronomer looks at
the data.




                                                                          Chapter 18
   Craters on the back side of the moon have for billions of years
recorded collisions with solar system debris. But that could become
observations only when the first NASA Apollo mission circled the
moon.
Quantum Collapses Can Produce New Information
  But they are not measurements, or even observations, until the
existence of a semi-permanent record has been made first.
  And that permanence requires positive entropy to be carried
away from the event, whether in a physics lab, on the back of the
moon, in a distant supernova, or a photon emitted by an atom in the
cosmic microwave background.
  If the positive entropy is not carried away, there is no permanent
(or semi-permanent) record to be observed.
   In that case, the new information is simply destroyed. The vast
fraction of all quantum collapses do not produce lasting new infor-
mation. Just as the vast fraction of negative entropy streams avail-
able do not create any new information structures.14
  14   See Appendix B for more details,
         216   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                      i n i s m
                          De     term
Chapter 19




                                                                   This chapter on the web
                                     informationphilosopher.com/freedom/determinism.html
                                                 Determinism           217


Determinism
    The “problem of determinism” looms large in philosophy, where
it appears as the powerful alternative to libertarian freedom in the
“problem of free will.”1
   But determinism is equally powerful in physics today. It appears
to be the logical, the rational, even the metaphysical foundation of
classical Newtonian physics. The alternative of chance is thought
to be irrational. Chance cannot be a “reason” or an explanation,
which the Greeks called a “logos.” Chance is “alogos,” illogical. An
uncaused cause has long been considered oxymoronic by analytic
language philosophers who, to be sure, placed too much explana-
tory power in words.
   Despite the fact that quantum physics seems to have shown that
the microscopic world at least is ontologically indeterministic, the
critics of quantum theory, who have developed several alternative
“interpretations” of quantum mechanics, are equally divided into




                                                                         Chapter 19
those who accept the indeterminism and those, following Albert
Einstein, Erwin Schrödinger, and many others, hope to show
that determinism can be restored to quantum theory by discover-
ing “hidden variables,” forces coming in “from outside space and
time,” or that there is only the “appearance” of randomness.
   Determinism is the philosophical idea that every event or state
of affairs, including every human decision and action, is the inevi-
table and necessary consequence of antecedent states of affairs.
There is but one possible future.
  More strictly, determinism should be distinguished from pre-
determinism, the idea that the entire past (as well as the future)
was determined at the origin of the universe.
  Nor should determinism be confused with determination, the
idea that events (including human actions) can be adequately
determined by immediately prior events (such as an agent’s rea-
sons, motives, desires), without being pre-determined back to
before the agent’s birth or even back to the origin of the universe.
  1    See chapter 4
         218     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Since modern quantum physics shows that the universe is inde-
               terministic, with profound effects on microscopic processes at the
               atomic scale, we will find it valuable to distinguish pre-determin-
               ism from the adequate or statistical determinism that we have in
               the real world. Adequate determinism, which may be arbitrarily
               close to and indistinguishable from certainty, is the basis for the
               classical physical laws that apply in the macrocosmos.
                  Determinism is a modern name (coined in the nineteenth-cen-
               tury) for the ancient idea of Democritus that causal determinis-
               tic laws control the motion of atoms, and that everything - includ-
               ing human minds - consists merely of atoms in a void.
                 Democritus’ mentor and fellow materialist Leucippus said
               absolute necessity leaves no room in the cosmos for chance.
                  “Nothing occurs at random, but everything for a reason and by neces-
                  sity.”
                  Determinism, especially the variation of “soft” determinism (cf.
               William James) or compatibilism, is supported as a theory of free
Chapter 19




               will by a majority of philosophers, each with special vested inter-
               ests in one or more of the many determinisms.
                  Compatibilists accept determinism but argue that man is free as
               long as his own will is one of the steps in the causal chain, even if
               his choices are completely predetermined for physical reasons or
               preordained by God.
                  And fatalism is a special form of determinism where every
               event in the future is fated to happen. Fatalism does not normally
               require that any causal laws or higher powers are involved. Que
               sera, sera.
                  The core idea of determinism is closely related to the idea of
               causality. But we can have causality without determinism, espe-
               cially the “soft” causality that follows an “uncaused” event (a causa
               sui) that is not predictable from prior events.
                 Aristotle called such events archai (ἀρχαί) - starting points
               or “fresh starts” in new causal chains which break the bonds of
               determinism.
                                                                Determinism   219

   Despite David Hume’s critical attack on the necessity of causes,
many philosophers embrace causality and determinism strongly.
Some even connect it to the very possibility of logic and reason.
And Hume himself believed strongly, if inconsistently, in neces-
sity. “‘tis impossible to admit any medium betwixt chance and
necessity,”2 he said.
  Bertrand Russell said causation may be a priori,
      “The law of causation, according to which later events can theoreti-
      cally be predicted by means of earlier events, has often been held to
      be a priori, a necessity of thought, a category without which science
      would not be possible.” 3
Indeterminism
  The idea of indeterminism appears to threaten causality and
the basic idea of causal law. But it does not.
   Indeterminism for some is simply an occasional event without
a cause. We can have an adequate causality without strict deter-
minism. Strict determinism means complete predictability (in




                                                                                Chapter 19
principle, if not in practice) of events and only one possible future.
Adequate determinism provides statistical predictability, which in
normal situations for physical objects approaches statistical cer-
tainty.
  An example of an event that is not strictly caused is one that
depends on chance, like the flip of a coin. If the outcome is only
probable, not certain, then the event can be said to have been
caused by the coin flip, but the head or tails result itself was not
predictable. So this causality, which recognizes prior events as
causes, is undetermined and the result of chance alone.
  We call this “soft” causality. Events are caused by prior
(uncaused) events, but not determined by events earlier in the
causal chain, which has been broken by the uncaused cause.
   Determinism is critical for the question of free will. Strict deter-
minism implies just one possible future. Chance means that the
future is unpredictable. Chance allows alternative futures and the

  2       Treatise of Human Nature, Book I, Part I, Section XIV, p.171
  3       Our Knowledge of the External World, p.179
         220         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?


               question becomes how the one actual present is realized from these
               alternative possibilities.
                  The departure required from strict determinism is very slight
               compared to the miraculous ideas associated with the “causa sui”
               (self-caused cause) of the ancients.
                 Even in a world that contains quantum uncertainty, macroscopic
               objects are adequately, statistically determined to an extraordinary
               degree. The macroscopic “laws of nature” are just statistical laws that
               “emerge” when large numbers of atoms or molecules get together.
               For large enough numbers, the probabilistic laws approach practical
               certainty.
                 Determinism is an emergent property.4
                  Newton’s laws of motion are deterministic enough to send men
               to the moon and back. Our two-stage model of free will5 is large
               enough to ignore quantum uncertainty for the purpose of the
               reasoning will. The neural system is robust enough to insure that
Chapter 19




               mental decisions are reliably transmitted to our limbs.
                  We call this determinism, only ineffective for extremely small
               structures, “adequate determinism.” It is adequate enough to pre-
               dict eclipses for the next thousand years or more with extraordinary
               precision.
               Determination
                 Unlike his compatibilist predecessors, R.E.Hobart (the pseud-
               onym of Harvard philosopher Dickinson S. Miller, a student of Wil-
               liam James) explicitly does not endorse strict logical or physical
               determinism. He uses the word “determination,” not determinism.
               And he explicitly endorses the existence of alternative possibilities,
               which can depend on absolute chance. Hobart is writing about six
               years after the discovery of quantum indeterminacy.
                 He says:
                     I am not maintaining that determinism is true...it is not here affirmed
                     that there are no small exceptions, no slight undetermined swervings,
                     no ingredient of absolute chance.6

                 4       See chapter 26.
                 5       See chapter 4.
                 6       Mind, Vol XLIII, No. 169, January, 1934, p.2
                                                           Determinism                221

    “We say,” I can will this or I can will that, whichever I choose “. Two
    courses of action present themselves to my mind. I think of their conse-
    quences, I look on this picture and on that, one of them commends itself
    more than the other, and I will an act that brings it about. I knew that I
    could choose either. That means that I had the power to choose either.7
  Much later, Phillipa Foot argued that because our actions are
determined by our motives, our character and values, our feelings
and desires, in no way leads to the conclusion that they are pre-
determined from the beginning of the universe.
    For instance, an action said to be determined by the desires of the man
    who does it is not necessarily an action for which there is supposed to
    be a sufficient condition. In saying that it is determined by his desires
    we may mean merely that he is doing something that he wants to do, or
    that he is doing it for the sake of something else that he wants. There is
    nothing in this to suggest determinism.8
   The presence of quantum uncertainty leads some philosophers to
call the world undetermined. But indeterminism is somewhat mis-
leading, with strong negative connotations, when most events are
overwhelmingly “adequately determined.” Nevertheless, speaking




                                                                                        Chapter 19
logically, if a single event is undetermined, then indeterminism is
true, and determinism false.
   There is no problem imagining that the three traditional mental
faculties of reason - perception, conception, and comprehension -
are all carried on more or less deterministically in a physical brain
where quantum events do not interfere with normal operations.
   There is also no problem imagining a role for randomness in
the brain in the form of quantum level noise. Noise can introduce
random errors into stored memories. Noise could create random
associations of ideas during memory recall. This randomness may
be driven by microscopic fluctuations that are amplified to the mac-
roscopic level.
   Our macro mind needs the micro mind for the free action items
and thoughts in an agenda of alternative possibilities to be de-liber-
ated by the will. The random micro mind is the “free” in free will and
the source of human creativity. The adequately determined macro
   7      ibid, p.8
   8      “Free Will as Involving Determinism,” The Philosophical Review, vol LXVI,
(1957), p.441
         222         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               mind is the “will” in free will that de-liberates, choosing actions for
               which we can be morally responsible.
                  Determinism must be disambiguated from its close relatives cau-
               sality, certainty, necessity, and predictability.
               The Emergence of Determinism
                  Since the physical world is irreducibly indeterministic at the base
               level of atoms and molecules, there is actually no strict determinism
               at any “level” of the physical world.
                  With random motions at the base level, what emerges at the higher
               level of the macroscopic physical world and the human mind is ade-
               quate determinism. Determinism is an abstract theoretical idea that
               simplifies physical systems enough to allow the use of logical and
               mathematical methods on idealized abstract “objects” and “events.”
               The apparent “determinism” of classical physics is the consequence
               of averaging over extremely large numbers of microscopic particles.
                 Adequate determinism “emerges” when we have large enough
Chapter 19




               objects to be averaging over vast numbers of atoms and molecules.
                 Determinism is an emergent property, just as the concept of
               determinism emerged historically.
               The History of Determinism9
                 The term (sic) determination is first attested in the late fourteenth
               century, “to come to an end,” also “to settle, decide,” from O.Fr. deter-
               miner (12c.), from L. determinare “set limits to,” from de- “off ” + ter-
               minare “to mark the end or boundary,” from terminus “end, limit.”
                 Its sense of “coming to a firm decision” (to do something) is from
               1450. Determination as a “quality of being resolute” dates from 1822.
                  Before the nineteenth century determinists were usually called
               Necessarians. William Belsham contrasted them (favorably) with
               the “incoherent” Libertarians in 1789. This was the first use of Lib-
               ertarian. Libertarians were thought incoherent because liberty was

                 9     Sources, OED, Webster’s Third International
                                                           Determinism            223

thought to be unruly, random, unlawful, and - in a related term of
the day - libertine.
 The noun “determinism” appears first in 1846 in Sir William
Hamilton’s edition of Thomas Reid’s works as a note on p.87.
   “There are two schemes of Necessity - the Necessitation by efficient - the
   Necessitation by final causes. The former is brute or blind Fate; the latter
   rational Determinism.”
  At about the same time, determinism is used by theologians to
describe lack of free will.
  In 1855, William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) wrote,
   “The theory of Determinism, in which the will is determined or swayed
   to a particular course by external inducements and forced habits, so that
   the consciousness of freedom rests chiefly upon an oblivion of the ante-
   cedents of our choice.”
   Ernst Cassirer claimed (mistakenly?) that determinism in the
philosophical sense of a “doctrine that everything that happens is
determined by a necessary chain of causation” dates from the work




                                                                                    Chapter 19
of Emil du Bois-Reymond in 1876.
   Note that many ancient philosophers worried about this causal
chain (ἄλυσις), but those philosophers who allowed the existence
of chance, (Aristotle, Epicurus, Lucretius, and Alexander of
Aphrodisias), denied such a causal chain, while maintaining that
human decisions were caused by neither chance nor necessity but
by a tertium quid - our autonomous human agency.
  The adjective “determinist” appeared first in the Contemporary
Review of October 1874 - “The objections of our modern Deter-
minists.” In the Contemporary Review of March 1885, R. H. Hutton
described “The necessarian or determinist theory of human action.”
   William James’s essay on “The Dilemma of Determinism”
appeared at about the same time, in 1884. In it he coined the terms
“soft determinism” (today’s compatibilism), and “hard determinism”
(strict determinism, indeed, pre-determinism from the beginning
of time).
         224   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                     o f t h e
                             a p s e
                        Col Function
                           l
Chapter 20




                        Wave




                                                             This chapter on the web
                                              informationphilosopher.com/solutions/
                                                experiments/wave-function_collapse/
                                                                 Collapse   225


Collapse of the Wave Function
   The probability amplitude wave function in quantum mechan-
ics and its indeterministic collapse during a measurement is with-
out doubt the most controversial problem in physics today. Of the
several “interpretations” of quantum mechanics, more than half
deny the collapse of the wave function1. Some of these deny quan-
tum “jumps” and even the existence of particles!
   So it is very important to understand the importance of what
Paul Dirac called the projection postulate in quantum mechan-
ics. The “collapse of the wave function” is also known as the
“reduction of the wave packet.” This usually describes the change
from a system that can be seen as having many possible quantum
states (Dirac’s principle of superposition) to its randomly being
found in only one of those possible states.
   Although the collapse is historically thought to be caused by
a measurement, and thus dependent on the role of a conscious
observer2 in preparing the experiment, collapses can occur when-




                                                                              Chapter 20
ever quantum systems interact (e.g., collisions between particles)
or even spontaneously (radioactive decay).
   The claim that a conscious observer is needed to collapse the
wave function has injected a severely anthropomorphic element
into quantum theory, suggesting that nothing happens in the
universe except when physicists are making measurements. An
extreme example is Hugh Everett III’s Many Worlds theory,
which says that the universe splits into two nearly identical uni-
verses whenever a measurement is made.
What is the Wave Function?
  Perhaps the best illustration of the wave function is to show it
passing though the famous slits in a two-slit experiment. It has
been known for centuries that water waves passing through a
small opening creates circular waves radiating outward from that
opening. If there are two openings, the waves from each opening
  1    See Other Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics on p.198
  2    See The Role of the Conscious Observer on p.212
         226     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?


               interfere with those from the other, producing waves twice as tall
               at the crests (or deep in the troughs) and cancelling perfectly
               where a crest from one meets a trough from the other.
                 When we send light waves through tiny slits, we see the same
               phenomenon.
                  Most of the light that reaches light detectors at the back lands
               right behind the barrier between the slits, which seems non-
               intuitive. Most amazingly, at some places there are null points,
               where no light at all appears in the interference pattern.
Chapter 20




                 Figure 20-15. Interfering waves show crests and troughs.


                  Since Einstein’s great hypothesis in 1905, we know that light
               actually consists of large numbers of individual photons, quanta
               of light. Our experiment can turn down the amount of light so
               low that we know there is only a single photon, a single parti-
               cle of light in the experiment at any time. What we see then is
               the very slow accumulation of photons at the detectors, but with
               exactly the same overall interference pattern. And this leads to
               what Richard Feynman called not just a “mystery,” but actually
               the “only mystery” in quantum mechanics. How can the particle
               go through both slits to interfere with itself?
                                                                        Collapse            227

   We can show that a single particle does not interfere with itself.
It may only go through one slit, but with two slits open, its pos-
sible motions are different from the case with only one slit. Look
at the possibilities function with the right slit closed. We have a
completely different interference pattern.




                                                                                              Chapter 20
    Figure 20-16. Many accounts say the interference fringes are lost, but there is still
interference between particles that come from different parts of the slit.

Information Physics Explains the Two-Slit Experiment
  Although we cannot say anything about a single particle’s
whereabouts, information philosophy can help us to see clearly in
these two figures that while it may only go through one slit, what
goes through the two slits and what it is that interferes with itself is
abstract information, the mathematical probability of finding the
particle at each of the possible places it may go.
   Neither matter nor energy, we call this abstract information the
“possibilities function.” The wave function is exploring all the pos-
sible locations where a particle may be found. So the quantum
wave going through the slit is an abstract number, neither mate-
rial nor energy, just a probability. It is information about where
particles of matter (or particles of light if we shoot photons at the
slit) will be found when we record them. Only large numbers of
         228        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               experiments reveal the wave nature and its interference. The loca-
               tion of a single particle is indeterminate, the result of ontological
               chance.
                  But the average locations of millions of particles shows the wave-
               like interference and demonstrates the causal power of the imma-
               terial and abstract possibilities function. For example, no particle
               lands at the null points!
                 Now information philosophy accepts that information needs
               matter for its embodiment and energy for its communication. So
               where is the “possibilities function” embodied? Before we explain
               that, let’s first review why this function is said to “collapse.”
                  When Einstein first considered this problem in 1905, he thought
               of the light wave as energy spread out everywhere in the wave. So it
               was energy that he thought might be traveling faster than light, vio-
               lating his brand new principle of relativity (published just two
               months after his light quantum paper). Let’s visualize his concern.
Chapter 20




                  Figure 20-17. Once the particle appears anywhere, the possibilities of it appearing any-
               where else must immediately vanish.
                                                                      Collapse             229

   Einstein assumed
    the energy of a beam of light from a point source (according to the Max-
    wellian theory of light or, more generally, according to any wave theory)
    is continuously spread over an ever increasing volume... In accordance
    with the assumption to be considered here, the energy of a light ray
    spreading out from a point source is not continuously distributed over
    an increasing space but consists of a finite number of energy quanta
    which are localized at points in space, which move without dividing,
    and which can only be produced and absorbed as complete units.3
   The interfering probability amplitude waves disappear instantly
everywhere once the particle is detected, but we left a small frag-
ment of interfering waves on the left side of the figure to ask a ques-
tion first raised by Einstein in 1905.
   What happens to the small but finite probability that the particle
might have been found at the left side of the screen? How has that
probability instantaneously (with “action-at-a-distance faster than
light speed) been collected into the unit probability at the dot?
  The answer provided by information philosophy is that noth-
ing collapsed, nothing moved at any speed. The wave function is




                                                                                             Chapter 20
not energy or matter, it is only abstract information that tells us the
probabilities of various possibilities.
  The idea of probability - or possibilities - “collapsing” is much
easier to understand than something material or energetic gather-
ing itself suddenly in one location. Probability and possibilities are
abstract ideas. They are immaterial.
  It was at the Solvay conference in Brussels in 1927, twenty-two
years after Einstein first tried to understand what is happening
when the wave collapses, when he noted;
    “If | ψ |2 were simply regarded as the probability that at a certain point
    a given particle is found at a given time, it could happen that the same
    elementary process produces an action ... assumes an entirely peculiar
    mechanism of action at a distance.” 4
  Einstein later came to call this spukhafte Fernwerkungen, “spooky
action at a distance.” It is now known as nonlocality.
   3      “A Heuristic Viewpoint on the Production and Transformation of Light,” English
translation - American Journal of Physics, 33, 5, 367
   4      Quantum Theory at the Crossroads, Bacciagaluppi and Valentini, 2009. p.442
         230       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?


               Where Is Information About Probabilities Embodied?
                  Information philosophy can now answer this critical part of
               the mystery. The information is not embodied in energy, as Ein-
               stein finally realized. It is also not embodied in the matter of a par-
               ticle, such as an electron. Einstein said that quantum mechanics is
               “incomplete” because the particle has no definite position before a
               measurement. He was right. But that is not because the particle is
               distributed in space.
                 What is distributed in space is seen clearly in the figures above,
               the waves of probability information. But where is that information
               embodied? The answer is astonishingly simple. It is embodied in
               the material of the experimental apparatus. It is in the “boundary
               conditions” of the wall with its slits and the screen with its detectors.
                   The waves are simply the mathematical solutions of the
               Schrödinger wave equation given the boundary conditions and the
               wavelength of the particles. When one slit is closed, the abstract
               “possibilities function” looks quite different from the two-slit open
Chapter 20




               case. The mystery of how the particle going through one slit is aware
               that the other slit is open or closed is completely solved.
                  We can regard those mathematical possibilities as the values of
               what Einstein in 1921 called a “ghost field” or “leading field” that
               predicts the probability of finding his light quanta. A few years later,
               inspired by Einstein, Louis de Broglie called it a “pilot wave” in his
               1924 thesis. Then in 1926, Max Born used Einstein’s idea as the basis
               for a “statistical interpretation” of quantum mechanics. He wrote:
                   I shall recall a remark that Einstein made about the behavior of the wave
                   field and light quanta. He said that perhaps the waves only have to be
                   wherever one needs to know the path of the corpuscular light quanta,
                   and in that sense, he spoke of a “ghost field.” It determines the probabil-
                   ity that a light quantum - viz., the carrier of energy and impulse – fol-
                   lows a certain path; however, the field itself is ascribed no energy and
                   no impulse.
                   ... from the complete analogy between light quanta and electrons, one
                   might consider formulating the laws of electron motion in a similar
                   manner. This is closely related to regarding the de Broglie-Schrödinger
                   waves as “ghost fields,” or better yet, “guiding fields.”
                                                                     Collapse             231

     ... The paths of these corpuscles are determined only to the extent that
    they are constrained by the law of energy and impulse; moreover, only a
    probability that a certain path will be followed will be determined by the
    function ψ. One can perhaps summarize this, somewhat paradoxically,
    as: The motion of the particle follows the laws of probability, but the
    probability itself propagates in accord with causal laws.5
   The sudden change in probability also occurs in the Einstein-
Podolsky-Rosen experiments, where measurement of one particle
transmits neither matter or energy to the other “entangled” parti-
cle. Instead, new information has come into the universe instan-
taneously. That information, together with conservation of angular
momentum, makes the state of the coherently entangled second par-
ticle certain, however far away it might be after the measurement.6
   The standard “orthodox” interpretation of quantum mechanics
includes the projection postulate. This is the idea that once one of
the possibilities becomes actual at one position, the probabilities
for actualization at all other positions becomes instantly zero. New
information has appeared, but there is no information transfer that
could be used to communicate that information.




                                                                                            Chapter 20
   The principle of superposition tells us that before a measurement, a
system may be in one of many possible states. In the two-slit experi-
ment, this includes all the possible positions where |ψ(x)|2 is not
zero. Once the quantum system (the photon or electron) interacts
with a specific detector at the screen, all other possibilities vanish. It
is unfortunate that the word “collapse” was chosen, since it suggests
some physical motion, where nothing at all is moving when prob-
abilities change.
   When we deny the appropriateness of the word “collapse,” we
do not deny the underlying indeterministic physics. Just as in
philosophy, where it is the language used that is often the source of
confusion, we find that thinking about the information involved,
rather than the words, clarifies the problem in physics.


   5       Quantum mechanics of collision processes (Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorgänge),
Zeitschrift für Physik. 38 (1926), 803-827
   6       See the next chapter for the two-particle wave function.
         232   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                         e nt
                        nt a n      glem
                      E
Chapter 21




                                                                  This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/problems/entanglement
                                                            Entanglement                233


Entanglement
  Entanglement is a mysterious quantum phenomenon that is
widely, but mistakenly, described as capable of transmitting infor-
mation over vast distances faster than the speed of light. It has
proved very popular with science writers, philosophers of science,
and many scientists who hope to use the mystery to deny one or
more of the basic concepts underlying quantum physics.
   Some commentators say that nonlocality and entanglement are
a “second revolution” in quantum mechanics, “the greatest mys-
tery in physics,” or “science’s strangest phenomenon,” and that
quantum physics has been “reborn.” They usually quote Erwin
Schrödinger as saying
    “I would not call that one but rather the characteristic trait of quan-
    tum mechanics,” the one that enforces its entire departure from clas-
    sical lines of thought.”1
   Schrödinger knew that his two-particle wave function could
not have the same simple interpretation as the single particle,
which can be visualized in ordinary three-dimensional configu-




                                                                                          Chapter 21
ration space. And he is right that entanglement exhibits a richer
form of the “action-at-a-distance” and nonlocality that Albert
Einstein had already identified in the collapse of the single par-
ticle wave function.
   The main difference is that two particles instead of one acquire
new properties, and they do it instantaneously (at faster than light
speeds), just as in the case of a single-particle measurement, where
the finite probability of appearing at various distant locations col-
lapses to zero at the instant the particle is found somewhere. This
two-particle instantaneous interaction is nonseparability.
   We can disagree with Schrödinger, who was enthusiastic about
the Einstein-Posolsky-Rosen attack in 1935 on quantum mechan-
ics as “incomplete” and who gave the phenomenon the name
“entanglement.” In fact, the entanglement of two indistinguishable
    1     Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Volume 31,
Issue 04, October 1935, pp 555-563
         234     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               particles can be completely understood with Paul Dirac’s prin-
               ciple of superposition, his axiom of measurement, and his projec-
               tion postulate. These three fundamentals of quantum mechanics
               already explain the “mysterious” phenomena that are impossible
               in classical mechanics, notably the one-particle mystery in the
               two-slit experiment that Richard Feynman calls “the only mys-
               tery” in quantum mechanics.
                 Information philosophy analyzes both the single-particle and
               two-particle wave function “collapses” as a question of who knows
               what when, that is, what information exists at each moment and
               where about the particle(s).
                  Entanglement depends on two quantum properties that are
               simply impossible in “classical” physics. One is called nonlocal-
               ity. The other is nonseparability. Each of these might be consid-
               ered a mystery in its own right, but fortunately information physics
               (and the information interpretation of quantum mechanics) can
               explain them both, with no equations, in a way that should be
               understandable to the lay person.
Chapter 21




                  This may not be good news for the science writers and publish-
               ers who turn out so many titles each year claiming that quantum
               physics implies that there are multiple parallel universes, that the
               minds of physicists are manipulating “quantum reality,” that there
               is nothing “really” there until we look at it, that we can travel back-
               wards in time, that things can be in two places at the same time,
               that we can teleport material from one place to another, and of
               course that we can send signals faster than the speed of light.
                  A second concern for Einstein was that the wave function ψ
               for an isolated free particle evolves in time to occupy all space.
               All positions become equally probable. Yet when we observe the
               particle, it is always located at some particular place. This does
               not prove that the particle had a particular place before the obser-
               vation, but Einstein had a commitment to “elements of reality”
               that he thought no one could doubt. One of those elements is
               a particle’s position. He asked the question, “Does the particle
               have a precise position the moment before it is measured?” The
               Copenhagen answer was sometimes “no,” more often it was “we
               don’t know,” or “Don’t ask?”
                                                 Entanglement            235


Einstein’s Discovery of Nonlocality and Nonseparability
   Albert Einstein was the first to see the nonlocal character of
quantum phenomena. He may have seen it as early as 1905, the
same year he published his special theory of relativity. But it was
perfectly clear to him twenty-two years later (ten years after his
general theory of relativity and his explanation of how quanta of
light are emitted and absorbed by atoms), when he described non-
locality to a conference of physicists from around the world in
Belgium in 1927 at the fifth Solvay conference.
   Then a few years later, in 1935, Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and
Nathan Rosen proposed a thought experiment (known by their
initials as EPR) to exhibit what they thought were internal contra-
dictions in the new quantum physics. Einstein hoped to show that
quantum theory could not describe certain intuitive “elements of
reality” and thus was either incomplete or, as he hoped, demon-
strably incorrect.
   Einstein and his colleagues Schrödinger, Max Planck, David
Bohm, and others hoped for a return to deterministic physics, and




                                                                           Chapter 21
the elimination of mysterious quantum phenomena like superpo-
sition of states and the “collapse” of the wave function. EPR contin-
ues to fascinate determinist philosophers of science who hope to
prove that quantum indeterminacy does not exist.
   Beyond the problem of nonlocality, the EPR “thought experi-
ment” introduced the problem of “nonseparability.” This myste-
rious phenomenon appears to transfer something physical faster
than the speed of light. Actually there is merely an instantaneous
change in the immaterial information about probabilities or pos-
sibilities for locating the particles.
   The 1935 EPR paper was based on a question of Einstein’s about
two electrons fired in opposite directions from a central source
with equal velocities. He imagined them starting at time t0 some
distance apart and approaching one another with high velocities.
Then for a short time interval from t1 to t1 + Δt the particles are in
contact with one another.
         236        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  After the particles are measured at t1, quantum mechanics
               describes them with a single two-particle wave function that is not
               separable into the product of two independent single-particle wave
               functions. Because electrons are indistinguishable particles, it is not
               proper to say electron 1 goes this way and electron 2 that way. (Nev-
               ertheless, it is convenient to label the particles, as we do in the illus-
               trations below.) Until the next measurement, it is misleading to
               think that specific particles have distinguishable paths. Either par-
               ticle could be anywhere.
                  Einstein said correctly that at a later time t2, measurement of one
               electron’s position would instantly establish the position of the other
               electron - without measuring it explicitly.
Chapter 21




                    Figure 21-19. Einstein’s first explanation of “action-at-a-distance.”

                  In this first discussion of the problem, Einstein simply used con-
               servation of linear momentum to calculate the position of the second
               electron. Although conservation laws are rarely cited as the expla-
               nation, they are the reason that entangled particles always produce
               correlated results. If the results were not always correlated, the
               implied violation of a fundamental conservation law would be a
               much bigger story than entanglement itself, as interesting as that is.
                 Although Einstein mentioned conservation in the original EPR
               paper, it is noticeably absent from later work. An exception is
               Eugene Wigner, writing on the problem of measurement in 1963:
                   If a measurement of the momentum of one of the particles is carried out
                   — the possibility of this is never questioned — and gives the result p, the
                   state vector of the other particle suddenly becomes a (slightly damped)
                   plane wave with the momentum -p. This statement is synonymous with
                                                        Entanglement                237

    the statement that a measurement of the momentum of the second par-
    ticle would give the result -p, as follows from the conservation law for
    linear momentum.2
   This idea of something measured in one place “influencing”
measurements far away challenged what Einstein thought of as
“local reality.” He famously called nonseparability “spukhafte Fern-
wirkungen” or “spooky action at a distance.”
  Einstein had objected to nonlocal phenomena as early as the
Solvay Conference of 1927, when he criticized the collapse of the
wave function as “instantaneous-action-at-a-distance.”
   Oddly, Einstein’s criticism resembles the criticisms by René
Descartes and others about Newton’s theory of gravitation. New-
ton’s opponents charged that his theory was “action at a distance”
and instantaneous. Einstein’s general relativity shows that gravity is
not instantaneous. It travels at the speed of light and is mediated by
a gravitational field that can be viewed mathematically as curvature
in space-time.
   But note that when a probability function collapses to unity in
one place and zero elsewhere, nothing physical is moving from one




                                                                                      Chapter 21
place to the other.
   In 1964, John Bell showed how the 1935 “thought experiments”
of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR) could be made into real
physical experiments. Bell put limits on the “hidden variables” that
might deny nonlocality and possibly restore a deterministic physics.
His test was in the form of what he called inequalities, the violation
of which would confirm standard quantum mechanics.
   Since Bell’s work, many other physicists have defined other “Bell
inequalities” and developed increasingly sophisticated experiments
to test them. Every test has confirmed standard quantum mechan-
ics.
   The first practical and workable experiments to test the EPR par-
adox had been suggested by David Bohm in 1952. Instead of only
linear momentum conservation, Bohm proposed using two elec-
trons that are prepared in an initial state of known total spin. If one
electron spin is 1/2 in the up direction and the other is spin down or
-1/2, the total spin is zero. The underlying physical law of impor-
   2     “The Problem of Measurement,” in Quantum Theory and Measurement, Wheeler
and Zurek, p,340
         238       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               tance is a second conservation law, in this case the conservation of
               angular momentum. If electron 1 is prepared with spin down and
               electron 2 with spin up, the total angular momentum is zero.




                  Figure 21-20. David Bohm changed EPR to measure electron spins.

                 Quantum theory says the two electrons are in a superposition of
               combined spin up ( + ) and spin down ( - ) states,
                 | ψ > = 1/√2) | + - > - 1/√2) | - + > (1)
                  The principles of quantum mechanics say that the prepared
               system is in a linear combination of these two states, and can pro-
Chapter 21




               vide only the probabilities of finding the entangled system in either
               the | + - > state or the | - + > state. Quantum mechanics does not
               describe the paths or the spins of the individual particles. Note that
               should measurements result in a | ++ > or | - - > state, that would
               violate the conservation of angular momentum.
                  EPR tests can be done more easily with polarized photons than
               with electrons, which require complex magnetic fields. The first of
               these was done in 1972 by Stuart Freedman and John Clauser
               at UC Berkeley. They used oppositely polarized photons (one with
               spin = +1, the other spin = -1) coming from a central source. Again,
               the total photon spin of zero is conserved. Their data, in agreement
               with quantum mechanics, violated Bell’s inequalities to high statisti-
               cal accuracy, thus providing strong evidence against local hidden-
               variable theories and confirming quantum mechanics.
                 For more on superposition of states and the physics of photons,
               see the Dirac 3-polarizers experiment in appendix B.
                 Clauser, Michael Horne, Abner Shimony, and Richard Holt
               (known collectively as CHSH) and later Alain Aspect did more
                                                       Entanglement        239

sophisticated tests. The outputs of the polarization analyzers were
fed to a coincidence detector that records the instantaneous mea-
surements, described as + -, - +, + +, and - - . The first two ( + - and
- + ) conserve the spin angular momentum and are the only types
ever observed in these nonlocality/entanglement tests.




   Figure 21-21. The CHSH teams looked for perfect synchronization.




                                                                             Chapter 21
   With the exception of some of Holt’s early results that were later
found to be erroneous, no evidence has so far been found of any fail-
ure of standard quantum mechanics. And as experimental accuracy
has improved by orders of magnitude, quantum physics has cor-
respondingly been confirmed to one part in 1016, and the speed of
any transfer of information between particles has a lower limit of
106 times the speed of light. There has been no evidence for local
“hidden variables.”
   Nicolas Gisin and his colleagues have extended the polarized
photon tests of EPR and the Bell inequalities to a separation of 18
kilometers near Geneva. They continue to find 100% correlation
and no evidence of the “hidden variables” sought after by Einstein
and David Bohm.
   Nevertheless, wishful-thinking experimenters continue to look
for possible “loopholes” in the experimental results, such as detec-
tor inefficiencies that might be hiding results favorable to Einstein’s
picture of “local reality.”
         240        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               The Importance of Conservation Laws in Entanglement
                  Conservation laws are the consequence of extremely deep prop-
               erties of nature that arise from simple considerations of symmetry.
               We regard these laws as “cosmological principles.” Physical laws
               do not depend on the absolute place and time of experiments, nor
               their particular direction in space. Conservation of linear momen-
               tum depends on the translation invariance of physical systems, con-
               servation of energy the independence of time, and conservation of
               angular momentum the invariance under rotations.
                  Recall that the EPR experiment starts with two electrons (or pho-
               tons) prepared in an entangled state that is a linear combination of
               pure two-particle states, each of which conserves the total angular
               momentum and, of course, conserves the linear momentum as in
               Einstein’s original EPR example. The initial information about the
               linear and angular momenta is established by the state preparation
               (a measurement).
                  Quantum mechanics describes the probability amplitude wave
               function ψ of the two-particle system as in a superposition of two-
Chapter 21




               particle states. It is not separable into a product of single-particle
               states, and there is no information about the identical indistinguish-
               able electrons traveling along distinguishable paths.
                 The probability amplitude wave function ψ travels from the
               source (at the speed of light or less). Let’s assume that at t1 observer
               A finds an electron (e1) with spin up.
                  After the “first” measurement, new information comes into exis-
               tence telling us that the wave function ψ has “collapsed” into the
               state | + - >. Just as in the two-slit experiment, probabilities have
               now become certainties. If the “first” measurement finds electron 1
               is spin up, so the entangled electron 2 must be found by observer B
               to be in a “second” measurement with spin down to conserve angu-
               lar momentum.
                  Notice that Einstein’s intuition is in part correct that the “second”
               result seems already “determined” or “fixed” before the second mea-
               surement. The result is determined by the law of conservation of
               momentum that the total the spin must remain zero.
                                                 Entanglement             241

    But the measurement by observer B was not pre-determined
before observer A’s measurement. It was simply determined by her
measurement. And conservation of linear momentum tells us that at
t1 the second electron is equidistant from the source in the opposite
direction.
   As with any wave-function collapse, the probability amplitude
information “travels” instantly.
   But unlike the single particle in the two-slit experiment, where
the collapse goes to a specific point in 3-dimensional configuration
space, the “collapse” here is a “projection” into one of the two pos-
sible 6-dimensional two-particle quantum states | + - > or | - + >.
  Just as the single particle in the two-slit experiment did not have
a position before the measurement, the two particles, which just
before the measurement did not have positions, instantly acquire
their positions in a space-like separation after the measurement.
   This makes “visualization” (Schrödinger’s Anschaulichkeit) more
difficult, but the parallel with the collapse in the two-slit case pro-
vides an intuitive insight of sorts.




                                                                            Chapter 21
   Schrödinger said that his “Wave Mechanics” provided more
“visualizability” than the “damned quantum jumps” of the Copen-
hagen school, as he called them. He was right.
   But we must focus on the probability amplitude wave function
of the prepared two-particle state, and not attempt to describe the
paths or locations of independent particles - which is only possi-
ble after some measurement has been made. We must also keep in
mind the conservation laws that Einstein used to describe nonlocal
behavior in the first place. Then we can see that the “mystery” of
nonlocality for two particles is primarily the same mystery as the
single-particle collapse of the wave function. But there is an extra
mystery, one we might call an “enigma,” of the nonseparability of
identical indistinguishable particles.
   In his 1935 paper (and his correspondence with Einstein),
Schrödinger described the two particles in EPR as “entangled” in
English, verschränkt in German, which means something like cross-
linked. It describes someone standing with arms crossed.
         242        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  In the time evolution of an entangled two-particle state according
               to the Schrödinger equation, we can visualize it (just as we visualize
               the single-particle wave function) as collapsing when a measure-
               ment is made. The discontinuous “jump” is also described as the
               “reduction of the wave packet.” This is apt in the two-particle case,
               where the superposition of | + - > and | - + > states is “projected” or
               “reduced to one of these states, say | - + >, and then further reduced
               to the product of two independent one-particle states, | - >| + >.
                 Measurement of a two-particle wave function simultaneously
               measures both particles, reducing them to separate one-particle
               wave functions, after which they are no longer entangled.
                 When entangled, the particles are nonseparable. Once measured,
               they are separate quantum systems with their own wave functions.
               They are no longer entangled.
                 In the two-particle case (instead of just one particle making an
               appearance), when either particle is measured we know instantly
               the now determinate properties of the other particle. They are the
               properties that satisfy the conservation laws, including its location
Chapter 21




               equidistant from, but on the opposite side of, the source, and the
               complementary spin.
                 In the one-particle case, it has no definite position before the
               experiment, then it appears somewhere. For two particles, neither
               one has a position, then both appear simultaneously (in an appro-
               priate frame of reference and with required opposite spins).3
               Can a Special Frame Resolve the EPR Paradox?
                  Almost every presentation of the EPR paradox begins with some-
               thing like “Alice observes one particle...” and concludes with the
               question “How does the second particle get the information needed
               so that Bob’s measurements correlate perfectly with Alice?”
                 There is a fundamental asymmetry in this framing of the EPR
               experiment. It is a surprise that Einstein, who was so good at seeing
               deep symmetries, did not consider how to remove the asymmetry.
                  3     For an animation of a two-particle measurement, see informationphilosopher.
               com/solutions/experiments/EPR/EPR-collapse.gif
                                                          Entanglement               243

   Consider this reframing: Alice’s measurement collapses the two-
particle wave function. The two indistinguishable particles simul-
taneously appear at locations in a space-like separation. The frame
of reference in which the source of the two entangled particles and
the two experimenters are at rest is a special frame in the following
sense.
  As Einstein knew very well, there are frames of reference moving
with respect to the laboratory frame of the two observers in which
the time order of the events can be reversed. In some moving frames
Alice measures first, but in others Bob measures first.
   If there is a special frame of reference (not a preferred frame in the
relativistic sense), surely it is the one in which the origin of the two
entangled particles is at rest. Assuming that Alice and Bob are also
at rest in this special frame and equidistant from the origin, we
arrive at the simple picture in which any measurement that causes
the two-particle wave function to collapse makes both particles
appear simultaneously at determinate places with fully correlated
properties (just those that are needed to conserve energy, momen-
tum, angular momentum, and spin).




                                                                                       Chapter 21


   Figure 21-22. In this special frame the source and measurements are at rest and
both measurements are made at exactly the same time.

   Clearly, the idea that different relativistic frames of reference
change the order of the measurements throws doubt on claims by
either observer to “measure first.”
   We can also ask what happens if Bob is not at the same distance
from the origin as Alice. This introduces a positional asymmetry.
But there is still no time asymmetry from the point of view of the
two-particle wave function collapse.
         244        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                  Figure 21-23. Here Alice measures long before Bob’s measurement.

                 When Alice detects a particle (with spin up), at that instant the
               other particle also becomes determinate (with spin down) at the
               same distance on the other side of the origin. It continues, in that
               determinate state, to Bob’s measuring apparatus.
                 Our idea of a special frame is not new.
                  Back in the 1960’s, C. W. Rietdijk and Hilary Putnam inde-
Chapter 21




               pendently, but mistakenly, argued that physical determinism could
               be proved true by considering the experiments and observers A and
               B in the diagram below to be moving at high speed with respect to
               one another. Roger Penrose developed a similar argument in his
               book The Emperor’s New Mind, called the “Andromeda Paradox.”




                 Figure 21-24. Physicists have known about our “special frame” for decades.
                                                        Entanglement             245

  Nicolas Gisin’s colleagues, Antoine Suarez and Valerio Sca-
rani, used this idea of hyperplanes of simultaneity to make what
they called “before-before” measurements.
  Suarez and Scarani used the fact that for some relative speeds
between the two observers A and B, observer A could “see” the mea-
surement of observer B to be in his future, and vice versa. Because
the two experiments have a “space-like” separation (neither is inside
the causal light cone of the other), each observer thinks he does his
own measurement before the other.
  Gisin tested the limits on this effect by moving mirrors in the
path to the birefringent crystals and showed that, like all other Bell
experiments, the “before-before” suggestion of Suarez and Scarani
did nothing to invalidate quantum mechanics.
   But these experiments were able to put a lower limit on the speed
with which the information about probabilities collapses, estimat-
ing it as at least thousands - perhaps millions - of times the speed
of light and showed empirically that probability collapses are essen-
tially instantaneous.




                                                                                   Chapter 21
   Despite all his experimental tests verifying quantum physics,
including the “reality” of nonlocality and entanglement, Nicolas
Gisin continues to explore the EPR paradox, considering the pos-
sibility that signals are coming to the entangled particles from “out-
side space-time.”
Do We Need Superdeterminism?
   During a mid-1980’s interview by BBC Radio 3 organized by P.
C. W. Davies and J. R. Brown, John Bell proposed the idea of a
“superdeterminism” that could explain the correlation of results in
entangled two-particle experiments without the need for faster-
than-light signaling. The two experiments need only have been pre-
determined by causes reaching both experiments from an earlier
time.
   Davies: I was going to ask whether it is still possible to maintain, in the
   light of experimental experience, the idea of a deterministic universe?
   Bell: You know, one of the ways of understanding this business is to say
   that the world is super-deterministic. That not only is inanimate nature
         246         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     deterministic, but we, the experimenters who imagine we can choose to
                     do one experiment rather than another, are also determined. If so, the
                     difficulty which this experimental result creates disappears.4
                  Bell’s superdeterminism would deny the important “free choice”
               of the experimenter (originally suggested by Bohr and Heisenberg)
               and later explored by John Conway and Simon Kochen. Conway
               and Kochen claim that the experimenters’ free choice requires that
               atoms must have free will, something they call their Free Will Theo-
               rem.
                  In his 1996 book, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point, Huw
               Price proposes an Archimedean point “outside space and time” as
               a solution to the problem of nonlocality in the Bell experiments in
               the form of an “advanced action.”
                  Rather than a “superdeterministic” common cause coming from
               “outside space and time” (as proposed by Bell, Gisin, Suarez, and
               others), Price argues that there might be a cause coming backwards
               in time from some interaction in the future. Penrose and Stuart
               Hameroff have also promoted this idea of “backward causation,”
               sending information backward in time in the Libet experiments and
Chapter 21




               in the EPR experiments.
               EPR “Loopholes” and Free Will
                  Investigators who try to recover the “elements of local reality”
               that Einstein wanted, and who hope to eliminate the irreducible
               randomness of quantum mechanics that follows from wave func-
               tions as probability amplitudes, often cite “loopholes” in EPR exper-
               iments. For example, the “detection loophole” claims that the effi-
               ciency of detectors is so low that they are missing many events that
               might prove Einstein was right.
                 Most all the loopholes have now been closed, but there is one
               loophole that can never be closed because of its metaphysical/philo-
               sophical nature. That is the “(pre-)determinism loophole.”
                 4       The Ghost in the Atom, P.C.W. Davies and J. Brown, ch.3, p.47
                                                 Entanglement             247

  If every event occurs for reasons that were established at the
beginning of the universe, then all the careful experimental results
are meaningless. Conway and Kochen have formalized this loop-
hole in what they call the Free Will Theorem.
  Although Conway and Kochen do not claim to have proven free
will in humans, they assert that should such a freedom exist, then
the same freedom must apply to the elementary particles.
   What Conway and Kochen are really describing is nothing more
than the indeterminism that quantum mechanics has introduced
into the world. Although indeterminism is a requirement for human
freedom, it is insufficient by itself to provide both “free” and “will”
as we saw in chapter 4.
   We also need the adequate or statistical determinism in the second
stage of “free will” to ensure that whatever our “free choice” may be,
it has been made consistent with our reasons for the choice.
   There are no such considerations of reasons, motives, feelings,
etc. going on at the quantum level for electrons. But Conway and
Kochen are right about the fundamental connection between quan-




                                                                            Chapter 21
tum indeterminism and free will.
         248   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                   re n ce
                            co h e
                     De
Chapter 22




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/problems/decoherence
                                                   Decoherence           249


Decoherence
   Decoherence is the study of interactions between a quantum
system (generally a very small number of microscopic particles
like electrons, photons, atoms, molecules, etc. - often just a single
particle) and the larger macroscopic environment, which is nor-
mally treated “classically,” that is, by ignoring quantum effects, but
which decoherence theorists study quantum mechanically. Deco-
herence theorists attribute the absence of macroscopic quantum
effects like interference (which is a coherent process) to interac-
tions between a quantum system and the larger macroscopic envi-
ronment.
  They maintain that no system can be completely isolated from
the environment. Decoherence, they say, accounts for the disap-
pearance of macroscopic quantum effects, and is experimentally
correlated with the loss of isolation.
   Niels Bohr maintained that a macroscopic apparatus used to
“measure” quantum systems must be treated classically. John von
Neumann, on the other hand, assumed that everything is made




                                                                           Chapter 22
of quantum particles, even the mind of the observer. This led him
and Werner Heisenberg to say that a “cut” must be located
somewhere between the quantum system and the mind, which
would operate in a sort of “psycho-physical parallelism.”1
   A main characteristic of quantum systems is the appearance of
wavelike interference effects. These only show up in large numbers
of repeated identical experiments that make measurements on
single particles at a time. Interference is never directly “observed”
in a single experiment. When interference is present in a system,
the system is called “coherent.” Decoherence then is the loss or
suppression of that interference.
   Interference experiments require that the system of interest
is extremely well isolated from the environment, except for the
“measurement apparatus.” This apparatus must be capable of
recording the information about what has been measured. It can
  1     Not to be confused with panpsychism.
         250     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               be a photographic plate or an electron counter, anything capable
               of registering a quantum level event, usually by releasing a cascade
               of metastable processes that amplify the quantum-level event to
               the macroscopic “classical” world, where an “observer” can see the
               result.
                 This does not mean that specific quantum level events are deter-
               mined by that observer (as noted by several of the great quantum
               physicists - Max Born, Pascual Jordan, Erwin Schrödinger,
               Paul Dirac, and textbook authors Landau and Lifshitz, Albert
               Messiah, and Kurt Gottfried, among others). Quantum pro-
               cesses are happening all the time. Most quantum events are never
               observed, let alone measured, though they can be inferred from
               macroscopic phenomenological observations.
                  To be sure, those quantum events that are “measured” in a phys-
               ics experiment which is set up to measure a certain quantity are
               dependent on the experimenter and the design of the experiment.
               To measure the electron spin in a Stern-Gerlach experiment, for
               example, the experimenter is “free to choose” to measure the
               z-component of the spin, rather than the x- or y-component. This
Chapter 22




               will influence quantum level events in the following ways:
                  The experimental outcome will produce a definite value for the
               z-component of the spin (either +1/2 or -1/2)
                  The x-component of the spin after the measurement will be in a
               linear combination/superposition of +1/2 or -1/2 states
                 | ψ > = (1/√2) | +1/2 > + (1/√2) | -1/2 >
                  It is in this sense that Bohr and Heisenberg described proper-
               ties of the quantum world as not existing until we make a mea-
               surement. We have a “free choice” which experiment we perform,
               what we measure. If we measure position for example, the precise
               position value did not exist immediately before the measurement.
                 On the other hand, we can not create the particular value for
               the position. This is a “random choice made by nature,” as Dirac
               put it.
                                                  Decoherence           251


The Decoherence Program
  The “decoherence program” of H. Dieter Zeh, Erich Joos,
Wojciech Zurek, John Wheeler, Max Tegmark, and others
has multiple aims -
  • to show how classical physics emerges from quantum physics.
They call this the “quantum to classical transition.”
  • to explain the failure to see any macroscopic superpositions of
quantum states (e.g., Schrödinger’s Cat as a superposition of live
and dead cats).
   • in particular, to identify the mechanism that suppresses
(“decoheres”) interference between states as something involving
the “environment” beyond the system and measuring apparatus.
  • to explain the appearance of particles following paths (they
actually say there are no “particles,” and maybe no paths).
  • to explain the appearance of discontinuous transitions between
quantum states (they say there are no “quantum jumps” either)
  • to champion an Everett-style “universal wave function” (as a
superposition of states) that evolves in a “unitary” fashion (i.e.,




                                                                          Chapter 22
deterministically) according to the Schrödinger equation.
  • to clarify and perhaps solve the measurement problem, which
they define as the lack of macroscopic superpositions.
  • to explain the “arrow of time.”
  • to revise the foundations of quantum mechanics by changing
some of its assumptions, notably challenging the “collapse” of the
wave function.
   Decoherence theorists say that they add no new elements to
quantum mechanics (such as “hidden variables”) but they do deny
one of the three basic assumptions - namely Dirac’s projection pos-
tulate. This is the method used to calculate the probabilities of
various outcomes, which probabilities are confirmed to several
significant figures by the statistics of large numbers of identically
prepared experiments.
         252       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Decoherence theorists accept (even overemphasize) Dirac’s
               principle of superposition. Some decoherence theorists also accept
               the axiom of measurement, although some of them question the link
               between eigenstates and eigenvalues.
                 The decoherence program hopes to offer insights into several
               other important phenomena:
                 • What Zurek calls the “einselection” (environment-induced
               superselection) of preferred states (the so-called “pointer states”) in
               a measurement apparatus.
                 • The role of the observer in quantum measurements.
                 • Nonlocality and quantum entanglement (which is used to
               “derive” decoherence).
                 • The origin of irreversibility (by “continuous monitoring”).
                 • The approach to thermal equilibrium.
                 The decoherence program finds unacceptable the following
               aspects of the standard quantum theory:
                 • Quantum “jumps” between energy eigenstates.
Chapter 22




                 • The “apparent” collapse of the wave function.
                  • In particular, explanation of the collapse as a “mere” increase of
               information.
                 • The “appearance” of “particles.”
                  • The “inconsistent” Copenhagen Interpretation - quantum
               “system,” classical “apparatus.”
                 • The “insufficient” Ehrenfest Theorems.
                 Decoherence theorists admit that some problems remain to
               be addressed, especially the “problem of outcomes.” Without the
               collapse postulate, it is not clear how definite outcomes are to be
               explained.
                 As Tegmark and Wheeler put it:
                  The main motivation for introducing the notion of wave-function col-
                  lapse had been to explain why experiments produced specific outcomes
                  and not strange superpositions of outcomes...it is embarrassing that
                                                           Decoherence            253

      nobody has provided a testable deterministic equation specifying pre-
      cisely when the mysterious collapse is supposed to occur.2
   Some of the controversial positions in decoherence theory,
including the denial of collapses and particles, come straight from
the work of Schrödinger, for example his 1952 essays “Are There
Quantum Jumps?” (Part I and Part II), where he denies the exis-
tence of “particles,” claiming that everything can be understood as
his waves alone.
  Other important sources for decoherence theorists include:
Hugh Everett III and his “relative state” or “many world” inter-
pretation of quantum mechanics; Eugene Wigner’s article on the
problem of measurement; and John Bell’s reprise of Schrödinger’s
arguments against quantum jumps.
   Decoherence advocates therefore look to other attempts to for-
mulate quantum mechanics. Also called “interpretations,” these are
more often reformulations, with different basic assumptions about
the foundations of quantum mechanics. Most assume the “univer-
sal” applicability of the unitary time evolution that results from the
Schrödinger wave equation. They include these formulations::
  •      DeBroglie-Bohm “pilot-wave” or “hidden variables”.




                                                                                    Chapter 22
  •      Everett-DeWitt “relative-state” or “many worlds”.
  •      Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber “spontaneous collapse”.
  Note that these “interpretations” are often in serious conflict
with one another. Where Schrödinger thinks that waves alone can
explain everything (there are no particles in his theory), David
Bohm thinks that particles not only exist but that every particle has
a definite position that is a “hidden parameter” of his theory. H.
Dieter Zeh, the founder of decoherence, sees
      one of two possibilities: a modification of the Schrödinger equation that
      explicitly describes a collapse (also called “spontaneous localization”)
      or an Everett type interpretation, in which all measurement outcomes
      are assumed to exist in one formal superposition, but to be perceived
      separately as a consequence of their dynamical autonomy resulting from
      decoherence. It was John Bell who called Everett’s many-worlds picture
      “extravagant,” While this latter suggestion has been called “extravagant”
  2       Scientific American, February 2001, p.75.
         254          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     (as it requires myriads of co-existing quasi-classical “worlds”), it is simi-
                     lar in principle to the conventional (though nontrivial) assumption,
                     made tacitly in all classical descriptions of observation, that conscious-
                     ness is localized in certain semi-stable and sufficiently complex subsys-
                     tems (such as human brains or parts thereof) of a much larger external
                     world. Occam’s razor, often applied to the “other worlds”, is a danger-
                     ous instrument: philosophers of the past used it to deny the existence
                     of the interior of stars or of the back side of the moon, for example. So
                     it appears worth mentioning at this point that environmental decoher-
                     ence, derived by tracing out unobserved variables from a universal wave
                     function, readily describes precisely the apparently observed “quantum
                     jumps” or “collapse events.”3
                  The information interpretation of quantum mechanics4 also has
               explanations for the measurement problem, the arrow of time,
               and the emergence of adequately, i.e., statistically determined clas-
               sical objects. However, I-Phi does it while accepting the standard
               assumptions of orthodox quantum physics.
                  We briefly review the standard theory of quantum mechanics and
               compare it to the “decoherence program,” with a focus on the details
               of the measurement process. We divide measurement into several
               distinct steps, in order to clarify the supposed “measurement prob-
               lem” (mostly the lack of macroscopic state superpositions) and per-
Chapter 22




               haps “solve” it.
                  The most famous example of probability-amplitude-wave inter-
               ference is the two-slit experiment. Interference is between the prob-
               ability amplitudes whose absolute value squared gives us the prob-
               ability of finding the particle at various locations behind the screen
               with the two slits in it.
                 Finding the particle at a specific location is said to be a
               “measurement.”5
                   In standard quantum theory, a measurement is made when the
               quantum system is “projected” or “collapsed” or “reduced” into a
               single one of the system’s allowed states. If the system was “pre-
               pared” in one of these “eigenstates,” then the measurement will find
               it in that state with probability one (that is, with certainty).
                 3       Decoherence and the Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory, p.22
                 4       See chapter 17.
                 5       See chapter 18.
                                                  Decoherence             255

  However, if the system is prepared in an arbitrary state ψa, it can
be represented as being in a linear combination of the system’s basic
energy states φn.
  ψa = Σ cn | n >.
  where
  cn = < ψa | φn >.
  It is said to be in “superposition” of those basic states. The prob-
ability Pn of its being found in state φn is
  Pn = < ψa | φn >2 = cn2 .
   Between measurements, the time evolution of a quantum system
in such a superposition of states is described by a unitary transfor-
mation U(t0,t1) that preserves the same superposition of states as
long as the system does not interact with another system, such as a
measuring apparatus. As long as the quantum system is completely
isolated from any external influences, it evolves continuously and
deterministically in an exactly predictable (causal) manner.
   Whenever the quantum system does interact however, with
another particle or an external field, its behavior ceases to be causal




                                                                            Chapter 22
and it evolves discontinuously and indeterministically. This acausal
behavior is uniquely quantum mechanical. Nothing like it is possi-
ble in classical mechanics. Most attempts to “reinterpret” or “refor-
mulate” quantum mechanics are attempts to eliminate this discon-
tinuous acausal behavior and replace it with a deterministic process.
   We must clarify what we mean by “the quantum system” and “it
evolves” in the previous two paragraphs. This brings us to the mys-
terious notion of “wave-particle duality.” In the wave picture, the
“quantum system” refers to the deterministic time evolution of the
complex probability amplitude or quantum state vector ψa, accord-
ing to the “equation of motion” for the probability amplitude wave
ψa, which is the Schrödinger equation,
  ih/2π δψa/δt = H ψa.
   The probability amplitude looks like a wave and the Schrödinger
equation is a wave equation. But the wave is an abstract quantity
whose absolute square is the probability of finding a quantum parti-
cle somewhere. It is distinctly not the particle, whose exact position
         256         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               is unknowable while the quantum system is evolving deterministi-
               cally. It is the probability amplitude wave that interferes with itself.
               Particles, as such, never interfere (although they may collide).
                  Note that we never “see” the superposition of particles in distinct
               states. There is no microscopic superposition in the sense of the
               macroscopic superposition of live and dead cats.6
                  When the particle interacts, with the measurement apparatus for
               example, we always find a whole particle. It suddenly appears. For
               example, an electron “jumps” from one orbit to another, absorbing
               or emitting a discrete amount of energy (a photon). When a photon
               or electron is fired at the two slits, its appearance at the photographic
               plate is sudden and discontinuous. The probability wave instanta-
               neously becomes concentrated at the location of the particle.
                  There is now unit probability (certainty) that the particle is
               located where we find it to be. This is described as the “collapse”
               of the wave function.7 Where the probability amplitude might have
               evolved under the unitary transformation of the Schrödinger equa-
               tion to have significant non-zero values in a very large volume of
               phase space, all that probability suddenly “collapses” (faster than the
Chapter 22




               speed of light, which deeply bothered Albert Einstein in 1905) to
               the location of the particle.
                  Einstein said that some mysterious “spooky action-at-a-distance”
               must act to prevent the appearance of a second particle at a dis-
               tant point where a finite probability of appearing had existed just an
               instant earlier.
                  Whereas the abstract probability amplitude moves continuously
               and deterministically throughout space, the concrete particle moves
               discontinuously and indeterministically to a particular point in
               space.
                  For this collapse to be a “measurement,” the new information
               about which location (or state) the system has collapsed into must
               be recorded somewhere in order for it to be “observable” by a sci-
               entist. But the vast majority of quantum events - e.g., particle colli-
               sions that change the particular states of quantum particles before
                 6     See chapter 23.
                 7     See chapter 20.
                                                             Decoherence             257

and after the collision - do not leave an indelible record of their new
states anywhere (except implicitly in the particles themselves).
   We can imagine that a quantum system initially in state ψa has
interacted with another system and as a result is in a new state φ,
without any macroscopic apparatus around to record this new state
for a “conscious observer.”
  H. D. Zeh describes how quantum systems may be “measured”
without the recording of information.
      It is therefore a plausible experimental result that the interference disap-
      pears also when the passage [of an electron through a slit] is “measured”
      without registration of a definite result. The latter may be assumed to
      have become a “classical fact” as soon as the measurement has irrevers-
      ibly “occurred”. A quantum phenomenon may thus “become a phenom-
      enon” without being observed. This is in contrast to Heisenberg’s remark
      about a trajectory coming into being by its observation, or a wave func-
      tion describing “human knowledge”. Bohr later spoke of objective irre-
      versible events occurring in the counter. However, what precisely is an
      irreversible quantum event? According to Bohr this event can not be
      dynamically analyzed.
      Analysis within the quantum mechanical formalism demonstrates
      nonetheless that the essential condition for this “decoherence” is that




                                                                                       Chapter 22
      complete information about the passage is carried away in some objec-
      tive physical form. This means that the state of the environment is now
      quantum correlated (entangled) with the relevant property of the system
      (such as a passage through a specific slit). This need not happen in a
      controllable way (as in a measurement): the “information” may as well
      form uncontrollable “noise”, or anything else that is part of reality. In
      contrast to statistical correlations, quantum correlations characterize
      real (though nonlocal) quantum states - not any lack of information. In
      particular, they may describe individual physical properties, such as the
      non-additive total angular momentum J2 of a composite system at any
      distance.8
The Measurement Process
  In order to clarify the measurement process, we separate it into
several distinct stages, as follows:
 A particle collides with another microscopic particle or with a
macroscopic object (which might be a measuring apparatus).
  8       Decoherence and the Appearance..., pp.13-14
         258       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 In this scattering problem, we ignore the internal details of the
               collision and say that the incoming initial state ψa has changed
               asymptotically (discontinuously, and randomly, viz., wave-function
               collapse) into the new outgoing final state φn.
                  Note that if we prepare a very large number of identical initial
               states ψa , the fraction of those ending up in the final state φn is just
               the probability
                 |< ψa | φn >|2.
                  The information that the system was in state ψa has been lost (its
               path information has been erased; it is now “noise,” as Zeh describes
               it). New information exists (implicitly in the particle, if not stored
               anywhere else) that the particle is in state φn.
                 If the collision is with a large enough (macroscopic) apparatus, it
               might be capable of recording the new system state information, by
               changing the quantum state of the apparatus into a “pointer state”
               correlated with the new system state.
                  “Pointers” could include the precipitated silver-bromide mole-
               cules of a photographic emulsion, the condensed vapor of a Wilson
               cloud chamber, or the cascaded discharge of a particle detector.
Chapter 22




                  But this new information will not be indelibly recorded unless the
               recording apparatus can transfer entropy away from the apparatus
               greater than the negative entropy equivalent of the new information
               (to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics). This is the second
               requirement in every two-step creation of new information in the
               universe.
                 The new information could be meaningful to an information
               processing agent who could not only observe it but understand it.
               Now neurons would fire in the mind of the conscious observer that
               von Neumann and Wigner thought was necessary for the measure-
               ment process to occur at all.
                  Von Neumann (perhaps influenced by the mystical thoughts
               of Niels Bohr about mind and body as examples of his
               “complementarity”) saw three levels in a measurement;
                                                       Decoherence           259

  • the system to be observed, including light up to the retina of the
observer.
  • the observer’s retina, nerve tracts, and brain
  • the observer’s abstract “ego.”
  John Bell asked tongue-in-cheek whether no wave function
could collapse until a scientist with a Ph.D. was there to observe it.
He drew a famous diagram of what he called von Neumann’s “shifty
split.”
  Bell shows that one could place the arbitrary “cut” (Heisenberg
                                  called it the “Schnitt”) at various
                                  levels without making any dif-
                                  ference.
                                           But an “objective” observer-
                                        independent         measurement
                                        ends when irreversible new
                                        information has been indelibly
                                        recorded (in the photographic
                                        plate of Bell’s drawing).




                                                                               Chapter 22
                                         Von Neumann’s physical and
                                      mental levels are perhaps better
                                      discussed as the mind-body
 Figure 22-25. Bell’s “shifty split.”
                                      problem.9 It is not really the
measurement problem in quantum physics.10
The Measurement Problem
  So what exactly is the “measurement problem?”
   For decoherence theorists, the unitary transformation of the
Schrödinger equation cannot alter a superposition of microscopic
states. Why then, when microscopic states are time evolved into
macroscopic ones, don’t macroscopic superpositions emerge?
According to H. D. Zeh:
   Because of the dynamical superposition principle, an initial superposi-
   tion Σ cn | n > does not lead to definite pointer positions (with their
   empirically observed frequencies). If decoherence is neglected, one

  9    See chapter 13.
  10   See chapter 18.
         260          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  obtains their entangled superposition Σ cn | n > | Φn >, that is, a state that
                  is different from all potential measurement outcomes.11
                 And according to Erich Joos, another founder of decoherence:
                  It remains unexplained why macro-objects come only in narrow wave
                  packets, even though the superposition principle allows far more “non-
                  classical” states (while micro-objects are usually found in energy eigen-
                  states). Measurement-like processes would necessarily produce nonclas-
                  sical macroscopic states as a consequence of the unitary Schrödinger
                  dynamics. An example is the infamous Schrödinger cat, steered into a
                  superposition of “alive” and “dead”.12
                  The fact that we don’t see superpositions of macroscopic objects
               is the “measurement problem,” according to Zeh and Joos.
                  An additional problem is that decoherence is a completely uni-
               tary process (Schrödinger dynamics) which implies time reversibil-
               ity. What then do decoherence theorists see as the origin of irrevers-
               ibility? Can we time reverse the decoherence process and see the
               quantum-to-classical transition reverse itself and recover the origi-
               nal coherent quantum world?
                  To “relocalize” the superposition of the original system, we need
               only have complete control over the environmental interaction. This
Chapter 22




               is of course not practical, just as Ludwig Boltzmann found in the
               case of Josef Loschmidt’s reversibility objection.13
                 Does irreversibility in decoherence have the same rationale -
               “not possible for all practical purposes” - as in classical statistical
               mechanics?
                  According to more conventional thinkers, the measurement
               problem is the failure of the standard quantum mechanical formal-
               ism (Schrödinger equation) to completely describe the nonunitary
               “collapse” process. Since the collapse is irreducibly indeterministic,
               the time of the collapse is completely unpredictable and unknow-
               able. Indeterministic quantum jumps are one of the defining char-
               acteristics of quantum mechanics, both the “old” quantum theory,
               where Bohr wanted radiation to be emitted and absorbed discon-
               tinuously when his atom jumped between stationary states, and the

                 11     Decoherence and the Appearance... p.20
                 12     Decoherence and the Appearance...p.2. And see chapter 23.
                 13     See chapter 25.
                                                           Decoherence             261

modern standard theory with the Born-Jordan-Heisenberg-Dirac
“projection postulate.”
   To add new terms to the Schrödinger equation in order to control
the time of collapse is to misunderstand the irreducible chance at the
heart of quantum mechanics, as first seen clearly, in 1917, by Albert
Einstein. When he derived his A and B coefficients for the emis-
sion and absorption of radiation, he found that an outgoing light
particle must impart momentum hν/c to the atom or molecule, but
the direction of the momentum can not be predicted! Neither can
the theory predict the time when the light quantum will be emitted.
   Such a random time was not unknown to physics. When Ernest
Rutherford derived the law for radioactive decay of unstable
atomic nuclei in 1900, he could only give the probability of decay
time. Einstein saw the connection with radiation emission:
    It speaks in favor of the theory that the statistical law assumed for [spon-
    taneous] emission is nothing but the Rutherford law of radioactive
    decay.14
   But the inability to predict both the time and direction of light par-
ticle emissions, said Einstein in 1917, is “a weakness in the theory...,
that it leaves time and direction of elementary processes to chance




                                                                                     Chapter 22
(Zufall, ibid.).” It is only a weakness for Einstein, of course, because
his God does not play dice. Decoherence theorists too appear to
have what William James called an “antipathy to chance.”
   We have several possible alternatives for eigenvalues. Measure-
ment simply makes one of these actual, and it does so, said Max
Born, in proportion to the absolute square of the probability ampli-
tude wave function ψn. In this way, ontological chance enters physics,
and it is partly this fact of quantum randomness that bothered Ein-
stein (whose relativity theories are deterministic) and Schrödinger
(whose equation of motion is deterministic).
What Decoherence Gets Right
  Allowing the environment to interact with a quantum system, for
example by the scattering of low-energy thermal photons or high-
energy cosmic rays, or by collisions with air molecules, surely will
suppress quantum interference in an otherwise isolated experiment.
  14    Abraham Pais,” “Subtle is the Lord...”, p.411
         262       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               But this is because large numbers of uncorrelated (incoherent)
               quantum events will “average out” and mask the quantum phenom-
               ena. It does not mean that wave functions are not collapsing. They
               are, at every particle interaction.
                  Decoherence advocates describe the environmental interaction
               as “monitoring” of the system by continuous “measurements.”
                 Decoherence theorists are correct that every collision between
               particles entangles their wave functions, at least for the short time
               before decoherence suppresses any coherent interference effects of
               that entanglement.
                 But in what sense is a collision a “measurement.” At best, it is a
               “pre-measurement.”
                  It changes the path information that was present in the wave
               functions before the collision. But the new information may not be
               have been recorded anywhere (other than being implicit in the new
               state of the system).
                  All interactions change the state of a system of interest, but not
               all leave the “pointer state” of some measuring apparatus with new
               information about the state of the system.
Chapter 22




                  So environmental monitoring, in the form of continuous colli-
               sions by other particles, is changing the specific information content
               of both the system, the environment, and a measuring apparatus (if
               there is one). But if there is no recording of new information (nega-
               tive entropy created locally), the system and the environment may
               be in thermodynamic equilibrium.
                 Equilibrium does not mean that decoherence monitoring of every
               particle is not continuing.
                  It is. There is no such thing as a “closed system.” Environmental
               interaction is always present.
                 If a gas of particles is not already in equilibrium, they may be
               approaching thermal equilibrium. This happens when any non-
               equilibrium initial conditions (Zeh calls these a “conspiracy”) are
               being “forgotten” by erasure of path information during collisions.
               Information about initial conditions is implicit in the paths of all the
               particles. This means that, in principle, the paths could be reversed
                                                 Decoherence             263

to return to the initial, lower entropy, conditions (the Loschmidt
paradox).15
   Erasure of path information could be caused by quantum parti-
cle-particle scattering (our standard view) or by decoherence “mon-
itoring.” How are these two related?
What Decoherence Gets Wrong
   Decoherence makes no testable predictions that differ from
standard quantum mechanics nor does it make calculations any
easier. In short, decoherence is just a way of talking about quantum
mechanics and especially the several interpretations that deny the
collapse of the wave function.16
Quantum Interactions Do Not Create Lasting Information
   The overwhelming number of collisions of microscopic parti-
cles like electrons, photons, atoms, molecules, etc, do not result in
observable information about the collisions. The lack of observa-
tions and observers does not mean that there have been no “col-
lapses” of wave functions. The idea that the time evolution of the
deterministic Schrödinger equation continues forever in a unitary




                                                                           Chapter 22
transformation that leaves the wave function of the whole universe
undecided and in principle reversible at any time, is an absurd and
unjustified extrapolation from the behavior of the ideal case of a
single perfectly isolated particle.
   The principle of microscopic reversibility applies only to such an
isolated particle, something unrealizable in nature, as the decoher-
ence advocates know with their addition of environmental “moni-
toring.” Experimental physicists can isolate systems from the envi-
ronment enough to “see” the quantum interference (but again, only
in the statistical results of large numbers of identical experiments).
The Transition from Quantum to Classical World
  In the standard quantum view, the emergence of macroscopic
objects with classical behavior arises statistically for two reasons
involving large numbers:
  15   See chapter 25.
  16   See chapter 20.
         264          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 The law of large numbers (from probability and statistics)
                  When a large number of material particles is aggregated, proper-
               ties emerge that are not seen in individual microscopic particles.
               These properties include, solidity, classical laws of motion, gravita-
               tional orbits, etc.
                  When a large number of quanta of energy (photons) are aggre-
               gated, properties emerge that are not seen in individual light quanta.
               These properties include continuous radiation fields with wavelike
               interference.
                  The law of large quantum numbers. This is Bohr’s Correspondence
               Principle, which he used to show quantum mechanics approaches
               classical mechanics in the limit of large quantum numbers.
               Decoherence and Standard Quantum Mechanics
                Can we explain the following in terms of standard quantum
               mechanics?
                • the decoherence of quantum interference effects by the environ-
               ment
                 • their measurement problem, viz., the absence of macroscopic
Chapter 22




               superpositions of states
                 • the emergence of “classical” adequately determined macro-
               scopic objects
                  • the logical compatibility and consistency of two dynamical laws
               - the unitary transformation and the discontinuous “collapse” of the
               wave function
                 • the entanglement of “distant” particles and the appearance of
               “nonlocal” effects such as those in the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
               experiment
                 Let’s consider these point by point.
                  The standard explanation for the decoherence of quantum inter-
               ference effects by the environment is that when a quantum system
               interacts with the very large number of quantum systems in a mac-
               roscopic object, the averaging over independent phases cancels out
               (decoheres) coherent interference effects.17
                 17     Quantum Mechanics, Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz, p.2
                                                   Decoherence              265

   In order to study interference effects, a quantum system is iso-
lated from the environment as much as possible. Even then, note
that microscopic interference is never “seen” directly by an observer.
It is inferred from probabilistic theories that explain the statistical
results of many identical experiments. Individual particles are never
“seen” as superpositions of particles in different states. When a par-
ticle is seen, it is always the whole particle and nothing but the parti-
cle. The absence of macroscopic superpositions of states, such as the
infamous linear superposition of live and dead Schrödinger Cats, is
therefore no surprise.18
  The standard quantum-mechanical explanation for the emer-
gence of “classical” adequately determined macroscopic objects is
that they result from a combination of a) Bohr’s correspondence
principle in the case of large quantum numbers. together with b)
the familiar law of large numbers in probability theory, and c) the
averaging over the phases. Heisenberg indeterminacy relations still
apply, but the individual particles’ indeterminacies average out, and
the remaining macroscopic indeterminacy is practically unmeasur-
able.




                                                                              Chapter 22
   Perhaps the two dynamical laws would be inconsistent if applied
to the same thing at exactly the same time. But the “collapse” of
the wave function (von Neumann’s Process 1, Pauli’s measurement
of the first kind) and the unitary transformation that describes the
deterministic evolution of the probability amplitude wave function
(von Neumann’s Process 2) are used in a temporal sequence.
   When you hear or read that electrons are both waves and par-
ticles, think “either-or” - first a wave of possibilities, then an actual
particle. One process describes their continuous deterministic evo-
lution (while isolated) along their mean free paths to the next col-
lision or interaction. The other then describes what happens when
quantum systems interact, in a collision or a measurement, when
they make a discontinuous jump into a new state. One dynamical
law applies to the wave picture, the other to the particle picture.
    The paradoxical appearance of nonlocal “influences” of one par-
ticle on an entangled distant particle, at velocities greater than light
  18    See chapter 23.
         266        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               speed, are a consequence of a poor understanding of both the wave
               and particle aspects of quantum systems. The confusion usually
               begins with a statement such as “consider a particle A here and a
               distant particle B there.”19 When entangled in a two-particle prob-
               ability amplitude wave function, the two identical particles are “nei-
               ther here nor there,” just as the single particle in a two-slit experi-
               ment does not “go through” one of the slits.
                  It is the single-particle probability amplitude wave that must “go
               through” both slits if it is to interfere. For a two-particle probabil-
               ity amplitude wave that starts its deterministic time evolution when
               the two identical particles are produced, it is only the probability
               of finding the particles that evolves according to the unitary trans-
               formation of the Schrödinger wave equation. It says nothing about
               where the particles “are.”
                  Now if and when a particle is measured somewhere, we can then
               label it particle A. Conservation of energy and momentum tell us
               immediately that the other identical particle is now symmetrically
               located on the other side of the central source of particles. If the
               particles are electrons (as in David Bohm’s version of EPR), con-
Chapter 22




               servation of spin tells us that the now distant particle B must have
               its spin opposite to that of particle A, since they were produced with
               a total spin of zero.
                  Nothing is sent from particle A to B. The deduced properties are
               the consequence of conservation laws that are true for much deeper
               reasons than the puzzles of nonlocal entanglement. The mysterious
               instantaneous values for their properties is exactly the same mystery
               that bothered Einstein in 1905 about a single-particle wave function
               having values all over a photographic screen at one instant, then
               having values only at the position of the located particle in the next
               instant, apparently violating his then very new theory of special
               relativity.
                  To summarize: Decoherence by interactions with environment
               can be explained perfectly by multiple “collapses” of the probabil-
               ity amplitude wave function during interactions with environment
               particles. Microscopic interference is never “seen” directly by an
               19     See chapter 21 for details.
                                                  Decoherence             267

observer. Interference is deduced from the statistical results of large
numbers of experiments, each one of which has no superpositions.
   We therefore never “see” macroscopic superpositions of live and
dead cats. The “transition from quantum to classical” systems is the
consequence of laws of large numbers. But there is only one world,
the quantum world. The “classical world” is how the quantum world
looks when there are a large number of particles, or even a single
atomic system when it is in a state with large quantum numbers,
according to Bohr’s correspondence principle.
  The quantum dynamical laws necessarily include two phases or
processes, as John von Neumann showed, one needed to describe
the continuous deterministic motions of probability amplitude
waves and the other the discontinuous indeterministic motions of
physical particles.
  The attempt by decoherence theorists to ignore the discontinuous
collapse of the wave function in a measurement is a failure, like all
other attempts since Hugh Everett, though it is a very popular one.




                                                                            Chapter 22
         268   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                              n g e r ’s
                       rö d i
                    Sch Cat
Chapter 23




                                                                    This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/problems/schrodingerscat
                                            Schrödinger’s Cat           269


Schrödinger’s Cat
   Erwin Schrödinger’s goal for his infamous cat-killing box
was to discredit certain non-intuitive implications of quantum
mechanics, of which his wave mechanics was the second formula-
tion. Schrödinger’s wave mechanics is continuous mathematically,
and deterministic. Werner Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics is
discontinuous and indeterministic.
   Schrödinger did not like Niels Bohr’s idea of “quantum jumps”
between Bohr’s “stationary states” - the different “energy levels” in
an atom. Bohr’s “quantum postulate” said that the jumps between
discrete states emitted (or absorbed) energy in the amount
hν = E2 - E1.
   Bohr himself did not accept Albert Einstein’s 1905 hypoth-
esis that the emitted radiation is a discrete quantum of energy
hν, later known as a photon. Until well into the 1920’s, Bohr and
Max Planck, the original inventor of the quantum hypothesis
believed radiation was a continuous wave of the kind defended
by Schrödinger. This raised the question of wave-particle duality,
which Einstein saw as early as 1909.




                                                                          Chapter 23
   It was Einstein who originated the suggestion that the superpo-
sition of Schrödinger’s wave functions implied that two different
physical states could exist at the same time. This was a serious
interpretational error that plagues the foundation of quantum
physics to this day.
  This error is found frequently in discussions of so-called
“entangled” states (see chapter 20).
   Entanglement occurs only for atomic level phenomena and
over limited distances that preserve the coherence of two-particle
wave functions by isolating the systems (and their eigenfunctions)
from interactions with the environment.
  We never actually “see” or measure any system (whether a
microscopic electron or a macroscopic cat) in two distinct states.
Quantum mechanics simply predicts a significant probability of
the system being found in these different states. And these prob-
         270     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               ability predictions are borne out by the statistics of large numbers
               of identical experiments.
                  The Pauli Exclusion Principle says (correctly) that two identical
               indistinguishable (fermion) particles cannot be in the same place
               at the same time. Entanglement is often interpreted (incorrectly)
               as saying that a single particle can be in two places at the same
               time. Dirac’s principle of superposition does not say that a particle
               is in two states at the same time, only that there is a non-zero
               probability of finding it in either state should it be measured.
                  Einstein wrote to Schrödinger with the idea that the random
               decay of a radioactive nucleus could be arranged to set off a large
               explosion. Since the moment of decay is unknown, Einstein
               argued that the superposition of decayed and undecayed nuclear
               states implies the superposition of an explosion and no explosion.
               It does not. In both the microscopic and macroscopic cases, quan-
               tum mechanics simply estimates the probability amplitudes for
               the two cases.
                  Many years later, Richard Feynman made Einstein’s sugges-
               tion into a nuclear explosion! (What is it about some scientists?)
                  Einstein and Schrödinger did not like the fundamental ran-
Chapter 23




               domness implied by quantum mechanics. They wanted to restore
               determinism to physics. Indeed Schrödinger’s wave equation pre-
               dicts a perfectly deterministic time evolution of the wave function.
               But what is evolving deterministically is only abstract probabilities
               - pure information. And these probabilities are confirmed only in
               the statistics of large numbers of identically prepared experiments.
               Randomness enters only when a measurement is made and the
               wave function “collapses” into one of the possible states of the sys-
               tem.1
                 Schrödinger devised a variation on Einstein’s idea in which the
               random radioactive decay would kill a cat. Observers could not
               know what happened until the box is opened.
                 1    See chapter 20.
                                                        Schrödinger’s Cat               271

  The details of the tasteless experiment include:
   • a Geiger counter which produces a macroscopic avalanche of
electrons when an alpha particle passes through it,
   • a bit of radioactive material with a decay half-life likely to emit
an alpha particle in the direction of the Geiger counter during a
time T,
   • an electrical circuit, energized by the Geiger counter elec-
trons, which drops a hammer,
  • a flask of a deadly hydrocyanic acid gas, smashed open by the
hammer.
  The gas will kill the cat, but the exact time of death is unpredict-
able and random because of the irreducible quantum indetermi-
nacy in the time of decay (and the direction of the decay particle,
which might miss the Geiger counter!).
   This thought experiment is widely misunderstood. It was meant
(by both Einstein and Schrödinger) to suggest that quantum
mechanics describes the simultaneous (and obviously contradic-
tory) existence of a live and dead cat.
  Here is the famous paradox with a cat both dead and alive.




                                                                                          Chapter 23




    Figure 23-26. What the statistics from multiple experiments give us is the
 probability of finding a live or dead cat, in this case half the cats are found dead
 and half alive, but we never see a macroscopic superposition of both.
         272       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  But quantum mechanics claims only that the time evolution of
               the Schrödinger wave functions will accurately predict the propor-
               tion of nuclear decays that will occur in a given time interval.
                  Quantum “probability amplitudes” do allow interference between
               the possible states of a quantum object, but not between macroscopic
               objects like live and dead cats More specifically, quantum mechan-
               ics provides us with the accurate prediction that if this experiment
               is repeated many times, half of the experiments will result in dead
               cats.
                 Note that this is a problem in epistemology. What knowledge is it
               that quantum physics provides?
                  If we open the box at the time T when there is a 50% probability
               of an alpha particle emission. The most a physicist can know is that
               there is a 50% chance that the radioactive decay will have occurred
               and the cat will be observed as dead or dying. Here is the famous
               diagram with a cat both dead and alive.
                 If the box were opened earlier, say at T/2, there is only a 25%
               chance that the cat has died. Schrödinger’s superposition of live and
               dead cats would look like this.
Chapter 23




                    Figure 23-27. Here is the imaginary superposition of a mostly living cat
                 and the pale shadow of a dead one.
                                                     Schrödinger’s Cat                 273

   If the box were opened later, say at 2T, there is only a 25% chance
that the cat is still alive. Quantum mechanics is giving us only statis-
tical information - knowledge about probabilities.




   Figure 23-28. And here a mostlly dead cat, a vision of something that simply does
not occur in macroscopic nature.


  Schrödinger is simply wrong that the mixture of nuclear wave
functions in the quantum world that accurately describes decay can
be magnified to the macroscopic world to describe a similar mix-




                                                                                         Chapter 23
ture of live cat and dead cat wave functions and the simultaneous
existence of live and dead cats.
   The kind of coherent superposition of states needed to describe an
atomic system as in a linear combination of states does not describe
macroscopic systems (see Paul Dirac’s explanation of the superposi-
tion of states using three polarizers in appendix C).
  Instead of a linear combination of macroscopic quantum states,
with quantum interference between the states, i.e.,
   | Cat > = ( 1/√2) | Live > + ( 1/√2) | Dead >,
  quantum mechanics tells us only that there is 50% chance of find-
ing the cat in either the live or dead state, i.e.,
   Cats = (1/2) Live + (1/2) Dead.
         274       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Just as in the quantum case, this probability prediction is con-
               firmed by the statistics of repeated identical experiments, but no
               interference between these macroscopic states is ever seen.
                  What do exist simultaneously in the macroscopic world are genu-
               ine alternative possibilities for future events. There is the real possi-
               bility of a live or dead cat in any particular experiment. Which one
               is found is irreducibly random, unpredictable, and a matter of pure
               chance.
                  Genuine alternative possibilities is what bothered physicists like
               Einstein, Schrödinger, and Max Planck who wanted a return to
               deterministic physics. It also bothers determinist and compatibilist
               philosophers who have what William James calls an “antipathy to
               chance.” Ironically, it was Einstein himself, in 1916, who discovered
               the existence of irreducible chance, in the elementary interactions
               of matter and radiation.
                 Until the information comes into existence, the future is indeter-
               ministic. Once information is macroscopically encoded, the past is
               determined.
                 How Information Physics Resolves the Cat Paradox?
Chapter 23




                 As soon as the alpha particle sets off the avalanche of electrons in
               the Geiger counter (an irreversible event with an entropy increase),
               new information is created in the world.
                  For example, a simple pen-chart recorder attached to the Geiger
               counter could record the time of decay, which a human observer
               could read at any later time. Notice that, as usual in information
               creation, energy expended by a recorder increases the entropy more
               than the increased information decreases it, thus satisfying the
               second law of thermodynamics.
                  Even without a mechanical recorder, the cat’s death sets in motion
               biological processes that constitute an equivalent, if gruesome,
               recording. When a dead cat is the result, a sophisticated autopsy
               can provide an approximate time of death, because the cat’s body is
               acting as an event recorder. There never is a superposition (in the
               sense of the simultaneous existence) of live and dead cats.
                                             Schrödinger’s Cat             275

   The cat paradox points clearly to the information physics solution
to the problem of measurement. Human observers are not required
to make measurements. In this case, information is in the cat’s body.
  The cat is the observer.
  In most physics measurements, any new information is captured
by an apparatus well before any physicist has a chance to read any
dials or pointers that indicate what happened. Indeed, in today’s
high-energy particle interaction experiments, the data may be cap-
tured but not fully analyzed until many days or even months of
computer processing establishes what was observed. In this case, the
experimental apparatus is the observer.
  And, in general, the universe is its own observer, able to record
(and sometimes preserve) the information created.
   The basic assumption made in Schrödinger’s cat thought experi-
ments is that the deterministic Schrödinger equation describing a
microscopic superposition of decayed and non-decayed radioactive
nuclei evolves deterministically into a macroscopic superposition of
live and dead cats.
  But since the essence of a “measurement” is an interaction with




                                                                             Chapter 23
another system (quantum or classical) that creates information to
be seen (later) by an observer, the interaction between the nucleus
and the cat is more than enough to collapse the wave function. Cal-
culating the probabilities for that collapse allows us to estimate the
probabilities of live and dead cats. These are probabilities, not prob-
ability amplitudes. They do not interfere with one another.
   After the interaction, they are not in a superposition of states. We
always have either a live cat or a dead cat, just as we always observe a
complete photon after a polarization measurement and not a super-
position of photon states, as P.A.M. Dirac explains so simply and
clearly2 .
  2     see appendix C
                276   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                     f Ti m e
                                 w o
                             Arro
Chapter
   Chapter
        22 24




                                                                         This chapter on the web
                                             informationphilosopher.com/problems/arrow_of_time
                                                      Arrow of Time       277


The Arrow of Time
   The laws of nature, except the second law of thermodynamics,
are symmetric in time. Reversing the time in the dynamical equa-
tions of motion simply describes everything going backwards.
The second law is different. Entropy must never decrease in time,
except statistically and briefly, as Ludwig Boltzmann showed.
   Many natural processes are apparently irreversible. Irreversibility
is intimately connected to the direction of time. Identifying the
physical reasons for the observed irreversibility, the origin of
irreversibility, would contribute greatly to understanding the
apparent asymmetry of nature in time, despite nature's apparently
perfect symmetry in space.1
The Thermodynamic Arrow
   In 1927, Arthur Stanley Eddington coined the term "Arrow
of Time" in his book The Nature of the Physical World. He con-
nected "Time's Arrow" to the one-way direction of increasing
entropy required by the second law of thermodynamics.2 This is
now known as the "thermodynamic arrow."
  In his later work, Eddington identified a "cosmological arrow,"



                                                                            Chapter 24
the direction in which the universe is expanding,3 which was dis-
covered by Edwin Hubble about the time Eddington first defined
the thermodynamic arrow.
   There are now a few other proposed arrows of time, includ-
ing a psychological arrow (our perception of time), a causal arrow
(causes precede effects), and a quantum mechanical arrow (elec-
troweak decay asymmetries). We can ask whether one arrow is a
"master arrow" that all the others are following, or perhaps time
itself is just a given property of nature that is otherwise irreducible
to something more basic, as is space.
   Given the four-dimensional space-time picture of special rela-
tivity, and given that the laws of nature are symmetric in space, we
may expect the laws to be invariant under a change in time direc-
tion. The laws do not depend on position in space or direction,

  1     See chapter 25.
  2     Nature of the Physical World, 1927, p.328-9
  3     New Pathways in Science, 1937, p.328-9
                278     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                      they are invariant under translations and rotations, since space
                      is seen to be uniform and isotropic. But time is not just another
                      spatial dimension. It enters into calculations of event separations
                      as an imaginary term (multiplied by the square root of minus 1).
                      Nevertheless, all the classical dynamical laws of motion are sym-
                      metric under time reversal.
                         So the basic problem is - how can macroscopic irreversibil-
                      ity result from microscopic processes that are fundamentally
                      reversible?
                        Long before Eddington, scientists asked deep questions about
                      the direction of time. Perhaps the first to explore the connection
                      with physics was Boltzmann, who with James Clerk Maxwell
                      investigated the statistical motions of the atoms and molecules of
                      gases.
                         If the laws of nature are time symmetric, perhaps the "arrow of
                      time" is to be found in the "initial" conditions, although this may
                      be a circular concept, since "initial,"current," and "final" states are
                      all defined with respect to time. Since the dynamical laws are time
                      reversible, scientists as early as Isaac Newton understood that
Chapter




                      one could calculate all the motions of a system by assuming "final
                      conditions" and working backwards in time.
   Chapter




                        Nevertheless, many if not most physicists have assumed the
        22 24




                      universe must have begun in a highly ordered (low entropy) state
                      and it has been "running down" (entropy or disorder increasing)
                      ever since. In the nineteenth century, this was called the "heat
                      death" of the universe. This view has the unfortunate implication
                      that all the information in the current universe was present at the
                      beginning, which is friendly to some theological ideas like pre-
                      destination, but distinctly unfriendly to ideas of human free will.
                         Boltzmann assumed that the universe was infinitely old and
                      that our current state is the consequence of a massive statistical
                      fluctuation away from equilibrium and maximum entropy, a con-
                      dition to which we must ultimately return.
                         Would time itself be reversed if we could make the entropy
                      decrease? That is unlikely, since entropy decrease anywhere (cre-
                      ating negative entropy or negentropy, a term coined by Leon
                                                            Arrow of Time              279

Brillouin) must be accompanied by an increase elsewhere, to
satisfy the second law. Otherwise we could use the local reduction
in the entropy to build a perpetual motion machine.
   Put another way, if we could reverse the time, would entropy
decrease? What can time reversal really mean? A thought experi-
ment suggests not. Consider a closed perfume bottle inside a large
empty container. Remove the bottle top and what would happen
assuming that time is flowing backwards? It seems likely that the
perfume molecules would leave the bottle whatever time is doing.




    Figure 24-29. Information physics has shown that at each collision of a gas par-
ticle with another particle, the path information of where that particle has been is
erased, so that time reversal would not return all the perfume to the bottle. .

   For Aristotle, time was a measure of motion and change and



                                                                                         Chapter 24
for practical purposes, many scientists have thought that time
reversal can be approximated by the reversal of all the velocities
or momenta of material particles at an instant, starting from their
current positions.
   If we could perfectly reverse the motions of every material body
(a practical impossibility, and perhaps a violation of Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle), would that make the entropy decrease?
Boltzmann agreed that it might, but only for a while. His intuition
was that a system could not return to a highly ordered original
state, such as every molecule getting back in the perfume bottle.
   J. Willard Gibbs thought otherwise, if the detailed path
information in all the macroscopic motions is still available as
microscopic information (if information is a conserved quantity),
then reversal of all the motions should be exactly like a movie
played backwards.
                280         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                         The fundamental question of information philosophy is cosmo-
                      logical and ultimately metaphysical. What is the process that creates
                      information structures in the universe?
                         Given the second law of thermodynamics, which says that any
                      system will over time approach a thermodynamic equilibrium of
                      maximum disorder or entropy, in which all information is lost, and
                      given the best current model for the origin of the universe, which
                      says everything began in a state of equilibrium some 13.75 billion
                      years ago, how can it be that living beings are creating and com-
                      municating new information every day? Why are we not still in that
                      state of thermal equilibrium?
                         It is perhaps easier for us to see the increasing complexity and
                      order of information structures on the earth than it is to notice
                      the increase in chaos that comes with increasing entropy, since the
                      entropy is radiated away from the earth into the night sky, then away
                      to the cosmic microwave background sink of deep space.
                         David Layzer is a Harvard cosmologist who in the early 1970's
                      made it clear that in an expanding universe the entropy would
                      increase, as required by the second law of thermodynamics, but
Chapter




                      that the maximum possible entropy of the universe might increase
                      faster than the actual entropy increase. This would leave room for
   Chapter




                      an increase of order or information at the same time the entropy is
        22 24




                      increasing!4
                         Layzer pointed out that if the equilibration rate of the matter
                      (the speed with which matter redistributes itself randomly among
                      all the possible states) was slower than the rate of expansion, then
                      the "negative entropy" or "order" (defined as the difference between
                      the maximum possible entropy and the actual entropy) would also
                      increase. Claude Shannon identified this negative entropy with
                      information, though visible structural information in the universe
                      may be much less than this "potential" information.
                        4     See appendix B for more on Layzer’s work.
                                                            Arrow of Time            281


The Historical Arrow
   Layzer called the direction of information increase the "historical
arrow." In a 1975 article for Scientific American called “The Arrow
of Time,” he wrote:
      the complexity of the astronomical universe seems puzzling. Isolated
      systems inevitably evolve toward the featureless state of thermodynamic
      equilibrium. Since the universe is in some sense an isolated system, why
      has it not settled into equilibrium? One answer, favored by many cos-
      mologists, is that the cosmological trend is in fact toward equilibrium
      but that too little time has elapsed for the process to have reached com-
      pletion... I shall argue that this view is fundamentally incorrect. The uni-
      verse is not running down, and it need not have started with a marked
      degree of disequilibrium; the initial state may indeed have been wholly
      lacking in macroscopic as well as microscopic information.
      Suppose that at some early moment local thermodynamic equilibrium
      prevailed in the universe. The entropy of any region would then be as
      large as possible for the prevailing values of the mean temperature and
      density. As the universe expanded from that hypothetical state the local
      values of the mean density and temperature would change, and so would
      the entropy of the region. For the entropy to remain at its maximum
      value (and thus for equilibrium to be maintained) the distribution of
      energies allotted to matter and to radiation must change, and so must
      the concentrations of the various kinds of particles. The physical pro-
      cesses that mediate these changes proceed at finite rates; if these "equili-




                                                                                       Chapter 24
      bration" rates are all much greater than the rate of cosmic expansion,
      approximate local thermodynamic equilibrium will be maintained; if
      they are not, the expansion will give rise to significant local departures
      from equilibrium.5
   This is Layzer's seminal theory of the growth of order in the
universe These departures represent macroscopic information; the
quantity of macroscopic information generated by the expansion is
the difference between the actual value of the entropy and the theo-
retical maximum entropy at the mean temperature and density.
  5       Scientific American, December, 1975, p.68
                282         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                        In his 1989 book The Emperor's New Mind, Roger Penrose
                      speculated on the connection between information, entropy, and
                      the arrow of time.
                            Recall that the primordial fireball was a thermal state — a hot gas in
                            expanding thermal equilibrium. Recall, also, that the term 'thermal
                            equilibrium' refers to a state of maximum entropy. (This was how we
                            referred to the maximum entropy state of a gas in a box.) However, the
                            second law demands that in its initial state, the entropy of our universe
                            was at some sort of minimum, not a maximum!
                            What has gone wrong? One 'standard' answer would run roughly as
                            follows:
                            True, the fireball was effectively in thermal equilibrium at the begin-
                            ning, but the universe at that time was very tiny. The fireball repre-
                            sented the state of maximum entropy that could be permitted for a uni-
                            verse of that tiny size, but the entropy so permitted would have been
                            minute by comparison with that which is allowed for a universe of the
                            size that we find it to be today. As the universe expanded, the permit-
                            ted maximum entropy increased with the universe's size, but the actual
                            entropy in the universe lagged well behind this permitted maximum.
                            The second law arises because the actual entropy is always striving to
                            catch up with this permitted maximum.6
                        Penrose's "standard" answer is a clear reference to the pioneer-
Chapter




                      ing work of David Layzer.
   Chapter




                      The Radiation Arrow
                        Whether they be electromagnetic waves or waves in water, we
        22 24




                      only observe wavelike disturbances that propagate outwards in
                      space away from the disturbance. These waves are described by
                      what is called the retarded potential. In his 1909 discussion of
                      waves and particles, Albert Einstein described the very remote
                      possibility of incoming spherical waves:
                            According to our prevailing theory, an oscillating electron generates a
                            spherical wave that propagates outwards. The inverse process does not
                            exist as an elementary process. A converging spherical wave is math-
                            ematically possible, to be sure; but to approach its realization requires

                        6       The Emperor’s New Mind, p.328-9
                                                            Arrow of Time              283

    a vast number of emitting entities. The elementary process of emission
    is not invertible. In this, I believe, our oscillation theory does not hit the
    mark. Newton's emission theory of light seems to contain more truth
    with respect to this point than the oscillation theory since, first of all, the
    energy given to a light particle is not scattered over infinite space, but
    remains available for an elementary process of absorption.7
   In 1945, John Wheeler and his student Richard Feynman
attempted to symmetrize Maxwell's equations for electromagnetic
fields with an "Absorber Theory of Radiation," that combined
retarded potentials (outgoing spherical waves) and advanced poten-
tials (incoming spherical waves) for radiation. They later described
the theory as a mistake. There are no incoming spherical waves.
The Cosmological Arrow
   We can define a cosmological direction of time as the direction
in which the universe is expanding. There are excellent reasons for
seeing this as the most fundamental of all arrows, even the one driv-
ing some of the others. Without expansion, a static universe would
settle into thermal equilibrium and there would be no changes.
There would be no entropy increase to show Eddington's thermo-
dynamic arrow. There would be no information increase, as seen in
Layzer's historical arrow.




                                                                                         Chapter 24
  Without the cosmological arrow, the thermodynamic, radiation,
and historical arrows could not have been realized.
  7       “On the Development of Our Views Concerning the Nature and Constitution of
Radiation,” Einstein Collected Papers, vol.6, p.213
         284   Great Problems in Philosophy Physics - Solved?




                                    b i l i t y
                      Irre    versi
Chapter 25




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                        informationphilosopher.com/problems/reversibility
                                                  Irreversibility       285


Microscopic Irreversibility
  In 1876, Josef Loschmidt criticized his younger colleague
Ludwig Boltzmann's 1866 attempt to derive from classical
dynamics the increasing entropy required by the second law of
thermodynamics. Loschmidt's criticism was based on the simple
idea that the laws of classical dynamics are time reversible. Con-
sequently, if we just turned the time around, the time evolution of
the system should lead to decreasing entropy.
   This is the intimate connection between time and the second
law of thermodynamics that Arthur Stanley Eddington later
called the Arrow of Time.1
   Microscopic time reversibility is one of the foundational
assumptions of both classical mechanics and quantum mechanics.
But a careful quantum analysis shows that reversibility fails even
in the most ideal conditions - the case of two particles in collision
- provided the quantum mechanical interaction with radiation is
taken into account.
   Our proof of microscopic irreversibility provides a new justi-
fication for Boltzmann's assumption of "molecular disorder" and
strengthens his proof of H-Theorem.



                                                                          Chapter 25
   In quantum mechanics, microscopic time reversibility is
assumed to be true by some scientists because the deterministic
linear Schrödinger equation itself is time reversible. But the
Schrödinger equation only describes the deterministic time evo-
lution of the probabilities of various quantum events.
   When a quantum event occurs, if there is a record of the event (if
new information enters the universe), the probabilities of multiple
possible events collapse to the occurrence of just one actual event.
This is the collapse of the wave function that John von Neumann
called process 1.2
   An irreversible event that leaves a record (stable new
information) may become a measurement, if the new information
is observed. Measurements are fundamentally and irreducibly
irreversible.
  1    See chapter 24
  2    See chapter 20 and appendix C
         286     Great Problems in Philosophy Physics - Solved?

                  When particles collide, even structureless particles should not
               be treated as individual particles with single-particle wave func-
               tions, but as a single system with a two-particle wave function,
               because they are now entangled.3
                  Treating two atoms as a temporary molecule means we must
               use molecular, rather than atomic, wave functions. The quantum
               description of the molecule now transforms the six independent
               degrees of freedom for two atoms into three for the molecule's
               center of mass and three more that describe vibrational and rota-
               tional quantum states.
                  The possibility of quantum transitions between closely spaced
               vibrational and rotational energy levels in the "quasi-molecule'
               introduces indeterminacy in the future paths of the separate atoms.
               The classical path information needed to ensure the deterministic
               dynamical behavior has been partially erased. The memory of the
               past needed to predict the future has been lost.
                  Even assuming the practical impossibility of a perfect classical
               time reversal, in which we simply turn the two particles around,
               quantum physics requires two measurements to locate the two
               particles, followed by two state preparations to send them in the
               opposite direction.
Chapter 25




                 Heisenberg indeterminacy puts calculable limits on the accu-
               racy with which perfect reversed paths can be achieved.
                  Let us assume this impossible task can be completed, and it
               sends the two particles back along the reverse collision paths. On
               the return path, there is only a finite probability that a "sum over
               histories" calculation will produce the same (or reversed) quan-
               tum transitions between vibrational and rotational states that
               occurred in the first collision. Perfect reversal is not impossible
               but extremely improbable.
                  Thus a quantum description of a two-particle collision estab-
               lishes the microscopic irreversibility that Boltzmann sometimes
                 3    See chapter 21 on entanglement.
                                                   Irreversibility       287

described as his assumption of "molecular disorder." In his second
(1877) derivation of the H-theorem, Boltzmann used a statisti-
cal approach and the molecular disorder assumption to get away
from the time-reversibility assumptions of classical dynamics.
The Origin of Irreversibility
   The path information required for microscopic reversibility
of particle paths is destroyed or erased by local interactions with
radiation and other particles.
   Boltzmann’s dynamical H-Theorem (his 1872 Stosszahlansatz)
correctly predicts the approach to equilibrium. But this appar-
ent increase in entropy could be reversed, according to Josef
Loschmidt’s time-reversibility objection and Ernst Zermelo’s
recurrence objection. We show that the addition of electromag-
netic radiation adds an irreducible element of randomness to
atomic and molecular motions, erasing classical path information,
just as the addition of a small speck of material can thermalize a
non-equilibrium radiation field. Path erasure prevents reversibil-
ity and maintains a high entropy state indefinitely. Statistical fluc-
tuations from equilibrium are damped by path erasure.
   Photon emission and absorption during molecular collisions
is shown to destroy nonlocal molecular correlations, justifying


                                                                           Chapter 25
Boltzmann’s assumption of “molecular chaos” (molekular ungeord-
nete) as well as Maxwell’s earlier assumption that molecular veloci-
ties are not correlated. These molecular correlations were retained
in Willard Gibbs formulation of entropy. But the microscopic
information implicit in classical particle paths (which would be
needed to implement Loschmidt’s deterministic motion reversal)
is actually erased. Boltzmann’s physical insight was correct that his
increased entropy is irreversible.
   It has been argued that photon interactions can be ignored
because radiation is isotropic and thus there is no net momentum
transfer to the particles. The radiation distribution, like the dis-
tribution of particles, is indeed statistically isotropic, but, as we
         288         Great Problems in Philosophy Physics - Solved?

               will show, each discrete quantum of angular momentum exchanged
               during individual photon collisions alters the classical paths suffi-
               ciently to destroy molecular velocity correlations.
                  Reversibility is closely related to the maintenance of path
               information forward in time that is required to assert that physics
               is deterministic. Indeterministic interactions between matter and
               radiation erase all path information. The elementary process of the
               emission of radiation is not time reversible, as first noted by Albert
               Einstein in 1909. He argued that the elementary process of light
               radiation does not have reversibility (“Umkehrbarkeit”). The reverse
               process (“umgekehrte Prozess”) does not exist as an elementary pro-
               cess, he said.
                  Macroscopic physics is only statistically determined. Macroscopic
               processes are adequately determined when the mass m of an object
               is large compared to the Planck quantum of action h (when there
               are large numbers of quantum particles).
                 But the information-destroying elementary processes of emission
               and absorption of radiation ensure that macroscopic processes are
               not individually reversible.
                  When interactions with a thermal radiation field and rearrange-
               ment collisions are taken into account, a quantum-mechanical treat-
Chapter 25




               ment of collisions between material particles shows that a hypo-
               thetical reversal of all the velocities following a collision would only
               very rarely follow the original path backwards. Although the deter-
               ministic Schrödinger equation of motion for an isolated two-parti-
               cle material system is time reversible (for conservative systems), the
               quantum mechanics of radiation interactions during collisions does
               not preserve particle path information, as does classical dynamics.
               Particle interactions with photons in the thermal radiation field and
               rearrangement collisions that change the internal states of the col-
               liding particles are shown to be microscopically irreversible for all
               practical purposes. These quantum processes are equivalent to the
               irreversible “measurements” that von Neumann showed increase
               the entropy.4
                 4     See appendix C
                                                               Irreversibility   289

  In classical physics, if we time reverse a collision, two particles
will reverse their vectors and go back along their original paths.




   Figure 25-31. Classical particle collisions are perfectly time reversible.

Now consider a quantum collision between two atoms that results
in the emission of a photon, deflecting the classical paths.




                                                                                   Chapter 25




   Figure 25-30. Quantum particle collisions are not time reversible.


   At some time t after the collision, let’s assume we can reverse the
separating atoms, sending them back toward the reverse collision.
If there had been no photon emission, the most likely path is an
exact traversal of the original path. But since a photon was emitted,
         290        Great Problems in Philosophy Physics - Solved?

               traversing the original path requires us to calculate the probability
               that at precisely the right time a photon of the same frequency is
               absorbed by the quasi-molecule, corresponding to a quantum
               jump back to the original rotational-vibrational state (conserving
               energy), with the photon direction exactly opposite to the original
               absorption (conserving momentum), allowing the colliding atoms
               to reverse its original path. While this is not impossible, it is extraor-
               dinarily improbable.
                 The uncertainty principle would prevent an experimenter from
               preparing the two material particles with the precise positions and
               reverse momenta needed to follow the exact return paths to the
               collision point. Moreover, the Schrödinger equation of motion for
               the two particles would only provide a probability that the particles
               would again collide.
                  As to the photon, let us assume with Einstein that a light quantum
               is “directed” and so could be somehow aimed perfectly at the colli-
               sion point. Even so, there is only a probability, not a certainty, that
               the photon would be absorbed.
                 We conclude that collisions of particles that involve radiation are
               not microscopically reversible.
               Detailed Balancing
Chapter 25




                 It is mistakenly believed that the detailed balancing of forward
               and reverse chemical reactions in thermal equilibrium, including
               the Onsager reciprocal relations, for example, depend somehow on
               the principle of microscopic reversibility.
                  Einstein’s work is sometimes cited as proof of detailed balancing
               and microscopic reversibility. (The Wikipedia article, for example.)
               In fact, Einstein started with Boltzmann’s assumption of detailed
               balancing, along with the “Boltzmann principle” that the probabil-
               ity of states with energy E is reduced by the exponential “Boltzmann
               factor,” f(E) ~ e-E/kT, to derive the transition probabilities for emission
               and absorption of radiation. Einstein also derived Planck’s radiation
               law and Bohr’s two “quantum postulates.” But Einstein distinctly
               denied any symmetry in the elementary processes of emission and
               absorption.
                                                              Irreversibility             291

   As early as 1909, he noted that the elementary process is not
“invertible.” There are outgoing spherical waves of radiation, but
incoming spherical waves are never seen.
    “In the kinetic theory of molecules, for every process in which only a few
    elementary particles participate (e.g., molecular collisions), the inverse
    process also exists. But that is not the case for the elementary processes
    of radiation. According to our prevailing theory, an oscillating ion gen-
    erates a spherical wave that propagates outwards. The inverse process
    does not exist as an elementary process. A converging spherical wave
    is mathematically possible, to be sure; but to approach its realization
    requires a vast number of emitting entities. The elementary process of
    emission is not invertible.”5
   The elementary process of the emission and absorption of radia-
tion is asymmetric, because the process is “directed.” The apparent
isotropy of the emission of radiation is only what Einstein called
“pseudo-isotropy” (pseudoisotropie), a consequence of time aver-
ages over large numbers of events. Einstein often substituted time
averages for space averages, or averages over the possible states of a
system in statistical mechanics.
   Detailed balancing is thus a consequence of averaging over
extremely large numbers of particles in equilibrium. This is the same
limit that produces the so-called “quantum to classical” transition.
And it is the same condition that gives us the “adequate” statistical



                                                                                            Chapter 25
determinism in the macroscopic, everyday world.
   Neither detailed balancing nor the adequate determinism that
we see in classical Newtonian experiments does anything to deny
that at the microscopic quantum level, events are completely statis-
tical, involving ontological chance. The interaction of radiation with
matter has “a ‘chance’-dependent value and a ‘chance’-dependent
sign” (emission or absorption), said Einstein in 1917.6

  5       “On the Development of Our Views Concerning the Nature and Constitution of
Radiation,” 1909, Einstein Collected Papers, vol.2, p.387
  6       “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” Einstein Collected Papers, vol.6, p.213
         292   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                               re n ce
                      R   ecur
Chapter 26




                                                                  This chapter on the web
                                         informationphilosopher.com/problems/recurrence
                                                    Recurrence          293


The Recurrence Problem
   The idea that the macroscopic conditions in the world will
repeat after some interval of time is an ancient idea, but it plays a
vital role in modern physics as well.
  Ancient middle eastern civilizations called it the Great Year.
They calculated it as the time after which the planets would realign
themselves in identical positions in the sky.
   The Great Year should not be confused with the time that the
precession of the equinoxes takes to return the equinoxes to the
same position along the Zodiac - although this time (about 26,000
years) is of the same order of magnitude as one famous number
given by Babylonian astronomers for the Great Year (36,000 years).
   Many societies have the concept of the Great Year, but none did
calculations as carefully as the Babylonians. But since the planets
orbital periods are not really commensurate, they kept increasing
the time for the Great Year searching for a better recurrence time.
   The Greek and Roman Stoics thought the Great Year was proof
of law in nature and the God of reason that lies behind nature.
   In modern philosophy, Friedrich Nietzsche described an
eternal return in his Also Sprach Zarathustra.


                                                                          Chapter 26
Zermelo’s Paradox
  Ernst Zermelo’ criticized Ludwig Boltzmann’s H-Theo-
rem, the attempt to derive the increasing entropy required by the
second law of thermodynamics from basic statistical mechanics.
  It was the second “paradox” attack on Boltzmann. The first was
Josef Loschmidt’s claim that entropy would be reduced if time
were reversed. This is the problem of microscopic reversibility.1
  Zermelo was an extraordinary mathematician. He was (in 1908)
the founder of axiomatic set theory, which with the addition of
the axiom of choice (also his work, in 1904) is the most common
foundation of mathematics. The axiom of choice says that given
any collection of sets, one can find a way to unambiguously select
one object from each set, even if the number of sets is infinite.
  1    See chapter 25 on irreversibility.
         294     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Before this amazing work, Zermelo was a young associate of
               Max Planck in Berlin, one of many German physicists who
               opposed the work of Boltzmann to establish the existence of
               atoms.
                 Zermelo’s criticism was based on the work of Henri Poincaré,
               an expert in the three-body problem, which, unlike the two-body
               problem, has no exact analytic solution.
                  Poincaré had been able to establish limits or bounds on the pos-
               sible configurations of the three bodies from conservation laws.
               Planck and Zermelo applied some of Poincaré’s thinking to the
               n particles in a gas. They argued that given a long enough time,
               the particles would return to a distribution in “phase space” (a
               6n-dimensional space of possible velocities and positions) that
               would be indistinguishable from the original distribution.
                  Thus, they argued, Boltzmann’s formula for the entropy would
               at some future time go back down, vitiating Boltzmann’s claim to
               have proved that entropy always increases - as the second law of
               thermodynamics requires.
                  Boltzmann replied that his argument was statistical. He only
               claimed that entropy increase was overwhelmingly more prob-
               able than Zermelo’s predicted decrease. Boltzmann calculated the
               probability of a decrease of a very small gas of only a few hundred
Chapter 26




               particles and found the time needed to realize such a decrease is
               many orders of magnitude larger than the presumed age of the
               universe.
                  The idea that a macroscopic system can return to exactly the
               same physical conditions is closely related to the idea that an agent
               may face “exactly the same circumstances in making a decision.
               Determinists maintain that given the “fixed past” and the “laws of
               nature” that the agent would have to make exactly the same deci-
               sion again.2
                 2    See chapter 5
                                                               Recurrence        295


The Extreme Improbability of Perfect Recurrence
   In a classical deterministic universe, given enough time, the
universe can return to the exact circumstance of any earlier instant
of time, because it contains the same amount of matter, energy,
and information.
   But, in the real universe, information expands from a minimum
at the origin, to ever larger amounts of information.
   Arthur Stanley Eddington was probably the first to see that
the expanding universe with increasing information provides a
resolution to Zermelo’s objection to Boltzmann.
      “By accepting the theory of the expanding universe we are relieved
      of one conclusion which we had felt to be intrinsically absurd. It was
      argued that every possible configuration of atoms must repeat itself
      at some distant date. But that was on the assumption that the atoms
      will have only the same choice of configurations in the future that
      they have now. In an expanding space any particular congruence
      becomes more and more improbable. The expansion of the universe
      creates new possibilities of distribution faster than the atoms can work
      through them, and there is no longer any likelihood of a particular
      distribution being repeated. If we continue shuffling a pack of cards
      we are bound sometime to bring them into their standard order — but
      not if the conditions are that every morning one more card is added
      to the pack.”3
   And note that it is the failure of recurrence that makes all the

                                                                                   Chapter 26
arrows of time of chapter 24 into one-way arrows.

  3       New Pathways in Science, 1939, p.68
         296   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                               e n ce
                       E  merg
Chapter 27




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/knowledge/emergence
                                                    Emergence           297


Emergence
   Information philosophy explains the reality of emergence,
because what emerges is new information. The universe began
with minimal information. For hundreds of thousands of years,
the only information structures were fundamental particles.
These were only the simplest matter and energy, and they are con-
served quantitities. In a deterministic universe, that initial infor-
mation would be all the information in the universe today and in
the future, because information would be conserved.
   But information is not conserved. Because it is neither matter
not energy, information is immaterial. Matter can be converted to
energy (E = mc2), but their total is a constant. The only thing that
is new is information. Information is the only emergent.
  A complex physical world of galaxies, stars, and planets has
emerged, a diverse biological world has emerged, and a mental
world of ideas has emerged, including the idea of emergence itself.
Emergence is the result of the cosmic creation process.1
   And this process is fundamentally a rearrangement and trans-
formation of the fundamental particles of matter and energy.
  The basic idea of emergence is that there are properties - per-
haps even “laws” - at the upper hierarchical levels of nature that
are not derivable from or reducible to the properties and laws of
the lower levels. Thus chemistry has properties not derivable from        Chapter 27
physics, biology has properties not derivable from chemistry, and
psychology has properties not derivable from biology.
Emergence or Reduction?
   Reductionism, by contrast, argues that everything can be
explained by (reduced to) the basic laws of physics. The world is
said to be “causally closed.” “Physicalism” is the idea that every-
thing that is caused has a physical cause, that everything that hap-
pens is caused by material particles in motion
  Causal control is assumed to work “bottom-up.” The motions
and forces between the material particles are said to determine
1      See appendix F.
         298     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               everything chemical, biological, and psychological. Information
               theory would then require that the information content of every-
               thing being done at the higher biological and mental levels is actu-
               ally contained in the structure and motions of the atoms and mol-
               ecules. We shall show that this reductionism is implausible
                  Causal closure implies that every thought in the mind is some-
               how present in the paths or positions of the atomic particles them-
               selves. Mental causation is then redundant. Mental events are epi-
               phenomenal, non-existent, just an illusion.
                  Genuine emergence of new properties at the higher biological
               and psychological levels, on the other hand, requires that those
               properties can exert “top-down” causal control on the motions of
               particles in lower levels. This is the notion of downward causa-
               tion, the highest version of which is mental causation.2 It means
               motions of the atomic particles must effectively be controlled by
               the mind, which strikes many biologists and psychologists, who
               are uncomfortable making claims about physics, as extravagant.
                 If the laws of nature control everything in the visible universe,
               they say, how can they fail to control the mind?
                  Proving this “top-down” or mental causation is made doubly
               difficult, since we would like to show that “bottom-up” causes on
               the body and mind can somehow be blocked. It seems illogical or
               even impossible to show that causation can flow downward but
Chapter 27




               not upward.
                  But we can demonstrate emergent phenomena at the biological
               and mental (neural) level that have exactly this emergent property
               of what we can call “one-way causality.”
               History of the Idea of Emergence
                 The idea of emergence was implicit in the work of John Stuart
               Mill and explicit in the work of “emergentists” like George
               Henry Lewes, Samuel Alexander, C. Lloyd Morgan, and
                 2    See chapter 15.
                                                               Emergence         299

C. D. Broad. Some wanted to explain the direct emergence of
mind from matter, to solve the mind-body problem, but as Alex-
ander put it, there are at least two distinct steps - mind emerges
from life, just as life emerges from the physical-chemical.
   Mill discusses the Laws of Nature in his System of Logic, Book
III. Although Mill did not use the term “emergent,” he makes the
concept clear enough:
    The chemical combination of two substances produces, as is well
    known, a third substance with properties different from those of either
    of the two substances separately, or of both of them taken together.
    Not a trace of the properties of hydrogen or of oxygen is observable
    in those of their compound, water. The taste of sugar of lead is not
    the sum of the tastes of its component elements, acetic acid and lead
    or its oxide; nor is the colour blue vitriol a mixture of the colours of
    sulphuric acid and copper...If this be true of chemical combinations, it
    is still more true of those far more complex combinations of elements
    which constitute organized bodies; and in which those extraordinary
    new uniformities arise, which are called the laws of life... To whatever
    degree we might imagine our knowledge of the properties of the sev-
    eral ingredients of a living body to be extended and perfected, it is
    certain that no mere summing up of the separate actions of those ele-
    ments will ever amount to the action of the living body itself.3
   Lewes also used Mill’s example of the properties of water not
being reducible to those of oxygen and hydrogen. He coined the
term “emergent” in 1875:
    Although each effect is the resultant of its components, the product of
                                                                                   Chapter 27
    its factors, we cannot always trace the steps of the process, so as to see
    in the product the mode of operation of each factor. In the latter case,
    I propose to call the effect an emergent. It arises out of the combined
    agencies, but in a form which does not display the agents in action.4
   In his 1920 book Space, Time, and Deity, Samuel Alexander
cited Lloyd Morgan as his source of emergentism, and wrote:
    much of what I have to say has been already said by Mr. Lloyd Morgan
    in the concluding chapter of his work on Instinct and Experience. The
    argument is that mind has certain specific characters to which there is
    or even can be no neural counterpart...

3       A System of Logic, Book III, chapter VI
4       Problems of Life and Mind,(1875), vol. 2, p. 412
         300         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    Mind is, according to our interpretation of the facts, an ‘emergent’ from
                    life, and life an emergent from a lower physico-chemical level of exis-
                    tence.5
                  Later, in his 1922 Gifford Lectures and 1923 book Emergent
               Evolution, Lloyd Morgan saw even atoms and molecules as emer-
               gent entities and introduced the related “top-down” concept of hier-
               archical supervenience:
                    ...in the physical world emergence is no less exemplified in the advent of
                    each new kind of atom, and of each new kind of molecule. It is beyond
                    the wit of man to number the instances of emergence. But if nothing
                    new emerge - if there be only regrouping of pre-existing events and
                    nothing more - then there is no emergent evolution.
                    Under emergent evolution there is progressive development of stuff
                    which becomes new stuff in virtue of the higher status to which it has
                    become raised under some supervenient kind of substantial gotogeth-
                    erness.6
                  Vitalists like Henri Bergson and Hans Driesch may not have
               used the term emergence, but they strongly supported the idea of
               teleological (purposeful), likely non-physical, causes, without which
               they thought that life and mind could not have emerged from physi-
               cal matter.
                   C. D. Broad’s view of the mind was emergentist and vitalist.
                  But Broad distinguished between what he called “Substantial
               Vitalism” (a dualist theory of an immaterial substance as a vital force,
               for example, Bergson’s élan vital) and what Broad called “Emergent
Chapter 27




               Vitalism” (some kind of non-reductive materialism, in which the
               vital property emerges from the body, and in the case of mind, from
               the highest bodily level - the brain).
                Broad says he borrowed the adjective “emergent” from Lloyd
               Morgan and Alexander.
                  Broad contrasted the two forms of Substantial and Emergent
               Vitalism with what he called “Biological Mechanism,” which is
               essentially a reduction of biology to physics and chemistry. All the
               emergentists were of course anti-mechanists or anti-reductionists.
               5        Space, Time, and Deity (1920), vol. 2, p. 14
               6        Emergent Evolution (1923), pp. 1-6
                                                     Emergence             301

   Broad also mentioned Driesch, an anti-mechanist who developed
a sophisticated form of vitalism that he called “neovitalism.”
   Driesch saw clear evidence of a kind of teleology in the ability of
lower organisms to rebuild their lost limbs and other vital parts. He
used Aristotle’s term “entelechy” (loosely translated as “having the
final cause in”) to describe the organism’s capacity to rebuild itself.
Driesch said this disproved the theory of preformation from a single
original cell. Driesch studied the original cells of a sea urchin, after
they had divided into two cells, then four, then eight. At each of
these stages, Driesch separated out single cells and found that the
separated cells went on to develop into complete organisms. This is
regarded as the first example of biological cloning.
   Broad rejected Driesch’s idea of entelechy as a non-material, non-
spatial agent that is neither energy nor a material substance of a spe-
cial kind, but we should note that Driesch’s entelechy well describes
the information content of any cell by which it develops into a
complete organism. Driesch himself maintained that his entelechy
theory was something very different from the substance dualism of
older vitalisms. So what was Broad’s criticism of Driesch? Neither
thinker could produce a clear description of their vital element.
   Broad was sophisticated in his discussion of emergence. He saw
that the kind of emergence that leads to water and its unique chemi-
cal properties, when compared to the properties of its molecular
components hydrogen and oxygen, has no element of purpose
or teleology. The emergence of life (and mind) from physics and              Chapter 27
chemistry, however, clearly introduces a kind of design or purpose.
Modern biologists call it teleonomy, to distinguish it from a meta-
physical telos that pre-exists the organism. It comes as an essential
part of the organism.
   It seems likely that both Driesch and Broad were trying to grasp
this teleonomy, which can be simply described as the built-in pur-
pose of each living cell to replicate its information. “The goal of
every cell is to become two cells.”
         302         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Three Kinds of Information Emergence
                 Note there are three distinct kinds of emergence, at the material,
               biological, and mental levels:
                        1. the order out of chaos when the randomly distributed
                     matter in the early universe first gets organized into informa-
                     tion structures.
                        This was not possible before the first atoms formed about
                     400,000 years after the Big Bang. Information structures like the
                     stars and galaxies did not exist before about 400 million years.
                     As we saw, gravitation was the principal driver creating infor-
                     mation structures.
                        Nobel prize winner Ilya Prigogine discovered another
                     ergodic process that he described as the “self-organization” of
                     “dissipative structures.” He popularized the slogan “order out of
                     chaos” in an important book.7 Unfortunately, the “self ” in self-
                     organization led to some unrealizable hopes in cognitive psy-
                     chology. There is no self, in the sense of a person or agent, in
                     physical phenomena like convection cells and whirlpools.
                        Both gravitation and Prigogine’s dissipative systems produce
                     a purely physical/material kind of order. The resulting structures
                     contain information, with a “steady state” flow of information-
                     rich matter and energy through them. But they do not process
                     or communicate information. They have no purpose, no “telos.”
Chapter 27




                        Order out of chaos can explain the emergence of downward
                     causation on their atomic and molecular components. But this
                     is a gross kind of downward causal control. Explaining life and
                     mind as “complex adaptive systems” has not been successful.
                     We need to go beyond “chaos and complexity” theories to teleo-
                     nomic theories.
                       2. the order out of order when the material information struc-
                     tures form self-replicating biological information structures.
                     Some become information processing systems.

                 7      Order Out of Chaos. Shambhala, 1984.
                                                      Emergence             303

       In his famous essay, “What Is Life?,” Erwin Schrödinger noted
    that life “feeds on negative entropy” (or information). He called
    this “order out of order.”
       This kind of biological processing of information first emerged
    about 3.5 billion years ago on the earth. It continues today on
    multiple emergent biological levels, e.g., single-cells, multi-cel-
    lular systems, organs, etc., each level creating new information
    structures and information processing systems not reducible to
    (caused by) lower levels and exerting downward causation on
    the lower levels.
       And this downward causal control is extremely fine. Biologi-
    cal systems control the motions and arrangements of individual
    atoms and molecules.
       Biological systems are cognitive systems, using internal “sub-
    jective” knowledge to recognize and interact with their “objec-
    tive” external environment, communicating meaningful mes-
    sages to their internal components and to other individuals
    of their species with a language of arbitrary symbols, taking
    actions to maintain themselves and to expand their populations
    by learning from experience.8
       With the emergence of life, “purpose” also entered the uni-
    verse. It is not the pre-existent “teleology” of many idealistic phi-
    losophies (the idea of “essence” before “existence”), but it is the
                                                                              Chapter 27
    “entelechy” of Aristotle, who saw that living things have within
    them a purpose, an end, a “telos.” To distinguish this evolved
    telos in living systems from teleology, modern biologists use the
    term “teleonomy.”
      3. the pure information out of order when organisms with
    minds generate, store (in the brain), replicate, utilize, and then
    externalize some non-biological information, communicat-
    ing it to other minds and storing it in the environment. Com-
    munication can be by hereditary genetic transmission or by an
    advanced organism capable of learning and then teaching its
    contemporaries directly by signaling, by speaking, or indirectly
    by writing and publishing the knowledge for future generations.

8       See appendix G on Biosemiotics.
         304       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                      This kind of information can be highly abstract mind-stuff,
                   pure Platonic ideas, the stock in trade of philosophers. It is nei-
                   ther matter nor energy (though embodied in the material brain),
                   a kind of pure spirit or ghost in the machine. It is a candidate for
                   the immaterial dualist “substance” of René Descartes, though
                   it is probably better thought of as a “property dualism,” since
                   information is an immaterial property of all matter.
                  The information stored in the mind is not only abstract ideas. It
               contains a recording of the experiences of the individual. In princi-
               ple every experience may be recorded, though not all may be repro-
               ducible/recallable. Information philosophy claims that everything
               created since the origin of the universe over thirteen billion years
               ago has involved just two fundamental physical processes that com-
               bine to form the core of all creative processes at all three levels.9
                  This core creative process underlies the formation of microscopic
               objects like atoms and molecules, as well as macroscopic objects like
               galaxies, stars, and planets. (Note that the formation of self-orga-
               nizing material systems in conditions far from equilibrium that are
               the subjects of chaos and complexity theories are this basic, non-
               teleonomic form of emergence.)
                  With the emergence of teleonomic (purposive) information in
               self-replicating systems, the same core process underlies all biologi-
               cal creation. But now some random changes in information struc-
Chapter 27




               tures are rejected by natural selection, while others reproduce suc-
               cessfully.
                  Finally, with the emergence of self-aware organisms and the cre-
               ation of extra-biological information stored in the environment, the
               same information-generating core process underlies communica-
               tion, consciousness, free will, and creativity.
                 The physical processes in the core creative process are quantum
               cooperative phenomena (involving the mysterious “collapse” of the
               wave function necessary for the appearance of particles - see chapter
               9       See appendix F for details on the cosmic creation process
                                                       Emergence           305

20) and thermodynamics, which requires the transfer of entropy
away from newly emergent information structures to ensure their
stability.10
Emergence in the Body
                                           When a ribosome assembles
                                        330 amino acids in four sym-
                                        metric polypeptide chains (glo-
                                        bins), each globin traps an iron
                                        atom in a heme group at the
                                        center to form the hemoglo-
                                        bin protein. This is downward
                                        causal control of the amino
   Figure 27-32. Four protein chains of
                                        acids, the heme groups, and the
 hemoglobin.                            iron atoms by the ribosome. The
ribosome is an example of Erwin Schrödinger’s emergent “order
out of order,” life “feeding on the negative entropy” of digested food.
   When 200 million of the 25 trillion red blood cells in the human
body die each second, in each of the new cells 100 million hemoglo-
bins cell must be assembled. With the order of a few thousand bytes
of information in each hemoglobin, this is 10 thousand x 100 mil-
lion x 200 million = 2 x 1020 bits of information per second, a million
times more information processing than today’s fastest computer
CPU. Red blood cells are 25% of body weight. Twenty percent of
                                                                             Chapter 27
these are working in the brain to support mental information pro-
cessing.
   When a ribosome produces a protein that does not fold properly,
a chaperone enzyme, shaped like a tiny trash can, opens its lid and
captures the protein. It then closes the lid and squeezes the protein.
Upon release, the protein then frequently folds properly. If it does
not, the chaperone captures it again and disassembles it back to its
amino acids. The chaperone is an emergent agent that is in no way
the result of “bottom-up” processes from its amino acid compo-
nents. It is also an extraordinary example of biological error detec-
tion and correction.
  10    See appendix B on entropy and the second law
         306          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Emergence in the Brain
                  When a single neuron fires, the active potential rapidly changes
               the concentration of sodium (Na+) ions inside the cell and potas-
               sium (K+) ions outside the cell. Within milliseconds, thousands
               of sodium-potassium ion channels in the thin lipid bilayer of the
               cell wall must move billions of those ions from one side to the
               other. They do it with emergent biological machinery that exerts
               downward causation on the ions, powered by ATP energy carriers
               (feeding on negative entropy). Random quantum indeterministic
               motions of the ions put some near the pump opening, where quan-
               tum collaborative forces capture them in a lock-and-key structure.11
                 When many motor neurons fire, innnervating excitatory post-
               synaptic potentials (EPSPs) that travel down through the thalamus
               and the spinal cord and cause muscles to contract, that is as literal as
               downward causation gets in the body.
                 When the emergent mind decides to move the body, that mental
               causation is realized as downward causation.
                  When an emergent philosopher rearranges and communicates
               ideas, verbally in lectures, or as written words in a published paper,
               or as the bits of information in a computer memory, this is “informa-
               tion out of order,” ultimately dependent on the body digesting food,
               producing energy with negative entropy (“order out of order”), but
               in no way controlled “bottom-up” by the molecules of body or food
Chapter 27




               material, or by the energy consumed.
               The Emergence of Immaterial Information Processing
                 Can information provide the basis for a different kind of mental
               substance, one that emerged?
                  Abstract information is neither matter nor energy, yet it needs
               matter for its concrete embodiment and energy for its communica-
               tion. Information is immaterial.
                 It is the modern spirit, the ghost in the machine.
                  Immaterial information is perhaps as close as a physical or bio-
               logical scientist can get to the idea of a soul or spirit that departs
               the body at death. When a living being dies, it is the maintenance of
               biological and mental information that ceases. The matter remains.
                 11     See “Ion Pumps in Neurons Select Individual Atoms” on page 183
                                                            Emergence     307

  Information philosophy proposes a mind-body dualism in which
thoughts (pure information processing) in our minds have genuine
causal power over the body. This might be considered a metaphysical
mind, but it is purely biological and entirely dependent on the brain.
There are multiple realizations of physical/material “hardware” that
can implement the “software” of our ideas.
  For example, when one person teaches another some new tech-
nique, or transmits some purely intellectual knowledge, the other
person is another physical realization, different hardware now run-
ning the same software.
  To make this case, we need to establish the following:
  • that the information in a mind can be regarded as an immaterial
substance.12
  • that the information in a mind, while dependent on the body,
has genuine causal (adequately determined) power over the body.13
   • that the information in a mind has not been pre-determined
by the sum of genetic inputs and life experiences, but has at least in
part been created by the agent, with inputs from some indetermin-
istic processes.14
The Emergence of Determinism
   When small numbers of atoms and molecules interact, their
motions and behaviors are indeterministic, governed by the rules
of quantum mechanics. But when large numbers of particles gather            Chapter 27
into large material objects, they are statistically determined. This is
called the “quantum to classical transition.”
   Werner Heisenberg’s principle of indeterminacy (mistakenly
called “uncertainty,” as if the problem is epistemic/subjective and
not ontological/objective) gives us the minimum error in simulta-
neous measurements of position x and momentum p, for any object,
large or small,
  Δp Δx ≥ h,
  where h is Planck’s constant of action.

  12   See appendix A on information
  13   See chapter 16 on mental causation
  14   See chapter 4 on the two-stage model of free will.
         308       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  To see how “adequate” determinism emerges for large numbers
               of particles, note that the momentum p = mv (the product of mass
               and velocity), so we can write the indeterminacy principle in terms
               of velocities and positions as
                 Δv Δx ≥ h / m.
                  When large numbers of microscopic particles get together in
               massive aggregates, the mass increases and h / m approaches zero,
               the indeterminacy of the individual particles gets averaged over and
               macroscopic “adequately” deterministic laws “emerge.” The posi-
               tions and velocities of large massive objects can therefore be “deter-
               mined” to a high degree of accuracy, in fact beyond our ability to
               measure.
                  Determinism is thus an emergent property for an object made up
               of large numbers of material particles,.
                  The “laws of nature,” such as Newton’s laws of motion, are all sta-
               tistical in nature. They also “emerge” when large numbers of atoms
               or molecules get together. For large enough numbers, the probabilis-
               tic laws of nature approach practical certainty. But the fundamental
               indeterminism of component atoms never completely disappears.
               There Was a Time with No Determinism
                  So determinism “emerges” today from microscopic quantum sys-
               tems as they become a part of larger and more classical systems.
Chapter 27




               But we can say that determinism also emerged in time. In the earli-
               est years of the universe, large massive objects did not yet exist. All
               matter was microscopic and quantal.
                  We can now identify that time in the evolution of the universe
               when determinism first could have emerged. Before the so-called
               “recombination era” at about 380,000 years, when the universe
               cooled to a few thousand degrees Kelvin, a temperature at which
               atoms could form out of sub-atomic particles (protons, helium
               nuclei, and electrons), there were no “macroscopic objects” to
               exhibit deterministic behavior.
                                                                  Emergence            309

   The early universe was filled with positive ions and negatively
charge electrons. The electrons scattered light photons, preventing
them from traveling very far. The universe was effectively opaque
past very short distances. When the temperature fell to about 3000
degrees K, the charged particles combined to form neutral atoms
(hydrogen and helium). With the scattering electrons now bound
into atoms, the photons suddenly could “see” (travel) to enormous
distances. This produced the transparent universe that we take for
granted today (on cloudless nights).
   Those 3000 degrees K photons have been red-shifted as a result
of the universe expansion and now appear to us as the 2.7 degree
K “cosmic microwave background” radiation left over from the big
bang. We are looking at a moment in time when “classical” objects
obeying apparently deterministic causal laws did not yet exist.
  After a few hundred million years, large material objects
could begin to form. Only then could anything “classical”” or
“deterministic” come into existence, could “emerge.”
Emergence Denied
   Some prominent philosophers of science, logical empiricists who
were committed to the ability of physical science to explain every-
thing as “unified science,” were confident that “emergence” would
go the way of “holism” and “vitalism.”
  For example, the former member of the Vienna Circle and lead-
ing reductionist Herbert Feigl wrote in 1958:                                            Chapter 27
     Inseparably connected with holism and the Gestalt philosophy is the
     doctrine of emergence. This is indeed my own, admittedly risky and
     speculative, guess; that is to say, I believe that once quantum dynamics
     is able to explain the facts and regularities of organic chemistry (i.e. of
     non-living, but complex compounds) it will in principle also be capable
     of explaining the facts and regularities of organic life.15


15       “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical’”, in Concepts, Theories, and the Mind-Body
Problem, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol.2, p. 414
         310   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                    o f  L i fe
                        r i g i n s          n
                Th e  O         r m a  t i o
                      d I n fo
                  a n
Chapter 28




                                                                  This chapter on the web
                                         informationphilosopher.com/introduction/biology
                                                         Origins       311


Origins of Life and Information
   Despite many controversies about the role of information in
biology over the past several decades, we can now show that the
creation of information is not only necessary to understand biol-
ogy, but that biology is a proper subset of information creation
in the universe, including the evolution of human minds, which
have created the knowledge about how abstract immaterial infor-
mation and concrete information structures (matter and energy
with low entropy) have been and are now being created in the
universe.
  A new story of biological evolution is needed, integrating it into
the cosmological story and illustrating the total dependence of life
on cosmological sources of negative entropy (information). We
cannot appreciate the origin of life without first understanding the
origin of information.
   The first information structures formed in the early universe.
Elementary particles, atoms and molecules, galaxies, stars, and
planets, are all the result of microscopic quantum cooperative
phenomena and macroscopic gravitational forces. These are the
very special anti-entropic processes that we call ergodic (informa-
tion creating) .
   But it is not until the emergence of life that information
replication, information processing, and information communica-
tion begins. Living things are biological information processors,        Chapter 28
forms through which matter and energy flows, with capabilities
far beyond the electronic digital computers that cognitive scien-
tists think provides a “computational theory of mind.”
   Most important, living things have “purposes.” They engage
in high level communications of information with other living
things and with the environment. Their messaging is meaningful,
allowing them to be active users of information, compared to pas-
sive material things, whose structural information is largely inert
and meaningless. Living things also have histories, unlike physics
and chemistry.
         312       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               History and Evolution in the Universe
                  Long before there was life, the galaxies, stars, and planets had
               a rich developmental or evolutionary history of their own. Astro-
               physics tells us that stars radiated energy into space as they dissi-
               pated the energy of gravitational collapse (the photons carried away
               positive entropy to balance the new spherically symmetric order).
               The stars paused their collapsing when their interiors reached tem-
               peratures high enough to initiate thermonuclear reactions, which
               convert the lightest elements (hydrogen and helium) into heavier
               elements. When the fuel is exhausted, the stars resume collapsing,
               some exploding catastrophically and spewing out into interstellar
               space their newly formed elements, especially the heavy elements
               needed for life.
                  Geophysics tells us that the surfaces of planets also go through
               heating, then cooling, as they radiate away the energy of gravita-
               tional binding. Chemical processes produce ever more complex
               molecules on planetary surfaces, and astrobiology now finds pre-
               biological organic molecules everywhere in space.
Chapter 28




                 Figure 28-1. Photons are the major source of negative entropy on the earth.

                  When a planet is bathed by radiation from a nearby star, the radi-
               ation field is far from equilibrium. The high-temperature photons
               leaving the solar surface (5800K) are spread out over a huge volume
               of space. The energy density of the radiation falling on the Earth
               corresponds to a much lower temperature (300K), but the high-
                                                          Origins       313

color-temperature photons cannot cool down without interacting
with matter.
  When they do interact with the planetary surface, photons
provide the necessary stream of free energy to form even more
complex information structures, the macromolecules that are the
chemical basis for life. An alternative stream of free energy with
negative entropy comes from inside the cooling planet.
   Whether from the Sun or high-temperature vents in the plan-
etary surface, it is these out-of-equilibrium conditions that lead to
the first living things. They are negative entropy flows which are
potential new information generators.
  The Origin of Life
   Early theories of the origin of life were based solely on phys-
ics and chemistry, from the 1920’s hypotheses of A.I. Operin and
J.B.S. Haldane that the early atmosphere of the Earth was reduc-
ing (hydrogen and not oxidizing), to Melvin Calvin’s 1930’s
suggestion for autocatalytic cycles, and the famous 1950’s experi-
ments of Harold Urey and Stanley Miller that showed many
organic molecules could form spontaneously (especially critical
amino acids, the building blocks of proteins) in Haldane’s “prebi-
otic soup.”
  In the last several decades, theories of chaos and complexity
have led to the idea of “self-organizing” complex adaptive systems
that combine various autocatalytic cycles, for example, the hyper-        Chapter 28
cycles of Manfred Eigen. The Nobel-prize-winning physical
chemist Ilya Prigogine identified irreversible processes in sys-
tems away from thermal equilibrium that he called “dissipative.”
   Examples of “dissipative systems” include whirlpools and
Bénard convection cells. They exhibit what Prigogine called
“order out of chaos” and are an example of “emergence.”1 All living
systems are “dissipative,” so Prigogine and the complex adaptive
system advocates thought they might explain the nature of life.
  Complexity theories were popular because they added an ele-
ment of unpredictability to otherwise deterministic physics, with-
out accepting the indeterminism and ontological chance of quan-
tum physics.
  1    See chapter 27 for the three kinds of emergence.
         314       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  All these complex, dissipative, autocatalytic processes depend on
               a stream of free energy and negative entropy for their operation. But
               if all that they produce is a “passive” information structure, it is the
               just the same kind of “order out of chaos” that gravitation produces
               in the galaxies, stars, and planets. It is not yet life.
                  The most sophisticated example of an autocatalytic system is one
               that can generate large quantities of prebiotic molecules, such as the
               amino acids that combine to form proteins. This is the citric acid
               cycle (or Krebs cycle) used by all living systems today. It was almost
               certainly a precursor of life, before the information replication we
               associate with complex nucleotides and genetic code (DNA and
               RNA).
                  Metabolic cycles do not use information in the sense of process-
               ing it, but they do use the negative entropy flow to increase informa-
               tion in the form of the amino acids. A large quantity of amino acids
               can create proteins, but only randomly. Proteins cannot recreate
               themselves precisely. They cannot transfer hereditary information.
                  So alongside a working metabolic cycle we need information
               replication. The earliest such information structures were prob-
               ably duplicated on an external template (a catalyst). Before DNA
               appeared, there was an RNA world in which RNA could perform
               the enzyme functions that proteins perform today, as well as the
               self-replication that DNA gives us.
                 The central dogma of biology today is that DNA generates RNA
Chapter 28




               which generates the proteins from amino acids. And today we see
               the clear central role of information, specifically the messaging and
               processing of information via “messenger RNA” and “transfer RNA.”
                  To be considered life, information philosophy expects an “active”
               information structure that is processing information, communicat-
               ing messages among the components to maintain its structure.
                  The first person to articulate the information processing aspect of
               life was Lila Gatlin, who wrote in 1971
                   Life may be defined operationally as an information processing system—
                   a structural hierarchy of functioning units—that has acquired through
                   evolution the ability to store and process the information necessary for
                                                                   Origins      315

      its own accurate reproduction. The key word in the definition is infor-
      mation.2
  At some moment, a primitive macromolecule replicated itself. To
do this, it created new (duplicate) information, so positive entropy
equal to or greater than the new negative entropy must have been
carried away from the new information structure (for it to be stable).
   Mere replication should not yet be seen as life. And anything like
metabolism would just be the flows of the low entropy solar photons
or geothermal free energy that get degraded in the process of pro-
viding the available energy needed to form the new molecule. But
we might anthropomorphize a bit and say that the apparent purpose
of the molecule appears to be replicating itself, increasing its own
kind of information structure in the universe.
   Now at some point the replication might have been less than per-
fect (note the element of chance here).
   Imagine now that the new molecule might be even more efficient
than the original molecule at replicating itself (it has greater repro-
ductive success). Note that the new molecule has more, or at least
different, information in it than the original. Now we might say that
this is the beginning of Darwinian evolution, which appears to have
a goal of building richer, more robust, living information structures.
   We now have both primitive inheritance (of the information) and
a form of variability. Some of these molecules might not only be
more successful replicators, they might have chemical properties
that allow them to resist being destroyed by environmental condi-                 Chapter 28
tions. The energetic extreme-ultraviolet photons, for example, or
destructive cosmic rays, which might have been the source of the
original variations.
   The result might be a runaway exponential explosion of the con-
centration of those molecules (an important characteristic of living
systems) as well as alteration of their environment. Early life gener-
ated an oxygen atmosphere that protected it from the ionizing ultra-
violet rays that may have led to life in the first place.
  Replication could lead to populations of the molecule that are well
beyond the normal populations that would be expected in chemical
  2       Information Theory and the Living System, p.1
         316        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               equilibrium. Chemists might view this as simply an autocatalytic
               process, in which the molecule catalyzes its own production. But
               because it is information replicating itself, it is qualitatively different
               from mere chemical autocatalysis.
                   At the atomic level, it will be quantum cooperative phenomena
               that pull the constituent atoms into the desired molecular positions.
               It is the overall shape (form, information) that produces a dynami-
               cal interactive constraint well beyond the mere aggregation of indi-
               vidual atoms.
                 Loosely speaking, the new, more successful species of molecule
               has “learned” something, storing the new information internally
               and passing it on to the next generation.
                  Jumping now to human evolution, we see a species of multi-
               molecular, multi-cellular organism that has found a way to external-
               ize information, storing it in the environment (culture), where it can
               be shared with new generations of humans, who continue to add to
               this external store of knowledge we call the Sum, enabling them to
               dominate the planet, for better or worse.
               The Origin of Information
                  Passive information structures formed in the universe from the
               first few moments of time. But these elementary particles could
               not even form a lasting atomic structure until nearly 400,000 years
               after the expansion of the universe had begun. The universe had to
Chapter 28




               cool significantly more, taking millions of years, before the galaxies,
               stars, and planets could form.
                  Although these magnificent astronomical bodies are the domi-
               nant contents of the universe, their information is essentially inert
               and meaningless until astronomers have appeared to study them,
               extracting their information. It is said that an astronomer is one gal-
               axy’s way of knowing about other galaxies, the universe’s means of
               self-contemplation. These of course are mere metaphors, because
               the flow of information is one way, from the passive structures to
               the information-processing minds.
                                                                Origins   317

   Claude Shannon3 analyzed the communication of informa-
tion in terms of senders and receivers, exchanging coded messages
through noisy channels. It applies to the extraction of any kind of
information, for example the yes/no answers to questions put to the
physical world by scientists making quantum measurements.4
   We can think of the Sun as sending its photons to Earth, although
since they go out in all directions, less than one in a billion is
received here. But where astronomers do not return any informa-
tion to the stars and galaxies they study, even the smallest organism
interacts with its environment and exchanges information in mean-
ingful ways. All organisms and their components are “interactors”
exchanging information.
  All life draws its nourishment from the stream of negative
entropy, the matter and free energy that flows though every organ-
ism. But living things also excrete matter and degraded energy into
their environment, a return information flow that alters, in many
ways creates, their local world - the biosphere.
Information in Biology
  The major question for information in biology is this, are the com-
munications between biological systems (organisms) and between
their components (cells, organelles, macromolecules) semiosis, the
exchange of signs?
   Major textbooks on biology have always used terms like signal-
ing, coding, transcribing, translating, communicating, messengers,          Chapter 28
recognition, even language, but they almost always insist that these
are only metaphors, that they are not the kind of intentional and
meaningful exchanges of signs that humans use.5
   Consider what happens in a cell when a particular protein or
enzyme is in short supply. A messenger enters the nucleus with a
signal that more of the protein is needed. Responding to the signal,
an enzyme (synthetase) travels to the exact segment of the DNA
that contains the sequence of nucleotides for the needed protein.
  3    The Mathematical Theory of Communication, 1948
  4    See ”Meaning in the Theory of Information” on page 142
  5    See appendix G for the story of Biosemiotics.
         318       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               The synthetase moves along the DNA, transcribing the sequence of
               nucleotide triplets (called codons) into a growing RNA with a mes-
               sage intended for the ribosome that manufactures proteins. Each
               codon refers to a specific amino acid in the protein.
                  The “messenger RNA” detaches itself from the DNA and travels
               through the nuclear membrane into the cell cytoplasm where ribo-
               somes and a supply of amino acids is located. The amino acids are
               moving about randomly and very rapidly as a result of thermal and
               quantal noise. The long thread of mRNA enters the ribosome, which
               stops it to wait for the arrival of a “transfer RNA” carrying an amino
               acid and the three-letter “anticodon” that matches the codon in the
               mRNA for the next amino acid needed in the polypeptide chain.
                  When the one-dimensional linear protein leaves the ribosome,
               it folds itself into a three-dimensional shape that has enzymatic
               activity. If it does not fold correctly, it is swallowed by tiny “trash-
               can” shaped structures called “chaperones.” The chaperone closes its
               cover and squeezes the protein, encouraging it to fold correctly.
                 If it does not, the protein is broken up into its amino acids. This is
               an amazing degree of error detection and correction.
                  The whole chain of communications between the signal that
               entered the nucleus, the syntax of the message, the semantic decod-
               ing of the mRNA by the ribosome, which refers to exactly the right
               amino acids as they fly around at high speeds connected to trans-
               fer RNA, looks like interpretation of the message, with reference to
Chapter 28




               the amino acids. The message has pragmatic significance, leading to
               meaningful action (production of the protein). The later Wittgen-
               stein tells us that “meaning is use.” The cell is using all this commu-
               nication of information for the purpose of staying alive!
                  Information philosophy looks at all this as the primitive proto-
               type of the information communication and processing that we
               have today in human beings. In human language, the fundamen-
               tal elements are syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and morphology
               (the shapes of the signs). Are not all of these already present in our
               smallest organisms?
                                                                           Origins        319

   Despite many calls to recognize the reality of information in biol-
ogy, the reductionist view that biology is nothing but the result of
physics and chemistry has prevented it. Here are some important
calls over the years to accept information in biology.
      “Life may be defined operationally as an information processing sys-
      tem—a structural hierarchy of functioning units—that has acquired
      through evolution the ability to store and process the information nec-
      essary for its own accurate reproduction. The key word in the definition
      is information. This definition, like all definitions of life, is relative to the
      environment. My reference system is the natural environment we find
      on this planet. However, I do not think that life has ever been defined
      even operationally in terms of information. This entire book constitutes
      a first step toward such a definition.”6
      “Evidently nature can no longer be seen as matter and energy alone. Nor
      can all her secrets be unlocked with the keys of chemistry and physics,
      brilliantly successful as these two branches of science have been in our
      century. A third component is needed for any explanation of the world
      that claims to be complete. To the powerful theories of chemistry and
      physics must be added a late arrival: a theory of information. Nature
      must be interpreted as matter, energy, and information.”7
      “A central and fundamental concept of this theory is that of ‘biological
      information,’ since the material order and the purposiveness character-
      istic of living systems are governed completely by information, which
      in turn has its foundations at the level of biological macromolecules .
      The question of the origin of life is thus equivalent to the question of the
      origin of biological information.”8
      “Information as the central concept in molecular biology:..Information,
      transcription, translation, code, redundancy, synonymous, messenger,
      editing, and proofreading are all appropriate terms in biology. They take             Chapter 28
      their meaning from information theory (Shannon, 1948) and are not
      synonyms, metaphors, or analogies.”9
Biological Machines
   We have seen that biological communications, the informa-
tion exchanged in messages between biological entities, is far
more important than the particular physical and chemical entities
themselves. These material entities are used up and replaced many
  6        Information Theory and the Living System, (1971) Lila Gatlin, p.1
  7        Grammatical Man, (1982) Jeremy Campbell, p.16, inspired by Gatlin
  8        Information and the Origin of Life, (1990) Bernd-Olaf Küppers, p.xvii
  9        Information Theory, Evolution, and the Origin of Life, (2005) H. Yockey, p.6
         320       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               times in the life cycle of a whole organism, while the messaging has
               remained constant, not just over the individual life cycle, but that of
               the whole species.
                  In fact most messages, and the specific molecules that embody
               and encode those messages, have been only slowly varying for bil-
               lions of years.
                  As a result, the sentences (or statements or “propositions”) in bio-
               logical languages may have a very limited vocabulary compared to
               human languages. Although the number of words added to human
               languages in a typical human lifetime is remarkably small.
                  Biological information is far more important than matter and
               energy for another reason. Beyond biological information as “ways
               of talking” in a language, we will show that the messages do much
               more than send signals, they encode the architectural plans for bio-
               logical machines that have exquisite control over individual mol-
               ecules, atoms, and their constituent electrons and nuclei.
                  Far from the materialist idea that fundamental physical elements
               have “causal control” over living things, we find that biological
               information processing systems are machines, intelligent robotic
               machines, that assemble themselves and build their own replace-
               ments when they fail, and that use the flow of free energy and mate-
               rial with negative entropy to manipulate their finest parts.
                  Coming back to the great philosopher of logic and language
               Ludwig Wittgenstein, who briefly thought of “models” as explan-
Chapter 28




               atory tools that can “show” what is difficult or impossible to “say” in
               a language, we offer still pictures of a few biological machines, with
               links to dynamic animated models on the I-Phi website.
                 The amazing operations of these machines are so far beyond
               man-made machines that it has called into question the ability of
               Darwinian evolution to create them by random trials and errors.
               But the most complex of these machines have been shown to be
               composed of dozens of smaller and simpler parts that did and still
               do much simpler tasks in the cell.
                 The five biological machines that we chose are
                                                                   Origins   321

   • the ribosome, a massive factory that manufactures thousands of
different possible proteins when messenger RNA carries a request
for one of them from the nuclear DNA,
  • ATP synthase, which packages small amounts of energy into a
nucleotide molecule that carries energy to any place in the organism
that needs power to perform its function,
  • the flagellum, a high-speed motor that moves bacterial cells to
sources of matter and energy in their environment,
   • the ion pump, which moves calcium and potassium ions to rap-
idly recharge the activation potential of a neuron so it is ready to fire
again in a fraction of a second so the mind can make its decisions
and take actions to move the body,
  • the chaperone, an error detection and correction system beyond
the ability of our finest computers to protect memories from noise.
   Biology cannot prevent the occurrence of random errors. Indeter-
ministic chance is the original source of variability in our genes that
led to the incredible diversity of life forms, including us humans.
   But the nearly perfect operation of our biological machines and
the phenomenal fidelity of copying our many genetic codes over
billions of years shows the stability and “adequate determinism” of
biology in the presence of ontological chance, a consequence of the
noise-immune digital nature of biological information.
Ribosomes                                                                      Chapter 28




      Figure 28-2. The ribosome waits for the right tRNA and amino acid to
   collide, then captures it to be added to the growing protein
         322       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  The linear messenger RNA is a sequence of three-letter nucleo-
               tide “codons,” each of which codes for one of twenty possible amino
               acids. The transfer RNAs are flying around randomly in the cell car-
               rying an amino acid with the complementary anti-codon. When an
               incoming tRNA colliding with the ribosome is a match, the mRNA
               captures it and moves three letters into the ribosome. The amino
               acid is detached from the tRNA and attached to the growing pep-
               tide chain, and the mRNA advances three more letters, releasing the
               outgoing, now empty tRNA, who will capture a replacement amino
               acid.
                  Notice that the tRNAs are moving quickly and randomly, so a
               large number of incorrect tRNAs bang into the next position on the
               mRNA while it waits for the correct match. Nothing in the path of
               the tRNA is determining the new sequence, as some physical chem-
               ists think. Which particular tRNA and amino acid of the right kind
               is added next is pure chance.
                  The ribosome is an ancient machine, going back to the last uni-
               versal common ancestor (LUCA) of the three domains of life - bac-
               teria, archaea, and eukaryotes. It is built from a few RNA molecules
               that self-fold to become enzymes (ribozymes) and a number of pro-
               teins that provide a supporting structure for the RNA. The longest
               of these RNAs is at the middle step when the amino acid is released
               from the tRNA and attached to the growing peptide chain.
                 Comparing modern ribosomes in the three domains, the micro-
Chapter 28




               biologist George Fox, who with Carl Woese identified the archaea
               domain, reconstructed the likely earliest version of the ribosome, an
               important component of the RNA world’s transition to DNA.
                  We shall see that reconstructing the earliest versions of important
               biological components, especially the biological machines, can pro-
               vide deep insights into the origin of life.
                  By comparison, the efforts of complex adaptive systems theorists
               to guess at the earliest auto-catalytic chemical systems have largely
               been fruitless, since chemical systems do not process information
               about the different chemicals.
                                                                 Origins          323


ATP Synthase




  Figure 28-3. The rotating motor embedded in the membrane spins at 10,000 rpm.


  The source of power for most biological machines is the ATP
(adenosine triphosphate) molecule. Adenosine is one of the four
nucleotides in the genetic code (G, C, A, T). The ATP synthase
machine above adds an inorganic phosphate group Pi back to a
depleted diphosphate ADP, powered by “chemiosmosis,” a flow of                      Chapter 28
protons (hydrogen ions) across the semi-permeable cell membrane.
  As each proton enters the top of the synthase complex, the top
rotates by one of its segments. A fixed shaft (on the right) holds the
lower part of the synthase in place while the rotating center shaft
pushes lower segments to open and close, providing the energy to
add back a Pi to the ADP.
  ATP contributes a jolt of power to other machines (see the ion
pumps below) when the third phosphate group is detached and
energetic ATP becomes depleted ADP.
 But what was the basic power source before complex biological
machines like ATP came into existence?
         324        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               The Flagellum




                  Figure 28-4. This motor can instantly switch into reverse, the bacterium tumbles
               randomly, then switches back to forward motion in a new direction.
                  Another rotating system embedded in a cell wall is the reversible
               motor that drives the flagella of mobile bacteria. The rotor has been
Chapter 28




               measured at an incredible tens of thousands of rotations per minute.
               This system is so amazing it is considered the “poster child” of intel-
               ligent design advocates, but of its fifty protein parts, over forty have
               been identified as having simpler, but similar, functions that have
               “exadapted “ for their role in the flagellum motor.
                 Bacterial flagella are powered by a flow of protons just like the
               rotating part of the ATP synthase, others by a flow of sodium ions,
               and some are powered by ATP flows. Some organisms have flagella
               only in their earliest development phase, for example, spermatazoa.
               But we can ask what produced the flow of protons before there was
               a molecule as advanced as ATP?
                                                            Origins   325


  Ion Pumps




  Figure 28-7. The ion pump uses ATP as its power source.

   When a single neuron fires, the active potential rapidly changes
the concentration of sodium (Na+) ions inside the cell and potas-
sium (K+) ions outside the cell. Within milliseconds, thousands of
sodium-potassium ion channels in the thin lipid bilayer of the cell
wall must move billions of those ions from one side to the other.
They do it with emergent biological machinery that exerts down-
ward causation on the ions, powered by ATP energy carriers (feeding
on negative entropy). Random quantum indeterministic motions of
the amino acids drive them near the pump opening, and quantum           Chapter 28
collaborative forces capture them in a lock-and-key structure.
   ATP hydrolysis provides the energy for a full cycle of opening
and closing the pump, which pumps three sodium ions out of the
cell for every two potassium ions pumped in. In neurons, the pump
uses about 2/3 of the energy expenditure in the cell.
  Before there were ion channels powered by ATP, could some
primitive proteins have evolved to move specific ions across a mem-
brane and create an electrochemical potential?
         326       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Chaperones




                  Figure 28-5. The error-correcting chaperone also uses ATP.

                  When a newly manufactured protein leaves the ribosome, it
               sometimes fails to fold properly to become an active enzyme that
               carries out its proper function in the cell. A well-folded protein
               hides away all its oily hydrophobic sites, exposing it hydrophylic
               sites to the water-based solution in the cell.
                  The incorrectly folded protein’s hydrophobic sites are attracted
               to hydrophobic locations inside a chaperone. Once inside a cap is
               attached to the top and forces inside the chaperone encourage it to
               fold properly, in which case the cap opens and the normal protein is
               released. Once again, it is ATP that powers the chaperones.
               Motive Power?
                  What ultimately powers all these machines? Of course it is ulti-
               mately free energy in a negative entropy flow, but what is the spe-
               cific chemistry? If it starts with sunlight, it will be photosynthesis
Chapter 28




               that extracts energy in the photons via redox reactions (simulta-
               neous reduction and oxidation) that produce electrons and ions.
               For example water becomes H+ and OH-, with transfer of H+ ions
               (protons) across plant cell membranes. In mitochondria, it is the
               breakdown of food (sugars) in the citric acid cycle, with transfer of
               protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane.
                  In either case, an electrochemical gradient across a membrane is
               like a battery voltage (a tiny tenth of a volt) that powers all of life.
               It may have originated with amino acids randomly assembled into
               proteins that penetrated the bilayer phospholipids of proto-cells to
               act as proto-ion-pumps.
                                                                     Origins   327


Life, Love, and Death
  A few speculations about three topics - bios, eros, and thanatos10 -
that often raise origin questions - why are we living?, why sex?, and
why do we die?
   From the standpoint of information philosophy, biology seems to
have been a series of cosmic accidents, some of which in retrospect
can be seen as highly unlikely. Against the arguments that given
the right conditions, life is highly probable, we can note that life
remained unicellular for the first few billion years. The endosymbio-
sis of bacterial cells being hosted by an archeon, to form the eukary-
otes who became multicellular, suggests that this critical step for the
possibility of intelligent life was highly improbable.
  The importance of chance is evident from the evolution of the
deliberate randomization of genes in sexual reproduction, which
seems to aim at creating unique individuals.
   As human life is about to take control of the evolution of the
human genome, a major objective may be to eliminate the chance
elements that lead to cell death.
Working Backwards in Time
   We saw in chapters 12 to 16 how philosophers of mind attempt to
reduce mental states to bottom-up deterministic causation by the
laws of physics and chemistry at work in the brain.
   Most biologists today are also reductionists, feeling more com-               Chapter 28
fortable with the materialist laws of the physical sciences than with
immaterial ideas like emergence, purpose, and information. Most
cognitive scientists and neuroscientists share this traditional and
conservative view.
  But information philosophers and scientists today should make
the strong case that life is more than the conserved quantities of
matter and energy, and more than the deterministic laws of classical
physics and chemistry.
  Life is matter and energy - plus information. Life is quantum
physics and chemistry - plus the new information in the universe
that would be impossible without the ontological chance of quantal
indeterminism.
  10   Or at the cellular level - mitosis, meiosis, and apoptosis.
         328       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Unlike physics and chemistry, life has a history - an information
               history. We are more likely to figure out the origin of life by work-
               ing backwards to guess the most primitive elements of today’s most
               universal parts (e.g., the citric acid cycle), than by trying to work
               forward from primitive chemical reactions of atoms and molecules
               that know nothing, that always lose any information about where
               they have been in the past.
                  We consider the origins of four increasingly sophisticated infor-
               mation-controlled processes - the metabolic cycle, chemiosmosis,
               the ribosome, and the genetic code. Our technique will be to strip
               them down to their primitive core elements. By reducing the amount
               of information in each process, we are working backward in time.
                  The current eight-step metabolic cycle uses sophisticated ATP as
               a catalyst. The earliest cycle would eliminate those steps.
                   Chemiosmosis moves protons or other ions across a membrane
               to create electrochemical potentials. This is done by multiple pro-
               tein complexes in the current electron transfer chain. Today’s pro-
               teins are produced by the ribosome, with RNA messages from the
               DNA. Let’s work back to a time without either of these. It will still
               be proteins separating the electrons from the protons. They must do
               it without ATP, because they provide the power to create ATP. So
               let’s look for the simplest components of today’s proteins that can
               do this.
                  There are several different such complexes. The largest one uses
Chapter 28




               a string of connected iron-sulfur clusters, each of which takes a
               small amount of energy from the electron and passes it, perhaps by
               quantum tunneling, to the next cluster. The presence of these FeS2
               clusters points to Günter Wächtershäuser’s iron-sulfur world
               hypothesis of life forming on mineral surfaces near hydrothermal
               vents in the deep sea. Membranes over pores in rock surfaces would
               later become modern cells in the RNA world.
                  It was a study of the different ribosomes in bacteria, archaea, and
               eukaryotes that led to Carl Woese’s discovery of the three domains
               of life. Woese’s colleague George Fox and Hyman Hartman of
               MIT have worked backward in time to the most ancient parts of
                                                                   Origins      329

the ribosome, specifically a central RNA molecule that encloses
the center where a new amino acid is added to the growing peptide
(protein) chain.
   The current genetic code uses three nucleotides out of four RNA
possibilities (G, C, A, U), giving 64 codes to choose one of twenty
amino acids. But the third nucleotide often has no relevance for the
amino acid. As long as the first two are GG, any one of the four will
still code for glycine. GCx codes for alanine, CGx for arginine, and
CCx for proline. All four of these amino acids are very common.
Could there have been an early time when there was a simpler, two-
base code and only four amino acids in the first proteins to be coded
for, probably in a ribozyme with the hereditary information?
   Hartman has connected this hypothesis back to the reversed citric
acid cycle that was likely in the early earth’s reducing atmosphere.
He estimated the number of extra steps beyond the metabolic cycle
needed to produce each amino acid, identifying the easiest to man-
ufacture. Alanine, glycine, aspartic acid, and glutamic acid are one
step away. Glutamine, asparagine, and serine are two steps away.
Between those with the simplest codes and those with the mini
mum number of steps to produce them, glycine and alanine were
likely the earliest amino acids to enter the genetic code.



                                                                                  Chapter 28




   Figure 28-6. Was there an earlier time when only two nucleotides coded for
fewer amino acids?
         330   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                  at i o n
                        In   form
Appendix A




                                                                  This chapter on the web
                                      informationphilosopher.com/introduction/information
                                                              Information   331


Information
  Information is the fundamental metaphysical connection
between idealism and materialism.
   Information is the form in all concrete objects as well as the
content in non-existent, merely possible, abstract entities. It is the
disembodied, de-materialized essence of anything.
  Information philosophy goes beyond a priori logic and its
puzzles, beyond analytic language and its games and paradoxes,
beyond philosophical claims of necessary truths, to a contingent
physical world that is best represented as made of dynamic, inter-
acting information structures. Models of these structures can best
represent the fundamental metaphysical nature of reality.
  Knowledge begins with information structures in minds that
are partial isomorphisms (mappings) of the information structures
in the external world. Information philosophy is the ultimate
correspondence theory.
   But I-Phi shows that there is no isomorphism, no information
in common, no necessary connection, between words and objects.
Although language is an excellent tool for human communica-
tion, its arbitrary and ambiguous nature makes it ill-suited to rep-
resent the world directly. Language does not picture reality. Is is
not the best tool for solving philosophical problems.
  The extraordinarily sophisticated connection between words                  Appendix A
and objects is made in human minds, mediated by the brain’s
experience recorder and reproducer (ERR).1 Words stimulate
neurons to start firing and to play back relevant experiences that
include the objects.
   By contrast, a dynamic information model of an information
structure in the world is presented immediately to the mind as
a look-alike and act-alike simulation, which is experienced for
itself, not mediated through words.

  1     See appendix E on the experience recorder and reproducer..
         332     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Without words and related experiences previously recorded in
               your mental experience recorder, you could not comprehend
               spoken or written words. They would be mere noise, with no
               meaning. Compare these two representations of a cat.




                 Compared to a spoken or printed word, a photograph or a
               moving picture with sound can be seen and mostly understood by
               human beings, independent of their native tongue.
                  The elements of information philosophy, dynamical models of
               information structures, go far beyond logic and language as a rep-
               resentation of the fundamental, metaphysical, nature of reality.
                 Models “write” directly into our mental experience recorders.
               They are not mediated through ambiguous language.
                  Computer animated models must incorporate all the laws of
               nature, from the differential equations of quantum physics to the
               myriad processes of biology. At their best, simulations are not only
               our most accurate knowledge of the physical world, they are the
               best teaching tools ever devised. We can transfer knowledge non-
               verbally to coming generations and most of the world’s population
               via the Internet and ubiquitous smartphones.
Appendix A




                  If you think about it, everything you know is pure abstract
               information. Everything you are is an “information structure,” a
               combination of matter and energy that embodies and communi-
               cates your information. And everything that you value contains
               information.
                  You are a creator of information, part of a cosmic creation
               process. Your free will depends on your unique ability to create
               alternative possibilities for your willed decisions and responsible
               actions.
                  The simple definition of information is the act of informing -
               the communication of knowledge from a sender to a receiver that
               informs (literally shapes) the receiver.
                                                    Information          333

   By information we mean a quantity that can be understood
mathematically and physically. It corresponds to the common-
sense meaning of information, in the sense of communicating or
informing. It is like the information stored in books and comput-
ers. But it also measures the information in any physical object,
like a snow crystal or a star like our sun, as well as the information
in biological systems, including the genetic code, the cell struc-
ture, and the developmental learning of the phenotype.
   Although some commentators would like to limit the term
“information” to messages sent with an intended purpose, physi-
cal scientists have long included the structure in physical objects
as something that can be measured by an observer and thus is also
information. Information philosophy recognizes material objects
as “information structures,” from which pure information con-
tent can be abstracted as meaningful knowledge, even though the
object itself may have no purpose.
   The sender of information need not be a person, an animal, or
even a living thing. It might be a purely material object, a rainbow,
for example, sending color information to your eye.
   The receiver, too, might be merely physical, a molecule of water
in that rainbow that receives too few photons and cools to join
the formation of a crystal snowflake, increasing its information
content.
   Information theory, the mathematical theory of the commu-
nication of information, says little about meaning in a message,
                                                                           Appendix A
which is roughly the use to which the information received is put.
Information philosophy extends the information flows in human
communications systems and digital computers to the natural
information carried in the energy and material flows between all
the information structures in the observable universe.
  A message that is certain to tell you something you already
know contains no new information. It does not increase your
knowledge, or reduce the uncertainty in what you know, as infor-
mation theorists put it.
         334        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Information in the Universe
                  Information in physical systems was connected to a measure of
               the structural order in a system as early as the nineteenth century by
               William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) and Ludwig Boltzmann,
               who described an increase in the thermodynamic entropy as “lost
               information.”
                  In 1877, Boltzmann proved his “H-Theorem” that the entropy or
               disorder in the universe always increases.2
                  He defined entropy S as the logarithm of the number W of possi-
               ble microscopic states of a physical system, an equation now known
               as Boltzmann’s Principle,
                  S = k log W.
                  In 1929, Leo Szilard showed the mean value of the quantity of
               information produced by a 1-bit, two-possibility (“yes/no”) mea-
               surement as S = k log 2, where k is Boltzmann’s constant, connecting
               information directly to entropy.
                 Following Szilard, Ludwig von Bertalanffy, Erwin
               Schrödinger, Norbert Wiener, Claude Shannon, Warren
               Weaver, John von Neumann, and Leon Brillouin, all expressed
               similar views on the connection between physical entropy and
               abstract “bits” of information.
                  Schrödinger said the information in a living organism is the
               result of “feeding on negative entropy” from the sun. Wiener said
               “The quantity we define as amount of information is the negative of
Appendix A




               the quantity usually defined as entropy in similar situations.”
                  Brillouin created the term “negentropy” because he said, “One
               of the most interesting parts in Wiener’s Cybernetics is the discus-
               sion on “Time series, information, and communication,” in which
               he specifies that a certain “amount of information is the negative of
               the quantity usually defined as entropy in similar situations.”
                  Shannon, with a nudge from von Neumann, used the term entropy
               to describe his estimate of the amount of information that can be
                  2      Boltzmann’s critics objected to his proof, but we have shown how to overcome
               their objections in chapters 24 and 25.
                                                       Information            335

communicated over a channel, because his mathematical theory of
the communication of information produced a mathematical for-
mula identical to Boltzmann’s equation for entropy, except for a
minus sign (the negative in negative entropy).
  Shannon described a set of i messages, each with probability pi .
He then defined a quantity H,
  H = k Σ pi log pi
  where k is a positive constant. Since H looked like the H in
Boltzmann’s H-Theorem, Shannon called it the entropy of the set of
probabilities p1, p2, . . . , pn.
  To see the connection, we can note that Boltzmann assumed
that all his probabilities were equal. For n equal states, the
probability of each state is p = 1/n. The sum over n states,
Σ pi log pi,, is then n x 1/n x log (1/n) = log (1/n) = -log n. If we set n
= W, we get Boltzmann’s entropy with a minus sign,
  H = - k log W.
  Shannon’s entropy H is simply the negative of Boltzmann’s S.
  Shannon showed that a communication that is certain to tell you
something you already know (one of the messages has probability
unity) contains no new information. The logarithm of 1 is 0.
   If everything that happens was certain to happen, as determin-
ist philosophers claim, no new information would ever enter the
universe. Information would be a universal constant. There would
be “nothing new under the sun.” Every past and future event could               Appendix A
in principle be known (as Pierre-Simon Laplace suggested3) by a
super-intelligence with access to such a fixed totality of information.
   It is of the deepest philosophical significance that information is
based on the mathematics of probability. If all outcomes were cer-
tain, there would be no “surprises” in the universe. Information
would be conserved and a universal constant, as some mathemati-
cians mistakenly believe it is. Information philosophy requires the
ontological chance and probabilistic outcomes of modern quantum
physics to create new information structures.

  3     See “Laplace’s Demon” on page 28
         336                 Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   But at the same time, without the extraordinary stability of quan-
                tized information structures over cosmological time scales, life and
                the universe we know would not be possible. Quantum mechanics
                reveals the architecture of the universe to be discrete rather than
                continuous, to be digital rather than analog. And digital provides
                extraordinary stability.
                  Creation of information structures means that in parts of the uni-
                verse local entropy is actually going down. Creation of a low-entropy
                system is always accompanied by radiation of energy and entropy
                away from the local structure to the night sky and the cosmic back-
                ground radiation.
                   From Newton’s time to the start of the 19th century, the Lapla-
                cian view coincided with the notion of the divine foreknowledge of
                an omniscient God. On this view, complete, perfect and constant
                information exists at all times that describes the designed evolution
                of the universe and of the creatures inhabiting the world.
                   In this God’s-eye view, information is a constant of nature. Some
                mathematicians argue that information must be a conserved quan-
                tity, like matter and energy. They are wrong. In Laplace’s view, infor-
                mation would be a constant straight line over all time, as shown
                along the top of the figure.
                                                                                                     information
                              Laplace’s Demon (1814)
                              A Laplace Demon has all the information - forces, positions, velocities -
Appendix A




                              for all the particles in the universe.

                              All times, past and future, are present to the Laplace Demon,
                              as to the eyes of God. In a deterministic universe, information is constant.
               information




                              Mathematical physicists, like Laplace, believe that the conservation of information
                              is as much a conservation law as that of matter and energy.

                              There is no chance. The randomness we see is simply epistemic, a consequence
                              of human ignorance about physical details that his demon and God can know.

                                                                                          time
                              (Pierre Simon Laplace, A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities, 1814)

                                Figure 29-1. Constant information in a deterministic universe
                                                                                                               Information     337

   If information were a universal constant, there would be “nothing
new under the sun.” Every past and future event can in principle be
known by Laplace’s super-intelligent demon, with its access to such
a fixed totality of information.




                                                                                                                         entropy
 entropy/information




                         Lord Kelvin’s Heat Death (1852)
                         Following the discovery of the laws of thermodynamics,
                         William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) claimed that the universe would
                         “run down,” all the energy ultimately dissipated into thermal motions,
                         which Herman Helmholtz called a “heat death.”
                          Mathematicians would say the information lost to entropy is still                             information
                          available microscopically, recoverable if time was reversed.

                                                                                           time
                       (William Thomson, "On a Universal Tendency in Nature to the Dissipation of Mechanical Energy")

                             Figure 29-2. The second law predicts a heat death of the universe

   But midway through the nineteenth century, Lord Kelvin (Wil-
liam Thomson) realized that the newly discovered second law of
thermodynamics required that information could not be con-
stant, but would be destroyed as the entropy (disorder) increased.
Hermann Helmholtz described this as the “heat death” of the
universe.                                                                                                                             Appendix A
   Mathematicians who are convinced that information is always
conserved argue that macroscopic order is disappearing into micro-
scopic order, but the information could in principle be recovered, if
time could only be reversed.
  This raises the possibility of some connection between the
increasing entropy and what Arthur Stanley Eddington called
“Time’s Arrow.” 4
   Kelvin’s claim that information must be destroyed when entropy
increases would be correct if the universe were a closed system. But
in our open and expanding universe, my Harvard colleague David
Layzer showed that the maximum possible entropy is increasing
        4                    See chapter 24.
         338         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               faster than the actual entropy. The difference between maximum
               possible entropy and the current entropy is called negative entropy,
               opening the possibility for complex and stable information struc-
               tures to develop.




                       Figure 29-3. Growth of information and entropy in the universe

                  We can see from the figure that it is not only entropy that
               increases in the direction of the arrow of time, but also the informa-
               tion content of the universe. We can describe the new information
               as “emerging.” 5
Appendix A




                 The expanding universe is the source of possibilities
                  Despite the second law of thermodynamics, stable and lawlike
               information structures evolved out of the initial chaos. First, quan-
               tum processes formed microscopic particulate matter – baryons,
               nuclei - from the fundamental quarks and electrons. Eventually
               these became atoms. Later, under the influence of gravitation, they
               coalesced into macroscopic galaxies, stars, and planets.
                 5     See chapter 27.
                                                  Information           339

   Every new information structure reduces the entropy locally, so
the second law requires an equal (or generally much greater) amount
of entropy to be carried away. Without the expansion of the uni-
verse, this would be impossible.




         Figure 29-4. Two entropy flows

   The positive entropy carried away (the big dark arrow on the
left) is always greater than and generally orders of magnitude larger
than the negative entropy in the created information structure (the
smaller light arrow on the right).
 See appendix B for the other negative entropy flows that ulti-
mately lead to human life.
  Information is emergent, because the universe began with min-
imal, essentially zero, information. It was in a state of thermody-
namic equilibrium, maximum disorder.
  And there are three distinct kinds of information emergence:
                                                                          Appendix A

  • the “order out of chaos” when the matter in the universe formed
cosmic information structures. This is also Ilya Prigogine’s chaos
and complexity theory.
  • the “order out of order” when the material information struc-
tures form self-replicating biological information processing sys-
tems. This is what Erwin Schrödinger described as life “feeding
on negative entropy.”
         340       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  • the pure “information out of order” when organisms with minds
               create, process, and externalize information, communicating it to
               other minds and storing it in the environment, sharing it with all
               humanity as the Sum of human knowledge.
                  Information philosophy explains how new information is con-
               stantly being created, by nature and by humanity. We are co-creators
               of our universe.
                 Information theory is the mathematical quantification of commu-
               nication to describe how information is transmitted and received, in
               human language, for example.
                  Information science is the study of the categorization, classifica-
               tion, manipulation, storage, and retrieval of information.
                  Cognitive science is the study of the mental acquisition, reten-
               tion, and utilization of knowledge, which we can describe as the
               recording and reproduction of experiences as guides for action.
                 Information philosophy is an attempt to examine some classic
               problems in philosophy from the standpoint of information.
                 What is information that merits its use as the foundation of a new
               philosophical method of inquiry?
                  Abstract information is neither matter nor energy, yet it needs
               matter for its concrete embodiment and energy for its communica-
               tion. Information is immaterial.
                 Information is the modern spirit, the ghost in the machine.
Appendix A




                  Immaterial information is perhaps as close as a physical or bio-
               logical scientist can get to the idea of a soul or spirit that departs
               the body at death. When a living being dies, it is the maintenance of
               biological information that ceases. The matter remains.
                 Biological systems are different from purely physical systems pri-
               marily because they create, store, and communicate information.
               Living things store information in a memory of the past that they
               use to shape their future. Fundamental physical objects like atoms
               have no history.
                                                   Information           341

   And when human beings export some of their personal informa-
tion to make it a part of human culture, that information moves
closer to becoming immortal.
   Human beings differ from other animals in their extraordinary
ability to communicate information and store it in external artifacts.
In the last decade the amount of external information per person
may have grown to exceed an individual’s purely biological informa-
tion.
   Information is an excellent basis for philosophy, and for science
as well, capable of answering questions about metaphysics (the
ontology of things themselves), epistemology (the existential status
of ideas and how we know them), idealism (pure information), the
mind-body problem, the problem of free will, and the “hard” prob-
lem of consciousness.
  Actionable information has pragmatic value.
   In our information philosophy, knowledge is the sum of all the
information created and preserved by humanity. It is all the infor-
mation in human minds and in artifacts of every kind - from books
and internetworked computers to our dwellings and managed envi-
ronment.
   We shall see that all information in the universe is created by a
single two-part cosmic creation process, the only one capable of
generating and maintaining information in spite of the dread second
law of thermodynamics, which describes the irresistible increase in        Appendix A
disorder or entropy. We call this anti-entropic process ergodic. It
should be appreciated as the creative source of everything we can
possibly value, and of everything distinguishable from chaos and
therefore interesting.
   Enabled by the general relativistic expansion of the universe,
the cosmic creative process has formed the macrocosmos of gal-
axies, stars, and planets. It has also generated the particular forms
of microscopic matter - atoms, molecules, and the complex macro-
molecules that support biological organisms. It includes all quan-
tum cooperative phenomena.
         342         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Quantum phenomena control the evolution of life and human
               knowledge. They help bring new information into the universe in a
               fundamentally unpredictable way. They drive biological speciation.
               They facilitate human creativity and free will.
                  Although information philosophy looks at the universe, life, and
               intelligence through the single lens of information, it is far from
               mechanical and reducible to a deterministic physics. The growth of
               information over time - our principle of increasing information - is
               the essential reason why time matters and individuals are distin-
               guishable.
                  Information is the principal reason that biology is not reducible
               to chemistry and physics. Increasing information (a combination
               of perfect replication with occasional copying errors) explains all
               emergent phenomena.”
                  In information philosophy, the future is unpredictable for two
               basic reasons. First, quantum mechanics shows that some events
               are not predictable. The world is causal, but not pre-determined.
               Second, the early universe does not contain the information of later
               times, just as early primates do not contain the information struc-
               tures for intelligence and verbal communication, and infants do not
               contain the knowledge and remembered experience they will have
               as adults.
                 In the naive world of Laplace’s demon and strict determinism, all
               the information in the universe is constant at all times. But “deter-
               minism” itself is an emergent idea, realized only when large num-
Appendix A




               bers of particles assemble into bodies that can average over the irre-
               ducible microscopic indeterminacy of their component atoms.
               Information and Entropy
                  In our open and expanding universe, the maximum possible
               entropy is increasing faster than the actual entropy. The difference
               between maximum possible entropy and the current entropy is
               called negative entropy. There is an intimate connection between
               the physical quantity negative entropy and information.6

                 6     See appendix B for more on entropy and the second law.
                                                    Information          343

  To give this very positive quantity of “negative” entropy a positive
name, we call it “Ergo” and describe processes capable of generating
negative entropy “ergodic.”
   Ergodic processes provide room to increase the information
structures in the universe. As pointed out by David Layzer, the
Arrow of Time7 points not only to increasing disorder but also to
increasing information.
   The increase of biological information is primarily by perfect rep-
lication of prior existing information, but it is critically important
that replication errors occur from time to time. They are the source
of new species and creative new ideas.
  The universe is creative. Information structures and processes
are emergent. Some laws of nature are emergent. Adequately deter-
ministic phenomena are emergent. The very idea of determinism is
emergent.8 Knowledge of the present did not all exist in the past. We
have only a rough idea of the exact future.
   The creative process continues. Life and humanity are a part of
the process. What gets created is in part our responsibility. We can
choose to help create and preserve information. Or we can choose
to destroy it. We are free to create our own futures.
  Why Information? Information is neither Matter nor Energy,
      But it needs Matter for its Embodiment,
      And it needs Energy for its Communication.
      Information is the modern Spirit.                                    Appendix A
      It is the Ghost in the Machine.
      It is the Mind in the Body.
      It is the Soul, and when we Die,
      It is our Information that Perishes,
      unless we Publish it to the World and Posterity.

Therefore, we publish this book and the accompanying website,
whose contents are freely usable according to a Creative Commons
license, because information wants to be free.

  7      See chapter 24 for the arrow of time.
  8      See chapter 27 on emergence.
         344   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                               py a n d
                          t ro
                       En nd Law
                        Seco
Appendix B




                                                                  This chapter on the web
                                         informationphilosopher.com/introduction/physics
                                    Entropy and Second Law               345


Entropy and the Second Law
   Every scientist who made a major contribution to the probabi-
listic nature of the world had some doubts as to whether the use
of probability implies that chance is real. Is the appearance of ran-
domness just a consequence of the limits on human knowledge
and merely epistemological? Or is randomness a fundamental
part of the external world and thus ontological? Quantum physics
says chance is ontological and the laws of physics are statistical.
   In 1860, James Clerk Maxwell was the first physicist to use
statistics and probability. He discovered the distribution of veloci-
ties of atoms or molecules in a gas. Although there was no real
evidence for the existence of atoms until Albert Einstein’s work
on Brownian motion in 1905, Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann
showed that the macroscopic laws of thermodynamics could be
explained if gases consist of microscopic atoms in motion. They
used the calculus of probabilities to reduce thermodynamics to sta-
tistical mechanics.
  This is despite the fact that they knew next to nothing about the
details of processes at the atomic level.
   Paradoxically, ignorance of microscopic details is overcome by
the power of averages over large numbers of cases. The average
value of any property gets more and more accurate as the number
of independent events gets large. The number of gas particles in a
cubic centimeter of air is truly astronomical, close to the number         Appendix B
of stars in the observable universe. For this reason, thermody-
namic gas laws like PV = NkT derived from statistical mechanics
are highly accurate, well beyond experimental error. This accuracy
suggests the laws are deterministic. But they are only adequately
or statistically deterministic. Determinism is an illusion.1
Discrete Particles
   To refine a famous comment by Richard Feynman, if there is
just one fact that could survive the destruction of knowledge, so as
to give future scientists the fastest recovery of physics, it would be
  1     See chapter 19.
         346      Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               that the contents of the universe are made up of discrete particles,
               not fields. This is now the standard model of particle physics. It
               grew out of the study of ordinary gases.




                   Figure 30-5. The perfume molecules dissipate until they are uniformly distributed.
               Classical statistical physics mistakenly claims that if the velocities of all the particles
               were reversed at an instant, the molecules would return to the bottle. It assumes that the
               complete path information needed to return to the bottle is preserved. But information
               is not conserved. It can be created and it can be destroyed. We shall show why such
               microscopic reversibility is extremely unlikely.

                  Gas particles are distributed in ordinary coordinate space (x, y,
               z) and in a conjugate momentum (p = mv, mass times velocity)
               space (px, py, pz).
                 These two spaces are combined to form a six-dimensional
               space called a “phase space,” one element of which is Δx Δy Δz
               Δpx Δpy Δpz. At equilibrium, when average density is the same
               everywhere, particles are found distributed in proportion to the
               volume of those spaces. But phase space elements are weighted
               by an exponential factor that reduces the probability of particles
Appendix B




               being found in higher energy spaces. The factor is
                  e - p2/2mkT = e - E / kT, today known as the “Boltzmann factor,”
               though it was first found by Maxwell.
                  E is the particle energy, p is the particle momentum, T is the
               absolute temperature (in degrees Kelvin), e is the base of natu-
               ral logarithms, and k is Boltzmann’s constant (so named by Max
               Planck). As E increases, the probability of finding particles with
               that energy decreases exponentially. But as the temperature T
               rises, the probability of finding particles with any given energy
               E increases.
                                            Entropy and Second Law                        347


   With the hindsight of quantum physics, we can envision the dis-
tribution of particles as the integer number (“occupation number”)
of particles in the smallest possible volumes of this 6-dimensional
“phase space” allowed by quantum mechanics. These have the
dimensions of h3, where h is Planck’s constant. h has the dimensions
of action (momentum times position). It’s called the “quantum of
action.”
   This minimum phase space volume of h3 can be understood as
the result of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle for each dimension,
Δp Δx = h. It is as if space itself is divided into these small “cells.” But
space is continuous, like time. Space and time are abstract tools for
assigning numbers to particle properties like location and motion.
The minimum volume h3 corresponds to locations and momenta
where there is a non-zero probability of finding a discrete particle.
   Although classical statistical mechanics did not include these
quantum volumes, Boltzmann did divide phase space into discrete
“coarse-grained” volumes for calculation purposes. This important
new insight of classical statistical mechanics was accepting the rad-
ical idea of the ancient Greeks Democritus and Leucippus that
matter comes in indivisible discrete discontinuous lumps.




                                                                                            Appendix B




  Figure 30-6. The number of particles with a given velocity at different temperatures.
         348       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Maxwell not only accepted the idea of atoms and molecules, he
               deduced their distribution among different velocities,
                                                  2
                 N(v) = (2πmkT)-3/2 4πv2 e-mv /2kT
                  When heat is added and the temperature rises, the average veloc-
               ity gets higher and there are fewer particles with low velocities,
               since the total number of molecules is a constant. Note that it was
               Maxwell who first found the exponential decay at higher energies
                   2
               e-mv /2kT, now called the “Boltzmann factor.”
                  Maxwell did not know about the future Boltzmann’s constant k
               and its relationship to temperature, but he knew that the exponen-
               tial term is a measure of the average velocity squared, and so of the
               average energy (mv2/2).
                  The Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution has two distinct
               regions which were critically important in Max Planck’s attempt
               to discover the distribution of electromagnetic radiation. For very
               low energies, the number rises as the square of the velocity. It turns
               around at a maximum near the average velocity. It then declines
               slowly like the long exponential tail of the normal distribution of
               errors because of the Boltzmann factor.
                 Boltzmann explained that probabilities can give definite results
               because of the large number of particles in a gas, but that the use of
               probabilities does not imply any uncertainty. He wrote:
                  The mechanical theory of heat assumes that the molecules of a gas are
                  not at rest, but rather are in the liveliest motion. Hence, even though
Appendix B




                  the body does not change its state, its individual molecules are always
                  changing their states of motion, and the various molecules take up many
                  different positions with respect to each other. The fact that we neverthe-
                  less observe completely definite laws of behaviour of warm bodies is to
                  be attributed to the circumstance that the most random events, when
                  they occur in the same proportions, give the same average value. For the
                  molecules of the body are indeed so numerous, and their motion is so
                  rapid, that we can perceive nothing more than average values.
                   Boltzmann refers One might compare the regularity of these aver-
                   to the social         age values with the amazing constancy of the
                                         average numbers provided by statistics, which are
                   statistics of Buckle
                                         also derived from processes each of which is
                   and Quételet          determined by a completely unpredictable inter-
                                         Entropy and Second Law                   349

    action with many other factors. The molecules are likewise just so many
    individuals having the most varied states of motion, and it is only
    because the number of them that have, on the average, a particular state
    of motion is constant, that the properties of the gas remain unchanged.
    The determination of average values is the task of probability theory.
    Hence, the problems of the mechanical theory of heat are also problems
    of probability theory.
    It would, however, be erroneous to believe that the mechanical theory of
    heat is therefore afflicted with some uncertainty because the principles
    of probability theory are used. One must not confuse an incompletely
    known law, whose validity is therefore in doubt,             In the 1870’s,
    with a completely known law of the calculus of Boltzmann clearly
    probabilities; the latter, like the result of any other   saw probability
    calculus, is a necessary consequence of definite
    premises, and is confirmed, insofar as these are cor-       as completely
    rect, by experiment, provided sufficiently many             deterministic.
    observations have been made, which is always the case in the mechani-
    cal theory of heat because of the enormous number of molecules
    involved.2
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
   Beyond his ability to visualize the above “liveliest states of motion”
for atoms, Boltzmann’s greatest work was his attempt to prove the
second law of thermodynamics. The second law says that isolated
systems always approach thermal equilibrium. Entropy or disor-
der always increases. Boltzmann showed that if the velocities of gas
molecules were initially not in the Maxwell distribution above, they
would always approach that distribution, and do it rapidly at stan-
dard temperatures and pressures (as we all know from experience).
  Boltzmann then developed a mathematical expression for entropy
                                                                                    Appendix B
(he called it H), the quantity in classical thermodynamics that is a
maximum for systems in thermal equilibrium.
   At first Boltzmann tried to do this with the dynamical theories
of classical mechanics. The particles in his system would move
around in phase space according to deterministic Newtonian laws.
They collide with one another as hard spheres (elastic collisions). He
included only two-particle collisions, assuming three-particle colli-
sions are rare. As it turns out, three-particle collisions are essential
for proving Boltzmann’s insights, but calculations are difficult.
  2     “Further Studies on the Thermal Equilibrium of Gas Molecules,”
  Vienna Academy of Sciences, 1872
         350         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  But Boltzmann’s mentor, Josef Loschmidt, criticized the results.
               Any dynamical system, he said, would move in reverse if all the par-
               ticles could have their velocities reversed. Apart from the practical
               impossibility of doing this, Loschmidt had shown that systems could
               exist for which the entropy should decrease instead of increasing.
               This is called Loschmidt’s Reversibility Objection, or the problem of
               microscopic reversibility.3
                  Loschmidt’s criticism forced Boltzmann to reformulate his proof
               of the second law with purely statistical considerations based on
               probability theory.
                  He looked at all the possible distributions for particles in phase
               space consistent with a given total energy. Since phase space is
               continuous, there is an infinity of positions for every particle. So
               Boltzmann started by limiting possible energy values to discrete
               amounts ε, 2ε, 3ε, etc. He thought he would eventually let ε go to
               zero, but his discrete “coarse-graining” gets him much closer to
               modern quantum physics. He replaced all his integrals by discrete
               sums (something the “founders of quantum mechanics” in the nine-
               teen-twenties would do).
                 Boltzmann then found the following expression that when
               summed over all the possible discrete energy states has the desired
               property of irreversible statistical increase,
                 Σ f(E) log f(E), where f (E) is the fraction of states with energy E.
                 In 1948, Claude Shannon found a similar expression to describe
Appendix B




               the amount of information, Σi pi log pi , thus connecting his commu-
               nication of information to Boltzmann’s entropy
                 Today scientists identity Boltzmann’s expression with the ther-
               modynamic entropy S, defined as the change of heat Q added to a
               system, divided by the temperature T,
                 dS = dQ/T.
                 3     See chapter 25 on irreversibility.
                                         Entropy and Second Law              351

   In terms of a sum over possible states, S is now written as the
logarithm of the total number of possible states W multiplied by
Boltzmann’s constant,
  S = k log W.
   Boltzmann was discouraged to find that a group of scientists, who
still hoped to deny the existence of atoms, continued to criticize his
“H-Theorem.” They included Henri Poincaré, an expert on the
three-body problem, Max Planck, who himself hoped to prove
the second law is not statistical but absolute, and a young student of
Planck’s named Ernst Zermelo who was an extraordinary math-
ematician, later the founder of axiomatic set theory.
   Poincaré’s work on the three-body problem suggested that,
given enough time, a bounded world, governed only by the laws of
mechanics, will always pass through a state very close to its initial
state. Zermelo accepted Boltzmann’s claim that a system will most
likely be found in a macrostate with the largest number of micro-
states, but he argued that given enough time it would return to a
less probable state. Boltzmann’s H-Theorem of perpetual increase
of entropy would therefore be incorrect sometime in the long run.
   Information physics has shown that, when quantum physics and
the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter are taken
into account, Loschmidt’s reversibility objection and Zermelo’s
recurrence objection fail to prevent entropy from increasing indefi-
nitely in our open universe.4
                                                                               Appendix B
   Unfortunately for Boltzmann, he died just before the significance
of radiation and the quantum were appreciated, and just as Ein-
stein proved the existence of his atoms. And ironically, it was Max
Planck, Zermelo’s mentor and one of those strongly opposing both
Boltzmann’s ideas of atoms and his use of statistics, who was to cor-
rectly guess the distribution law for electromagnetic radiation.
  Adding to the injustice, to develop his radiation law, Planck used
Boltzmann’s own statistical ideas, his assumption about discrete
  4    See chapter 25 on irreversibility and 26 on the recurrence problem.
         352         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               energies, coarse graining, and his ideas about entropy. The radia-
               tion distribution has almost exactly the same shape as the Maxwell-
               Boltzmann distribution for particle velocities. You can see the initial
               rise as the square of the radiation frequency ν, and after the maxi-
               mum the decline according to the Boltzmann factor e - hν / kT, where
               the energy E = hν is Planck’s new constant h times the radiation
               frequency. The reason for the similarity is profound, electromag-
               netic radiation - light is also made of particles, as Einstein brilliantly
               hypothesized in 1905.
                  B (ν) = 8πhν3/ c3 (ehν/kT -1)-1
                  Figure 30-5 shows the number of photons with a given frequεncy
               at different temperatures. When heat is added and the temperature
               rises, the average energy gets higher at all frequencies. The frequency
               at which energy is a maximum moves to higher frequencies. Unlike
               the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution above (Figure 30-4), where
               the total number of molecules is a constant, additional heat shows
               up as more photons at all frequencies. The number of photons is not
               conserved. So the area under the radiation curve grows with tem-
               perature, where the area under the particles curve is a constant.
Appendix B




                   Figure 30-7. Planck’s radiation distribution law is often presented as a function of wave-
               length rather than frequency, but this masks the similarity with the Maxwell-Boltzmann
               distribution of particles.
                                     Entropy and Second Law                  353

   Compounding the irony and injustice for Boltzmann still further,
Planck, who was long the opponent of discrete particles and statisti-
cal mechanics, used Boltzmann’s assumption that energies come in
discrete amounts, ε, 2ε, 3ε, etc. Planck called them quanta of energy
hν, 2hν, 3hν, proportional to frequency ν, where h is a new constant,
now named for Planck. He thereby named and launched the twen-
tieth-century development of quantum mechanics, without really
understanding the full implications of quantizing the energy. Planck
thought quantization was just a mathematical trick to get the right
formula for the blackbody radiation law.
   Albert Einstein said that “the formal similarity between the curve
of the chromatic distribution of thermal radiation and the Max-
wellian distribution law of velocities for gas particles is so striking
that it could not have been hidden for long.” But for over twenty
years few others than Einstein saw so clearly the implication that
light itself is a localizable quantized discrete particle just as any par-
ticle of matter! Planck refused to believe this for many years.
  So did Niels Bohr, despite his famous 1913 work that quantized
the energy levels for electrons in his Bohr model of the atom.
   Bohr postulated two things, 1) that the energy levels in the atom
are discrete and 2) that when an electron jumps between levels it
emits or absorbs energy E = hν, where the radiated energy E is the
difference between the two energy levels in the atom, E = En - Em.
   After independently developing the theory of statistical mechan-
ics in 1902-1904, extending it well beyond Boltzmann, Einstein
                                                                               Appendix B
hypothesized in 1905 that light comes in bundles of localized energy
that he called light quanta (now known as photons). Although it is
hard to believe, Bohr denied the existence of discrete photons well
into the nineteen-twenties, although today’s textbooks teach that
quantum jumps in the Bohr atom emit or absorb photons (a grave
this case an injustice to Einstein. Bohr insisted until the middle
1920’s that the radiation in his discrete quantum jumps is a continu-
ous wave. He was most reluctant to accept Einstein’s work, to depart
from Maxwell’s classical laws of electromagnetism.
         354         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Einstein had told friends that his hypothesis of light quanta was
               more revolutionary than his theory of special relativity published
               the same year. It was Einstein, not Planck or Bohr or Heisenberg,
               who should be recognized as the father of quantum theory. He first
               saw mysterious aspects of quantum physics like wave-particle dual-
               ity, nonlocality, entanglement, and the ontological nature of chance,
               perhaps more deeply than any other physicist has ever seen them.
                 Einstein famously abhorred chance (“God does not play dice”),
               but he did not hesitate to tell other physicists that chance seems to
               be an unavoidable part of quantum theory.
               Entropy Flows in the Universe
                 Creation of information structures means that in parts of the
               universe the local entropy is actually going down. Creation of a
               low entropy system is always accompanied by transfer of positive
               entropy away from the local structures to distant parts of the uni-
               verse, into the night sky for example.
                  My Harvard colleague Eric Chaisson studied energy rather
               than entropy. He saw energy consumption or production per gram
               a better measure of complexity in cosmic evolution. He wrote,
                     When examined on a system-by-system basis, information content can
                     be a slippery concept full of dubious semantics, ambivalent connota-
                     tions, and subjective interpretations. Especially tricky and controversial
                     is meaningful information, the value of information...The conceptual
                     idea of information has been useful, qualitatively and heuristically, as
                     an aid to appreciate the growth of order and structure in the Universe,
Appendix B




                     but this term is too vague and subjective to use in quantifying a specific,
                     empirical metric describing a whole range of real-world systems. 5
                  But information philosophy sees matter and energy as conserved
               quantities that need information concepts to explain how they do
               what they do. As the universe expands, both positive and nega-
               tive entropy are generated.6 The normal thermodynamic entropy is
               known as the Boltzmann Entropy. The negative entropy, often called
               the Shannon Entropy, is a measure of the information content in the
               open and evolving universe.
                 5       Cosmic Evolution: The Rise of Complexity in Nature, p.132.
                 6       As shown by our common mentor at Harvard, David Layzer.
                                          Entropy and Second Law        355




  Figure 30-8. David Layzer’s growth of information in the universe

   “Negative entropy” is simply the difference between the maxi-
mum possible entropy (where all the particles in a physical system
would be in a maximum state of disorder, there would be no visible
structure) and the actual entropy.
   For matter in thermodynamic equilibrium, there is only motion
of the microscopic constituent particles (“the motion we call heat”).
The existence of macroscopic structures, such as the stars and plan-      Appendix B
ets, and their motions, is a departure from thermodynamic equilib-
rium. And that departure we call the “negative entropy.”
   The second law of thermodynamics says that the entropy (or dis-
order) of a closed physical system increases until it reaches a maxi-
mum, the state of thermodynamic equilibrium. It requires that the
entropy of the universe is now and has always been increasing. This
established fact of increasing entropy led many scientists and phi-
losophers to assume that the universe we have is “running down” to
a “heat death.” They think that means the universe began in a very
high state of information, since the second law requires that any
         356       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               organization or order is susceptible to decay. The information that
               remains today, in their view, has always been here.
                  But Harvard cosmologist David Layzer showed that the uni-
               verse is not a closed system (see Figure 30-4). It is in a dynamic
               state of expansion that is moving away from thermodynamic equi-
               librium faster than entropic processes can keep up. The maximum
               possible entropy is increasing much faster than the actual increase
               in entropy. The difference between the maximum possible entropy
               and the actual entropy is potential information.
               Positive and Negative Flows
                  There are two information/entropy flows. In any process, the pos-
               itive entropy increase is always at least equal to, and generally orders
               of magnitude larger than, the negative entropy in any created infor-
               mation structures, to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics.




                 Figure 30-9. Information flows into Boltzmann and Shannon Entropy.
Appendix B




                  Material particles are the first information structures to form in
               the universe from the primordial quarks and electrons. They are
               baryons, the protons and neutrons of atomic nuclei, which com-
               bine with electrons to form atoms and eventually molecules, when
               the temperature is low enough. After hundreds of millions of years,
               these particles are attracted by the force of gravitation to form the
               gigantic information structures of the galaxies, stars, and planets.
                                          Entropy and Second Law        357




  Figure 30-10. Cosmological information flows.

   Microscopic quantum mechanical particles and huge self-gravi-
tating systems are stable and have extremely long lifetimes, thanks
in large part to quantum stability.
  Stars are another source of radiation, after the original Big Bang
cosmic source, which has cooled down to 3 degrees Kelvin (3K) and
shines as the cosmic microwave background radiation.




                                                                          Appendix B


  Figure 30-11. Sun to Earth information flow.

   Our solar radiation has a high color temperature (5000K) and a
low energy-content temperature (273K). It is out of equilibrium and
it is the source of all the information-generating negative entropy
that drives biological evolution on the Earth. Note that the fraction
of the light falling on Earth is less than a billionth of that which
passes by and is lost in space.
         358         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                 A tiny fraction of the solar energy falling on the earth gets con-
               verted into the information structures of plants and animals. Most
               solar energy is radiated away as waste energy to the night sky.
Appendix B




                 Figure 30-12. Information flows into life.

                  Every biological structure is a quantum mechanical structure.
               DNA has maintained its stable information structure over billions
               of years in the constant presence of chaos and noise.
                  The extraordinarily stable information content of a human being,
               from the DNA in every cell to the memories in the Experience
               Recorder and Reproducer,7 survives many changes in the material
               content of the body during a person’s lifetime. Only with death does
               the mental information (spirit, soul) dissipate - unless it is saved
               somewhere. 8
                 7     See appendix E for the ERR
                 8     See chapter 2 for identity over time.
                                          Entropy and Second Law                359




  Figure 30-13. Information flows in a human being.

   The total mental information in a living human is orders of
magnitude less than the information content and information pro-
cessing rate of the body. But the information structures created by
humans outside the body, in the form of external knowledge like
this book, and the enormous collection of human artifacts, rival the
total biological information content of one individual human.
   Information increases and we are co-creators of the universe
Creation of information structures means that today there is more
information in the universe than at any earlier time. This fact of
increasing information fits well with an undetermined universe that
is still creating itself. In this universe, stars are still forming, biologi-
cal systems are creating new species, and intelligent human beings
are co-creators of the world.
   All this creation is the result of the two-step core process that
                                                                                  Appendix B
creates all information.9 It is a combination of two distinct physical
processes, one quantum mechanical, the other thermodynamic.
   Understanding this core creative process is as close as we are
likely to come to understanding the reality behind the popular idea
of an anthropomorphic creator of the universe, a still-present divine
providence, the cosmic source of everything good and evil.
  Information philosophy hopes to replace beliefs with knowledge.
The “miracle of creation” is happening now, in the universe and in
you and by you.
  9     See appendix F on the cosmic creation process.
         360   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                hys i c s
                         t u m P
                   Qu a n
Appendix C




                                                              This chapter on the web
                                               informationphilosopher.com/quantum/
                                            Quantum Physics            361


Quantum Physics
   In the classical Newtonian picture of matter in motion, there is
only one possible future, determined completely by the distribu-
tion and motion of matter at any moment. The future is certain
and “causally closed.” Complete information about the future
exists today, even if unknowable.
   In the quantum picture, there are many possible futures. Quan-
tum mechanics lets us exactly calculate the probability for the dif-
ferent futures, but it cannot tell us the actual future that will be
realized. The actual future is uncertain. New information about
the future is being created every day and we are co-creators of that
information. The future is open.
  It is important to understand that new information generated
by quantum mechanics is not necessarily permanent. New infor-
mation must be stably recorded and protected from erasure by the
destructive forces of entropy.
  As we saw in appendix B, this requires that more positive
entropy must be transferred away from the information structure
than its new negative entropy, to satisfy the second law.
   Max Planck derived the distribution of radiation at different
frequencies (or wavelengths) just as Maxwell and Boltzmann had
derived the distribution of velocities (or energies) of the gas par-
ticles.1 Both curves have a power law increase on one side up to a
maximum and an exponential decrease down the other side from
the maximum (the “Boltzmann factor” of e - E / kT)). This is because
                                                                         Appendix C

both curves describe particles, one matter, the other light.
   Planck’s assumption that the energy of the oscillators is “quan-
tized” was the beginning of quantum mechanics, but he did not
actually believe that radiation came in the form of discrete par-
ticles, as we do today. It was Albert Einstein in 1905 who made
the hypothesis that light comes in highly localized discrete par-
ticles, subsequently called “photons.” Later, Einstein showed that
each photon, although massless, must have an associated momen-
tum p = hν/c = h/ λ, another fundamental connection between
matter and light deriving from his most famous equation, E = mc2.
  1    See Figure 30-2 in appendix B.
         362     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  But Einstein was puzzled and deeply concerned about the con-
               nection between the wave properties of light and his new insight
               that light consists of particles. In classical electrodynamics, elec-
               tromagnetic radiation (light, radio) is well known to have wave
               properties, such as interference. When the crest of one wave meets
               the trough of another, the two waves cancel one another. How, he
               wondered, could discrete particles show interference effects?
                  Like water surface waves, light goes off in all directions as out-
               going spherical waves. But if the energy of light fills a large spheri-
               cal volume, Einstein wondered, how does the energy get itself col-
               lected together instantaneously to be absorbed by a single electron
               in a particular atom? Does the widely distributed energy move
               faster than the speed of light when it collapses to a single point?
                  In 1905, Einstein published his special theory of relativity
               denying that possibility. That same year he proved the existence
               of Boltzmann’s atoms with his explanation that the Brownian
               motions of visible particles in a liquid are caused by invisible
               atoms or molecules. His concerns about light waves versus light
               particles also appeared the same year, in his paper on the photo-
               electric effect (for which he was awarded the Nobel prize).
                  When ultraviolet light shines on a metal surface and ejects a
               single electron from one of the atoms in that metal, Einstein
               showed that some energy in the light beam acts like a single par-
               ticle of light getting absorbed by a single ejected electron.
                  Einstein assumed there is
Appendix C




               a “work function” or poten-
               tial energy P that must be
               overcome to release an elec-
               tron and that the energy of
               a photon must exceed that
               energy. Any excess energy
               Ee should show up as kinetic         Figure 31-1. The photoelectric effect
               energy in the liberated elec-
               tron.
                 Ee = hν - P.
                                                     Quantum Physics                  363

   Some part of the incoming photon energy, P, is used to release
the electron. Einstein predicted the other part would show a linear
relationship between the kinetic energy Ee of the electron and the
frequency ν. It was over ten years before Einstein’s predictions
were experimentally confirmed.




   Figure 31-2. Millikan confirmed Einstein’s relation between the photon energy hν
and the energy of the ejected electron.
  Turning up the intensity (more photons) of light with less
energy (longer wavelengths) cannot eject an electron. And once
the light has high enough frequency (energy), it does not matter
how low the intensity of the light, electrons continue to be ejected.
  It is thus the energy of a single quantum of light that becomes
energy in a single electron. At this moment in 1905, Einstein was
                                                                                        Appendix C

grappling with two problems that the “founders” of quantum
mechanics would themselves not see for another twenty years.
  The first problem is the apparent “collapse” of the light wave.
The second is called “nonlocal” behavior. Einstein’s great field
theories like gravitation require what he called “local reality.”
   If we can see these problems through Einstein’s young eyes,
which many great quantum physicists could not, we may also see
the most plausible solutions to those two problems and perhaps
more. A third Einstein insight will help us understand “wave-par-
ticle duality.” A fourth will clarify “entanglement.”
         364       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  In 1913, Niels Bohr developed his radical model of the atom
               incorporating Planck’s quantum conditions. Where classical elec-
               trodynamic theory says that electrons orbiting a central nucleus
               would continuously radiate energy at the orbital frequency (and the
               loss of energy would cause the electron to spiral in to the nucleus),
               Bohr postulated the atom has “stationary states” and that transitions
               (discontinuous “quantum jumps”) between those states result in the
               emission or absorption of energy with a frequency ν, according to
               Planck’s relation hν = Em - En , where Em and En are the energies of
               the two states.
                 Einstein had confirmed the relation E = hν in his photoelectric
               paper, but Bohr did not mention it. Bohr’s theory agreed perfectly
               with the frequencies of known spectral lines in the hydrogen atom
               and predicted many more lines that were subsequently found.
                 Einstein called Bohr’s theory an “enormous achievement” and
               “one of the greatest discoveries,” but Bohr did not accept Einstein’s
               hypothesis of discrete light particles. The quantum jumps are dis-
               continuous, but the emitted radiation is continuous, said Bohr.
                  Bohr was asked in 1913 by Lord Rutherford how we know to
               which other state a quantum jump will go. He replied that we do
               not know. A few years later, Einstein calculated the probabilities for
               electronic transitions between Bohr’s energy levels. He confirmed
               that it quantum jumps are a matter of chance, just as we cannot
               predict the time or direction of a particle ejected from a decaying
               radioactive nucleus. Quantum theory is a statistical theory.
Appendix C




                 In the 1920’s, Louis de Broglie argued that if photons, with
               their known wavelike properties, could be described as particles,
               perhaps particles like electrons might show wavelike properties
               with a wavelength λ inversely proportional to their momentum p =
               mev. De Broglie’s formula for a particle’s wavelength, λ = h/p, is the
               same as Einstein’s formula for the momentum of a photon, p = hν/c,
               because λν = c.
                 Experiments confirmed de Broglie’s assumption and led Erwin
               Schrödinger to derive a “wave equation” to describe the motion of
                                             Quantum Physics              365

de Broglie’s waves. For elementary particles, Schrödinger’s quantum
equation replaces the classical Newton equations of motion.
   Note that Schrödinger’s equation describes the motion of only
the wave aspect, not the particle aspect, and so it includes interfer-
ence effects in the waves. Note also that it is fully deterministic and
continuous, just like Newton’s equations. Schrödinger thought par-
ticles are not real, but could be explained as point-like singularities
in his continuous waves.
  There was some hope, particularly by Einstein, that Schrödinger’s
continuous equation would return determinism to physics, elimi-
nating chance. It was not to be.
   Schrödinger attempted to interpret his “wave function” for the
electron as a probability density for electrical charge, but charge
density would be positive everywhere and thus unable to interfere
with itself. Moreover, fractions of the electron spread out in the
wave are never found. Fractions of the energy would have different
(lower) energies and frequencies.
  Long before the work of de Broglie and Schrödinger, Einstein
had suggested that light waves might be thought of as a “ghost field”
(Gespensterfeld) or a “leading field (Führungsfeld) that guides the
motion of the light particles. Einstein suggested that waves indicate
the probable locations of his light quanta, although few physicists
accepted his radical hypothesis.
   The information about probabilities and possibilities in the wave
function is immaterial, but that abstract information has real causal
powers. The wave’s interference with itself predicts null points where
                                                                            Appendix C

no particles should be found. And experiments confirm that no par-
ticles are found there. Information philosophy views information as
a kind of modern “spirit.”
   Max Born applied Einstein’s suggestion about light to matter. He
shocked the world of physics by suggesting that the absolute values
of the square of the wave function ψ (|ψ|2) can be interpreted as the
probability of finding an electron in various position and momentum
states - if a measurement is made. This allows the probability ampli-
tude ψ to interfere with itself, producing non-intuitive phenomena
         366        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               such as the two-slit experiment. It is an immaterial wave of informa-
               tion about possible locations that passes through both slits.
                  Despite the immaterial probability amplitude going through two
               slits and interfering with itself, experimenters never find parts of
               electrons. They are always found whole.
                  Born’s statistical interpretation of the wave function (“Born rule”)
               says that the motion of the immaterial probabilities wave function
               is continuous and deterministic, but the motion of the material par-
               ticles themselves is discontinuous and probabilistic.
                 Einstein and Schrödinger could never accept this.
                  Interpreters of quantum mechanics have found it hard to recon-
               cile this combination of determinism and indeterminism, of con-
               tinuous wavelike possibilities and discontinuous particle-like actu-
               alizations. The information interpretation of quantum mechanics
               attempts that reconciliation. (See chapter 16.)
                  Note the connection between alternative possibilities for action
               in the mind and adequately determined actions. (Chapter 4.)
               Basic Quantum Mechanics
                  The basic ideas of quantum mechanics are hopelessly non-intui-
               tive. They describe quantum phenomena that are simply impossible
               to imagine in classical physics. This does not mean that they cannot
               be visualized, by which we mean illustrated, even animated with
               tools now available for web pages, which are much more powerful
               than images on a static printed page.
Appendix C




                  We hope that watching the animations will help you to develop
               new intuitions about the way the quantum world works. The clas-
               sical world we experience is just the quantum world as seen at our
               macroscopic level, where it is averaged over a vast number of inde-
               terministic quantum events to produce an adequately (or statisti-
               cally) determined world.
                  We present the fundamental ideas of quantum mechanics fol-
               lowing two great mathematical physicists, Paul Dirac and John
               von Neumann. Von Neumann proposed that quantum mechan-
               ics consists of just two basic processes. Dirac said the basics can be
                                                        Quantum Physics    367

summarized in just three definitions, a principle of superposition, an
axiom of measurement, and a projection postulate. Let’s start with
Dirac’s three definitions, then see how they are realized in von Neu-
mann’s processes.
   Finally, we present Dirac’s application of the three definitions in
the very simple case of a quantum system in a superposition of just
two quantum states. This example of three polarizers also demon-
strates von Neumann’s two processes.
   Almost all the conflicting interpretations of quantum mechanics
today depend on either denying one or more of these basic elements
of quantum mechanics or extending them to situations where they
do not apply.
   These three definitions and two processes are used throughout
the physics chapters in support of the proposed solutions to great
problems in physics.
The Principle of Superposition
   The fundamental equation of motion in quantum mechanics is
Schrödinger’s famous wave equation that describes the evolution in
time of his wave function ψ,
  ih/2π δψ/δt = Hψ.
   For a single particle in idealized complete isolation, and for a Ham-
iltonian H that does not involve magnetic fields, the Schrödinger
equation is a unitary transformation that is time-reversible.2
   Max Born interpreted the square of the absolute value of
                                                                             Appendix C

Schrödinger’s wave function as providing the probability of finding
a quantum system in a certain state ψn (the “Born rule”).
   The quantum (discrete) nature of physical systems results from
there generally being a large number of solutions ψn(called eigen-
functions) of the Schrödinger equation in its time-independent
form, with energy eigenvalues En.
  Hψn = Enψn,

  2     See the principle of microscopic reversibility in chapter 24.
         368       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  The discrete energy eigenvalues En limit interactions (for exam-
               ple, with photons) to the energy differences En - Em, as assumed by
               Bohr. Eigenfunctions ψn are orthogonal to one another,
                 < ψn | ψm > = δnm,
                  where δnm is the Dirac delta-function, equal to 1 when n = m, and
               0 otherwise. The sum of the diagonal terms in the matrix < ψn | ψm >,
               when n = m, must be normalized to 1 to be meaningful as Born rule
               probabilities.
                 Σ Pn = Σ < ψn | ψn >2 = 1.
                  The off-diagonal terms in the matrix, < ψn | ψm >, are interpre-
               table as interference terms. When the matrix is used to calculate
               the expectation values of some quantum mechanical operator O,
               the off-diagonal terms < ψn | O | ψm > are interpretable as transition
               probabilities - the likelihood that the operator O will induce a tran-
               sition from state ψn to ψm.
                  The Schrödinger equation is a linear equation. It has no quadratic
               or higher power terms, and this introduces a profound - and for
               many scientists and philosophers a disturbing - feature of quantum
               mechanics, one that is impossible in classical physics. This is the
               principle of superposition of quantum states. If ψa and ψb are both
               solutions of the equation, then an arbitrary linear combination of
               these, ψ = caψa + cbψb, with complex coefficients ca and cb, is also a
               solution.
                  Together with Born’s statistical interpretation of the wave func-
               tion (remember this was Einstein’s original idea), the principle of
Appendix C




               superposition accounts for the major mysteries of quantum theory,
               some of which we hope to resolve, or at least reduce, with an objec-
               tive (observer-independent) explanation of information creation
               during quantum processes, which can often be interpreted as mea-
               surements.
               The Axiom of Measurement
                 The axiom of measurement depends on the idea of “observables,”
               physical quantities that can be measured in experiments. A physical
               observable is represented as a Hermitean operator A that is self-
               adjoint (equal to its complex conjugate, A* = A).
                                             Quantum Physics              369

   The diagonal elements < ψn | A | ψn > of the operator’s matrix
are interpreted as giving the expectation value for An (when we
make a measurement). The off-diagonal n, m elements describe the
uniquely quantum property of interference between wave functions
and provide a measure of the probabilities for transitions between
states n and m.
   It is these intrinsic quantum probabilities that provide the ulti-
mate source of indeterminism, and consequently of irreducible
irreversibility (see chapter 25). The axiom of measurement is then
that a large number of measurements of the observable A, known to
have eigenvalues An, will result in the number of measurements with
value An being proportional to the probability of finding the system
in eigenstate ψn with eigenvalue An.
The Projection Postulate
   The third novel idea of quantum theory is often considered the
most radical. It has certainly produced some of the most radical
ideas ever to appear in physics, in attempts to deny it (as the deco-
herence program appears to do, as do also Everett relative-state
interpretations, many worlds theories, and Bohm-de Broglie hidden
variables). The projection postulate is actually very simple, and argu-
ably intuitive as well. It says that when a measurement is made, the
system of interest will be found in one of the possible eigenstates
ψn of the measured observable, with the eigenvalue An.
   We have several possible alternatives for eigenvalues An. Measure-
ment simply makes one of these eigenvalues actual, and it does so,
                                                                            Appendix C

said Max Born, in proportion to the absolute square of the probabil-
ity amplitude wave function |ψn |2. In this way, ontological chance
enters physics, and it is partly this fact of quantum randomness
that bothered Einstein (“God does not play dice”) and Schrödinger
(whose equation of motion is deterministic).
  When Einstein derived the expressions for the probabilities of
emission and absorption of photons in 1916, he lamented that the
theory seemed to indicate that the direction of an emitted photon
was a matter of pure chance (Zufall), and that the time of emission
was also statistical and random, just as Ernst Rutherford had
         370         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               found for the time of decay of a radioactive nucleus. Einstein called
               it a “weakness in the theory.”
                 Most “interpreters” of quantum mechanics do not accept this
               postulate, with its idea of a “collapse.” 3
                 Von Neumann’s Two Processes
                  In 1932, John von Neumann explained that two fundamentally
               different processes are going on in quantum mechanics.
                  Process 1: A non-causal process, in which a measured electron
               winds up randomly in one of the possible physical states (eigen-
               states) of the measuring apparatus plus electron.
                 The probability for each eigenstate is given by the square of the
               coefficients cn of the expansion of the original system state (wave
               function ψ) in a set of wave functions φn that represent the eigen-
               functions of the measuring apparatus plus electron.
                 ψ = Σn cn | φn >
                 cn = < φn | ψ >
                  Process 1 corresponds exactly to Dirac’s projection postulate.
               It also describes the “collapse” of the wave function. It introduces
               indeterminism and ontological chance.
                  This is as close as we get to a description of the discontinuous
               motion of the particle aspect of a quantum system. According to von
               Neumann, the particle simply “shows up” somewhere as a result of
               a measurement. The information interpretation of quantum physics
               says it can only “show up” if a new stable information structure is
Appendix C




               created that can be seen by an observer, after which it may constitute
               a measurement.
                  Paul Dirac explained process 1 with a very simple quantum
               system that has only two states, horizontal and vertical polariza-
               tion. We will describe it below.4 It exhibits properties of quantum
               mechanics that are impossible for a classical system.
                  Process 2: A causal process, in which the electron wave func-
               tion ψ evolves deterministically according to Schrödinger’s equa-
               tion of motion for the wavelike aspect. This evolution describes the
                 3     See chapter 19.
                 4     See p.374.
                                                        Quantum Physics               371

continuous motion of the probability amplitude wave ψ between
discontinuous measurements,
  (ih/2π) ∂ψ/∂t = Hψ.
  Von Neumann claimed there is another major difference between
these two processes. He said Process 1 is thermodynamically irre-
versible. (See chapter 24.) Process 2 is reversible. This confirms the
fundamental connection between quantum mechanics and thermo-
dynamics that is explainable by the information interpretation of
quantum physics.
   Information physics establishes that an experiment may create
irreversible new information. If it does not, no observation and thus
no measurement is possible. Most processes in the universe that
create new information are never observed. Process 2 is in principle
reversible, in practice maybe not. If so, it preserves information. The
figure is an example of a reversible process.
Dirac’s Three Polarizers
   In his 1930 textbook The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Dirac
introduced the uniquely quantum concepts of superposition, mea-
surement, projection/collapse, and indeterminacy using polarized
photons. Einstein said of Dirac,
      “Dirac, to whom, in my opinion, we owe the most perfect exposition,
      logically, of this [quantum] theory, rightly points out that it would prob-
      ably be difficult, for example, to give a theoretical description of a photon
      such as would give enough information to enable one to decide whether
      it will pass a polarizer placed (obliquely) in its way or not.”5
                                                                                        Appendix C
  Dirac’s example with an “oblique” polarizer suggests a very simple
and inexpensive experiment to demonstrate the superpositions of
quantum states, the projection or representation of a given state
vector in another basis set of vectors, the preparation of quantum
systems in states with known properties, and the measurement of
various properties.
   Any measuring apparatus is also a state preparation system. We
know that after a measurement of a photon which has shown it to
be in a state of vertical polarization, for example, a second mea-
surement with the same (vertical polarization detecting) capabil-
ity will show the photon to be in the same state with probability
unity. Quantum mechanics is not always uncertain. There is also no
  5       Ideas and Opinions, p.270
         372       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               uncertainty if we measure a vertically polarized photon with a hori-
               zontal polarization detector. There is zero probability of finding the
               vertically polarized photon in a horizontally polarized state.
                 Since any measurement increases the amount of information,
               there must be a compensating increase in entropy absorbed by or
               radiated away from the measuring apparatus.
                 The natural basis set of vectors is usually one whose eigenvalues
               are the observables of our measurement system. In Dirac’s bra and
               ket notation, the orthogonal basis vectors in our example are | v >,
               the photon in a vertically polarized state, and | h >, the photon in a
               horizontally polarized state. These two states are eigenstates of our
               measuring apparatus.
                  The interesting case to consider is a third measuring apparatus
               that prepares a photon in a diagonally polarized state 45° between
               | v > and | h >, the “oblique” polarizer.
                  Dirac tells us this diagonally polarized
               photon can be represented as a superposition
               of vertical and horizontal states, with complex
               number coefficients that represent “probabil-
               ity amplitudes,” as shown in equation 1.
                 | d > = ( 1/√2) | v > + ( 1/√2) | h >    (1)
                 Note that vector lengths are normalized to unity, and the sum of
               the squares of the probability amplitudes is also unity. This is the
               orthonormality condition needed to interpret the (squares of the)
               wave functions as probabilities, as proposed by Max Born, follow-
Appendix C




               ing Einstein’s idea that waves show the probable locations for light
               quanta.
                  When these complex number coefficients are squared (actually
               when they are multiplied by their complex conjugates to produce
               positive real numbers), the numbers represent the probabilities of
               finding the photon in one or the other state, should a measurement
               be made. Dirac’s bra vector < | is the complex conjugate of the cor-
               responding ket vector | >.
                                              Quantum Physics               373

   It is the probability amplitudes that interfere in the two-slit exper-
iment. To get the probabilities of finding a photon, we must square
the probability amplitudes. Actually we must calculate the expecta-
tion value of some operator that represents an observable. The prob-
ability P of finding the photon in state |ψ> at a position (in configu-
ration space) r is
  P(r) = < ψ | r | ψ >.
   No single experiment can convey all the wonder and non-intui-
tive character of quantum mechanics. But we believe Dirac’s simple
examples of polarized photons can teach us a lot. He thought that
his simple examples provide a good introduction to quantum phys-
ics and we agree.
   We use three squares of polarizing sheet material with white labels
A, B, and C to illustrate Dirac’s explanation of quantum superposi-
tion of states and the collapse of a mixture of states to a pure state
upon measurement or state preparation.
   Here are the three polarizing sheets.
They are a neutral gray color because they
lose half of the light coming though them.
The lost light is absorbed by the polarizer,
converted to heat, and this accounts for the
(Boltzmann) entropy gain required by our
new information (Shannon entropy) about
the exact polarization state of the transmit-
ted photons.
                                                                              Appendix C

  Here polarizers A and B are superimposed to show that the same
               amount of light comes through two polarizers, as
               long as the polarizing direction is the same. The
               first polarizer prepares the photon in a given state
               of polarization. The second is then certain to find it
               in the same state. Let’s say the direction of light
               polarization is vertical when the letters are upright.
         374        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   If one polarizer, say B, is turned 90°, its polariza-
               tion direction will be horizontal and if it is on top
               of vertical polarizer A, no light will pass through
               it, as we see in figure 3. We can still see half of the
               unpolarized light from letter A.
               The Wonder and Mystery of the Oblique Polarizer
                  As you would expect, any quantum mechanics experiment must
               contain an element of “Wow, that’s impossible!” or we are not get-
               ting to the non-intuitive and unique difference between quantum
               mechanics and the everyday classical mechanics. So let’s look at the
               amazing aspect of what Dirac is getting to, and then we will see how
               quantum mechanics explains it.




                  We turn the third polarizer C so its polarization is along the diag-
               onal. Dirac tells us that the wave function of light passing through
Appendix C




               this polarizer can be regarded as in a mixed state, a superposition of
               vertical and horizontal states. As Einstein agreed, the information
               as to the exact state in which the photon will be found following a
               measurement does not exist.
                  We can make a measurement that detects vertically polarized
               photons by holding up the vertical polarizer A in front of the oblique
               polarizer C. Either a photon comes through A or it does not. Simi-
               larly, we can hold up the horizontal polarizer B in front of C. If we
               see a photon, it is horizontally polarized.
                                             Quantum Physics               375


   From equation (1) we see that the probability of detecting a photon
diagonally polarized by C, if our measuring apparatus (polarizer B)
is measuring for horizontally polarized photons, is 1/2. Similarly,
if we were to measure for vertically polarized photons, we have the
same 50% chance of detecting a photon.
  Going back to polarizers A and B crossed at a 90° angle, we know
that no light comes through.
  And if we hold up polarizer C along the 45 degree diagonal
and place it in front of (or behind) the crossed polarizers, nothing
changes. Still no light is getting through.
   But here is the amazing, impossible part. If you insert polarizer
C between A and B at that 45 degree angle, some light now gets
through. Note that C is slipped between A (in the rear) and B (in
front).
  If B, crossed 90° with A, blocks all light, how can adding another
polarization filter add light? It is somewhat less light than through
C alone, and we shall see why.
The Quantum Physics Explanation
   Let’s start with the A polarizer in the back. It prepares the photons
in the vertical polarization state | v >. If we now had just polarizer
B, it would measure for horizontal photons. None through A are
horizontal, so no photons get through B.
  Measurements are von Neumann process 1.
  When we interpose C at the oblique angle, it measures for diago-
                                                                             Appendix C

nal photons. The vertically polarized photons coming through A
can be considered in a superposition of states at a 45 degree angle
and a -45 degree angle. Photons at -45 degrees are absorbed by C.
Those at +45 degrees pass through C.
   C makes a measurement of 45 degree photons. It can also be
viewed as a preparation of 45 degree photons. Only half the photons
come through polarizer C, but they have been prepared in a state of
diagonal polarization | d >.
         376         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  The original vertical photons coming through A had no chance of
               getting through B, but the diagonal photons passing through C (half
               the original photons) can now be regarded as in a linear superposi-
               tion of vertical and horizontal photons, and the horizontal photons
               can now pass through B. Those vertically polarized will get absorbed
               by B, as usual.
                  Recall from equation (1) that | d > is a superposition of the basis
               vectors | v > and | h >, with coefficients 1/√2, which when squared
               give us probabilities 1/2. Fifty percent of these photons emerging
               from C will pass though B. One quarter or 25% of the original A
               photons make it through.
                  This happens if we send just one photon through at a time, just as
               with the two-slit experiment. Just as we can not say that the photon
               passes through slit A or B (only probabilities are moving in von
               Neumann’s process 2), we cannot say that our photons are in one
               state or another. They are in the mysterious linear combination that
               can collapse instantaneously into one state when a measurement is
               made.
               Einstein and Quantum Physics
                  It was Albert Einstein in 1916 who first saw that quantum
               mechanics involves chance. Because he did not like chance
               (“God does not play dice” was his oft-repeated claim), he called
               it a “weakness in the theory.” But his insight into chance is much
               clearer than that of Werner Heisenberg and Max Born. Seeing
               chance through Einstein’s eyes may convince many philosophers
Appendix C




               and scientists who are now confused by disagreements between the
               various “interpretations” of quantum mechanics.6
                  Paradoxically, ironically perhaps, and even tragically, almost no
               scientists and philosophers recognize the full range of Einstein’s
               contributions to quantum mechanics, primarily because he
               disavowed his own quantum discoveries as contrary to his
               fundamental beliefs about the workings of the universe.
                  Besides quantizing light energy and seeing its interchangeability
               with matter, E = mc2, Einstein was the first scientist to see many
               of the most fundamental aspects of quantum physics - the quantal
               derivation of the blackbody radiation law, nonlocality and instanta-

                 6     informationphilosopher.com/introduction/physics/interpretations
                                             Quantum Physics               377

neous action-at-a-distance (1905), the internal structure of atoms
(1906), wave-particle duality and the “collapse” of the wave aspect
(1909), transition probabilities for emission and absorption pro-
cesses that introduce indeterminism whenever matter and radiation
interact, making quantum mechanics a statistical theory (1916-17),
the indistinguishability of elementary particles with their strange
quantum statistics (1925), and the nonseparability and entangle-
ment of interacting identical particles (1935).
   It took the physics community eighteen years to accept Einstein’s
light-quantum hypothesis. He saw wave-particle duality fifteen years
before deBroglie, Schrödinger, Heisenberg, and Bohr. He saw inde-
terminism a decade before the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. He
saw nonlocality as early as 1905, presenting it formally in 1927, but
was ignored. In the 1935 Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paper, he added
nonseparability, which was dubbed “entanglement” by Schrödinger.
   Information philosophy sees immaterial information as a kind of
modern “spirit.” Einstein himself described the wave as a “ghostly
field” (Gespensterfeld) and as a “guiding field” (Führungsfeld). This
idea was taken up later by Louis de Broglie as “pilot waves”
and by Erwin Schrödinger, who developed the linear equation
that describes how the probability wave function moves through
space deterministically. This restoration of some determinism was
a brief bright moment for Einstein. He saw a possible return to a
deterministic theory for quantum mechanics and his continuous
field theory. But it was not to be, despite the large number of present-
day physicists who are still pursuing Einstein’s and Schrödinger’s
                                                                             Appendix C

dreams, by denying indeterminism and “quantum jumping.”
  Einstein even made the original suggestion to Schrödinger
that a microscopic superposition might become a macroscopic
superposition, the idea that Schrödinger made famous as his cat
paradox.
   The problems raised by Einstein are usually presented as arising
after the “founders” of quantum mechanics and their Copenhagen
Interpretation in the late 1920’s. Modern attention to Einstein’s work
on quantum physics often starts with the EPR paper of 1935, when
his mysteries of nonlocality, nonseparability, and entanglement
were first being clearly understood by his opponents.
         378   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                             a n ce
                          Ch
Appendix D




                                                            This chapter on the web
                                                informationphilosopher.com/chance
                                                                    Chance      379


Chance
  Is chance ontological and real or epistemic and the result of
human ignorance. Information philosophy answers this question.
   For most of the history of philosophy, ontological chance has
been strictly denied. Leucippus (440 BCE) stated the first dogma
of determinism, an absolute necessity.
      “Nothing occurs by chance (maton), but there is a reason (logos) and
      necessity (ananke) for everything.”
  Chance is regarded as inconsistent with causal determinism
and with physical or mechanical determinism.
   The first thinker to suggest a physical explanation for chance in
the universe was Epicurus. Epicurus was influenced strongly by
Aristotle, who regarded chance as a fifth cause. Epicurus said
there must be cases in which the normally straight paths of atoms
in the universe occasionally bend a little and the atoms “swerve” to
prevent the universe and ourselves from being completely deter-
mined by the mechanical laws of Democritus.
  For Epicurus, the chance in his atomic swerve was simply a
means to deny the fatalistic future implied by determinism (and
necessity). As the Epicurean Roman Lucretius explained the
idea,
      “...if all motion is always one long chain, and new motion arises out
      of the old in order invariable, and if the first-beginnings do not make
      by swerving a beginning of motion such as to break the decrees of
      fate, that cause may not follow cause from infinity, whence comes this
      freedom in living creatures all over the earth.”1
   Epicurus did not say the swerve was directly involved in deci-
                                                                                  Appendix D



sions so as to make them random. His critics, ancient and modern,
have claimed mistakenly that Epicurus did assume “one swerve -
one decision.” Some recent philosophers call this the “traditional
interpretation” of Epicurean free will, an unfortunate error.
   On the contrary, following Aristotle, Epicurus thought
human agents have an autonomous ability to transcend the neces-
sity and chance of some events. He stated clearly that this special
ability makes us morally responsible for our actions.
  1       De Rerum Natura, Book 2, lines 251-256
         380     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Epicurus, again following Aristotle, finds a tertium quid,
               between and beyond the other two options, necessity (Democri-
               tus’ determinism) and chance (Epicurus’ swerve).
                 The tertium quid is agent autonomy. Epicurus wrote:
                     “...some things happen of necessity (ἀνάγκη), others by chance (τύχη),
                     others through our own agency (παρ’ ἡμᾶς)...necessity destroys
                     responsibility and chance is uncertain; whereas our own actions are
                     autonomous, and it is to them that praise and blame naturally attach.”2
                  Despite abundant evidence, many philosophers deny that real
               chance exists. If a single event is determined by chance, then inde-
               terminism would be “true,” they say, and undermine the very pos-
               sibility of certain knowledge. Some go to the extreme of saying
               that chance makes the state of the world totally independent of
               any earlier states,3 which is nonsense, but it shows how anxious
               they are about chance.
                 The Stoic Chrysippus (200 BCE) said that a single uncaused
               cause could destroy the universe (cosmos), a concern shared by
               some modern philosophers, for whom reason itself would fail. He
               wrote:
                     “Everything that happens is followed by something else which
                     depends on it by causal necessity. Likewise, everything that happens is
                     preceded by something with which it is causally connected. For noth-
                     ing exists or has come into being in the cosmos without a cause. The
                     universe will be disrupted and disintegrate into pieces and cease to be
                     a unity functioning as a single system, if any uncaused movement is
                     introduced into it.”
                  The core idea of chance and indeterminism is closely related to
               the idea of causality. Indeterminism for some is simply an event
               without a cause, an uncaused cause or causa sui that starts a new
Appendix D




               causal chain. If we admit some uncaused causes, we can have
               an adequate (statistical) causality without the physical necessity
               of strict determinism - which implies complete predictability of
               events and only one possible future.
                 2       Letter to Menoeceus, §133
                 3       Compare perdurantism on p.40
                                                                    Chance     381

  An example of an event that is not strictly caused is one that
depends on chance, like the flip of a coin. If the outcome is only
probable, not certain, then the event can be said to have been
caused by the coin flip, but the head or tails result itself was not pre-
dictable. So this “soft” causality, which recognizes prior uncaused
events as causes, is undetermined and the result of chance alone.
The Calculus of Probabilities
   The great mathematical theorists of games of chance found
ways to argue that the chance they described was somehow neces-
sary, that chance outcomes were actually determined by “laws.”
The greatest of these, Pierre-Simon Laplace, preferred to call
his theory the “calculus of probabilities.” With its connotation of
approbation, probability is a more respectable term than chance,
which has associations of gambling and lawlessness. For Laplace,
the random outcomes were not predictable only because we lack
the detailed information needed to predict. As did the ancient
Stoics, Laplace explained the appearance of chance as the result of
human ignorance. He said,
    “The word ‘chance,’ then expresses only our ignorance of the causes of
    the phenomena that we observe to occur and to succeed one another
    in no apparent order.”




                                                                                 Appendix D




  Figure 32-1. C.S.Peirce called the distribution of random events “normal.”
         382       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Decades before Laplace, Abraham de Moivre discovered the
               normal distribution (the bell curve) of outcomes for ideal random
               processes, like the throw of dice. Perfectly random processes pro-
               duce a regular distribution pattern for many trials (the law of large
               numbers). Inexplicably, the discovery of these regularities in vari-
               ous social phenomena led the great thinkers to conclude that the
               phenomena were determined, not random. They simply denied the
               existence of chance in the world.
                  In 1718 De Moivre wrote a book called The Doctrine of Chances.
               It was very popular among gamblers. In the second edition (1738)
               he derived the mathematical form of the normal distribution of
               probabilities, but he denied the reality of chance. Because it implied
               events that God could not know, he labeled it atheistic.
                  “Chance, in atheistical writings or discourse, is a sound utterly insignifi-
                  cant: It imports no determination to any mode of existence; nor indeed
                  to existence itself, more than to non existence; it can neither be defined
                  nor understood.”
                  As early as 1784, Immanuel Kant had argued that the regulari-
               ties in social events from year to year showed that they must be the
               consequence of underlying deterministic laws.
                  “Thus marriages, the consequent births and the deaths, since the free
                  will seems to have such a great influence on them, do not seem to be
                  subject to any law according to which one could calculate their number
                  beforehand. Yet the annual (statistical) tables about them in the major
                  countries show that they occur according to stable natural laws.”
                 In the early 1800’s Adolphe Quételet and Henry Thomas
               Buckle argued that these regularities in “social physics” proved
               that individual acts like marriage and suicide were not “free,” but
               determined by an unknown natural law.
Appendix D




                 The possibility that chance is more than human ignorance
               entered physics when Ludwig Boltzmann showed in 1877 that
               random collisions between atomic particles in a gas could explain
               the increase in entropy that is the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
                 In 1866, when Boltzmann first derived Maxwell’s velocity distri-
               bution of gas particles, he did it assuming that the physical motion of
                                                                    Chance        383

each particle (or atom) was determined exactly by Newton’s laws. And
in 1872, when he attempted to show how his kinetic theory of gases
could explain the increase in entropy, he again used strictly deter-
ministic physics. But Boltzmann’s former teacher Josef Loschmidt
objected to this derivation of the second law. Loschmidt said that
if time was reversed, the deterministic laws of classical mechanics
require that the entropy would then go down, not up.4
   So in 1877 Boltzmann reformulated his derivation, assuming
that each collision of gas particles was not determined, but statisti-
cal and random. He assumed that the directions and velocities of
particles after a collision depended on chance, as long as energy and
momentum were conserved. He could then argue that the particles
would be located randomly in “phase space” based on the statistical
assumption that individual cells of phase space were equally prob-
able. His H-Theorem produced a quantity which would go only up,
independent of the time direction. Laws of nature became statisti-
cal.
   Boltzmann’s student Franz S. Exner defended the idea of abso-
lute chance and indeterminism as a hypothesis that could not be
ruled out on the basis of observational evidence. Exner did this in
his 1908 inaugural lecture at Vienna University as rector (two years
after Boltzmann’s death), and ten years later in a book written during
World War I. But Exner’s view was not the standard view. Ever since
the eighteenth-century development of the calculus of probabilities,
scientists and philosophers assumed that probabilities and statisti-
cal phenomena, including social statistics, were completely deter-
mined. They thought that our inability to predict individual events
was due simply to our ignorance of the details.
                                                                                    Appendix D



   In his own 1922 inaugural address at the University of Zurich,
What Is a Law of Nature?, Erwin Schrödinger said about his
favorite teacher,
      “It was the experimental physicist, Franz Exner, who for the first time,
      in 1919, launched a very acute philosophical criticism against the taken-
      for-granted manner in which the absolute determinism of molecular
      processes was accepted by everybody. He came to the conclusion that
  4       See chapter 25.
         384       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  the assertion of determinism was certainly possible, yet by no means
                  necessary, and when more closely examined not at all very probable.
                  “Exner’s assertion amounts to this: It is quite possible that Nature’s laws
                  are of thoroughly statistical character. The demand for an absolute law
                  in the background of the statistical law — a demand which at the present
                  day almost everybody considers imperative — goes beyond the reach of
                  experience.”
                 Ironically, just four years later, after developing his continuous
               and deterministic wave theory of quantum mechanics, Schrödinger
               would himself “go beyond the reach of experience.” He searched for
               deterministic laws underlying the discontinuous, discrete, statistical
               and probabilistic indeterminism of the Bohr-Heisenberg school, to
               avoid the implications of absolute chance in quantum mechanics.
               Planck and Einstein too were repulsed by randomness and chance.
               “God does not play dice,” was Einstein’s famous remark.
                 A major achievement of the Ages of Reason and Enlightenment
               was to banish absolute chance as unintelligible and atheistic. Newton’s
               Laws provided a powerful example of deterministic laws govern-
               ing the motions of everything. Surely Leucippus’ and Democritus’
               original insights had been confirmed?
                 Franz Exner was not alone in defending chance before quantum
               physics. In the nineteenth century in America, Charles Sanders
               Peirce coined the term “tychism” for his idea that absolute chance
               was the first step in three steps to “synechism” or continuity.
                  Peirce was influenced by the social statisticians, Buckle and Qué-
               telet, by French philosophers Charles Renouvier and Alfred
               Fouillée, who also argued for some absolute chance, by the physi-
               cists Maxwell and Boltzmann, but most importantly Peirce was
Appendix D




               influenced by the philosophers Kant and Hegel, who saw things
               arranged in the triads that Peirce so loved.
                  Quételet and Buckle thought they had established an absolute
               deterministic law behind all statistical laws. Buckle went so far as to
               claim it established the lack of free will.
                                                                   Chance        385

  Renouvier and Fouillée introduced chance or indeterminism
simply to contrast it with determinism, and to discover some way,
usually a dialectical argument like that of Hegel, to reconcile the
opposites. Renouvier argues for human freedom, but nowhere
explains exactly how chance might contribute to that freedom,
other than negating determinism.
   Maxwell may have used the normal distribution of Quételet and
Buckle’s social physics as his model for the distribution of molecular
velocities in a gas. Boltzmann also was impressed with the distribu-
tion of social statistics, and was initially convinced that individual
particles obeyed strict and deterministic Newtonian laws of motion.
   Peirce does not explain much with his tychism. And, with his
view that continuity and evolutionary love is supreme, may have
had doubts about the importance of chance. He did not propose
chance as directly or indirectly providing free will. He never men-
tions the ancient criticisms that we cannot accept responsibility
for chance decisions. And he does not really care for chance as the
origin of species, preferring a more deterministic and continuous
lawful development, under the guidance of evolutionary love. He
called Darwinism “greedy? But Peirce does say clearly, well before
Boltzmann and Exner, that the observational evidence simply does
not establish strict determinism.
  It remained for William James, Peirce’s close friend, to assert
that chance can provide random unpredictable alternatives from
which the will can choose or “determine” one alternative. James was
the first thinker to enunciate clearly a two-stage decision process,
with chance in a present time of random alternatives, leading to a
                                                                                   Appendix D


choice which selects one alternative and transforms an equivocal
ambiguous future into an unalterable determined past.
  Free will consists of undetermined alternatives followed by
adequately but statistically determined choices.
   “The stronghold of the determinist argument is the antipathy to the idea
   of chance...This notion of alternative possibility, this admission that any
   one of several things may come to pass is, after all, only a roundabout
   name for chance...
         386         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     “What is meant by saying that my choice of which way to walk home
                     after the lecture is ambiguous and matter of chance?...It means that both
                     Divinity Avenue and Oxford Street are called but only one, and that one
                     either one, shall be chosen.”5
                  Chance is critically important for the question of free will because
               strict necessity implies just one possible future. Absolute chance
               means that the future is fundamentally unpredictable at the levels
               where chance is dominant. Chance allows alternative futures and
               the question becomes how the one actual present is realized from
               these potential alternative futures.
                  The amount of chance and the departure from strict causal-
               ity required for free will is very slight compared to the miraculous
               ideas often associated with the “causa sui” (self-caused cause) of
               the ancients. For medieval philosophers, only God could produce a
               causa sui, a miracle. Modern quantal randomness, unless amplified
               to the macroscopic world, is often insignificant, not a miracle at all.
                  Despite David Hume’s critical attack on causality, many phi-
               losophers embrace causality strongly, including Hume himself in
               his other writings, where he dogmatically asserts “’tis impossible to
               admit of any medium betwixt chance and an absolute necessity.”
                 Since Chrysippus twenty-two centuries ago, philosophers still
               connect causality to the very possibility of logic and reason.
                  Bertrand Russell said “The law of causation, according to
               which later events can theoretically be predicted by means of earlier
               events, has often been held to be a priori, a necessity of thought, a
               category without which science would not be possible.”6 Although
               he felt some claims for causality might be excessive, Russell was
               unwilling to give up strict determinism, saying “Where determin-
Appendix D




               ism fails, science fails.”7 And, “what science cannot discover, man-
               kind cannot know.”
                 The great polymath Henri Poincaré said
                     “Every phenomenon, however trifling it be, has a cause, and a mind
                     infinitely powerful and infinitely well-informed concerning the laws of
                 5       “The Dilemma of Determinism,” in The Will to Believe, 1897, p.155
                 6       Our Knowledge of the External World, p.179
                 7       Determinism and Physics, p.18
                                                                         Chance               387

      nature could have foreseen it from the beginning of the ages. If a being
      with such a mind existed, we could play no game of chance with him;
      we should always lose. For him, in fact, the word chance would have no
      meaning, or rather there would be no such thing as chance.”
  Max Planck, along with Einstein, Schrödinger and others,
opposed indeterminism. Einstein called chance a “weakness in the
theory.” Planck remained convinced that determinism and strict
causality are essential requirements for physical science and so must
be true.
     “Just as no physicist will in the last resort acknowledge the play of chance in human
  nature, so no physiologist will admit the play of chance in the absolute sense.”
     “the assumption of chance in inorganic nature is incompatible with the working
  principle of natural science.”
      “We must admit that the mind of each one of our greatest geniuses — Aristotle,
  Kant or Leonardo, Goethe or Beethoven, Dante or Shakespeare — even at the moment
  of its highest flights of thought or in the most profound inner workings of the soul, was
  subject to the causal fiat and was an instrument in the hands of an almighty law which
  governs the world.”8

   Ernest Rutherford studied the emission of particles from
decaying radioactive atoms. He called them α and β rays. The alpha
particles are helium nuclei stripped of electrons. The beta particles
are electrons. It was Niels Bohr who told Rutherford that the α and
β rays were coming from the central nucleus that Rutherford had
discovered in 1911, not from the surrounding electron cloud as had
been thought.
  Rutherford said the emission of rays is a chance process. There
seemed to be no way to predict the time or direction of such events.
He could only discover a characteristic time or “half-life” after which
50% of the original radioactive elements would be left.
                                                                                                Appendix D



   When Bohr showed two years later that the electron cloud could
be organized into circular orbits, and the electrons were jumping
from one orbit to another with the emission or absorption of light
quanta, Rutherford’s question to Bohr was, “How do the electrons
know which orbit they are going to jump to?”Bohr did not know.

  8       Where Is Science Going?, pp.147, 154, 156
         388        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Einstein answered that question in 1916 when he showed it is
               purely a matter of chance. Einstein derived A and B coefficients
               describing the absorption, spontaneous emission, and (his newly
               predicted) stimulated emission of radiation. In two papers, “Emis-
               sion and Absorption of Radiation in Quantum Theory,” and “On
               the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” he derived the Planck law (for
               Planck it was mostly a heuristic guess at the formula), he derived
               Planck’s postulate E = hν, and he derived Bohr’s second postulate
               Em - En = hν. Einstein did this by exploiting the obvious relationship
               between the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of gas particle veloci-
               ties and the distribution of radiation in Planck’s law. He wrote:
                   “The formal similarity between the chromatic distribution curve for
                   thermal radiation and the Maxwell velocity-distribution law is too strik-
                   ing to have remained hidden for long. In fact, it was this similarity which
                   led W. Wien, some time ago, to an extension of the radiation formula in
                   his important theoretical paper, in which he derived his displacement
                   law...Not long ago I discovered a derivation of Planck’s formula which
                   was closely related to Wien’s original argument and which was based
                   on the fundamental assumption of quantum theory. This derivation dis-
                   plays the relationship between Maxwell’s curve and the chromatic dis-
                   tribution curve and deserves attention not only because of its simplicity,
                   but especially because it seems to throw some light on the mechanism of
                   emission and absorption of radiation by matter, a process which is still
                   obscure to us.”9
                  But the introduction of Maxwell-Boltzmann statistical mechani-
               cal thinking to electromagnetic theory produced what Einstein
               called a “weakness in the theory.” It introduces the reality of irre-
               ducible objective chance!
                  If light quanta are particles with energy E = hν traveling
               at the velocity of light c, then they should have a momentum
Appendix D




               p = E/c = hν/c. When light is absorbed by material particles, this
               momentum will clearly be transferred to the particle. But when light
               is emitted by an atom or molecule, a problem appears.
                  9     “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” Sources of Quantum Mechanics, B. L.
               van der Waerden, Dover, 1967, p.63
                                                                     Chance         389

  The “statistical interpretation” of Max Born (“Born rule”) tells
us the outgoing wave is the probability amplitude wave function Ψ,
whose absolute square is the probability of finding a light particle in
an arbitrary direction.
   Conservation of momentum requires that the momentum of the
emitted particle will cause an atom to recoil with momentum hν/c in
the opposite direction. However, the standard theory of spontane-
ous emission of radiation is that it produces a spherical wave going
out in all directions. A spherically symmetric wave has no preferred
direction. In which direction does the atom recoil?, Einstein asked:
   “Does the molecule receive an impulse when it absorbs or emits the
   energy ε? For example, let us look at emission from the point of view of
   classical electrodynamics. When a body emits the radiation ε it suffers a
   recoil (momentum) ε/c if the entire amount of radiation energy is emit-
   ted in the same direction. If, however, the emission is a spatially symmet-
   ric process, e.g., a spherical wave, no recoil at all occurs. This alternative
   also plays a role in the quantum theory of radiation. When a molecule
   absorbs or emits the energy ε in the form of radiation during the transi-
   tion between quantum theoretically possible states, then this elementary
   process can be viewed either as a completely or partially directed one in
   space, or also as a symmetrical (nondirected) one. It turns out that we
   arrive at a theory that is free of contradictions, only if we interpret those
   elementary processes as completely directed processes.”10
   An outgoing light particle must impart momentum hν/c to the
atom or molecule, but the direction of the momentum can not be
predicted! Neither can the theory predict the time when the light
quantum will be emitted. Einstein called this weakness by its
German name - Zufall (chance).
   He recalled that Rutherford’s law for radioactive decay of unstable
atomic nuclei could only give the probability of decay time. Einstein
                                                                                      Appendix D



saw the connection with radiation emission:
   “It speaks in favor of the theory that the statistical law assumed for
   [spontaneous] emission is nothing but the Rutherford law of radioactive
   decay.”11
  10   On the Quantum Theory of Radiation, p.65
  11   “Subtle is the Lord...”, A. Pais, p.411
         390          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  But the inability to predict both the time and direction of light
               particle emissions, said Einstein in 1917, is “a weakness in the
               theory..., that it leaves time and direction of elementary processes to
               chance (Zufall, ibid.).” It is only a weakness for Einstein, of course,
               because his God does not play dice.
                  Einstein clearly saw, as none of his contemporaries did, that since
               spontaneous emission is a statistical process, it cannot possibly be
               described with classical physics. Einstein had probably known this
               since 1905, but he deeply disliked the idea of chance in physics.
               But Einstein’s dislike of quantum physics did not prevent him from
               seeing its necessity.
                   “The properties of elementary processes required...make it seem almost
                   inevitable to formulate a truly quantized theory of radiation.”12
                  Einstein may not have liked this conceptual crisis, but his insights
               into the indeterminism involved in quantizing matter and energy
               were known, if largely ignored, over a decade before Heisenberg’s
               quantum theory introduced his famous uncertainty principle in
               1927. Heisenberg states that the exact position and momentum of
               an atomic particle can only be known within certain (sic) limits. The
               product of the position error and the momentum error is greater
               than or equal to Planck’s constant h/2π.
                 ΔpΔx ≥ h/2π
                  Indeterminacy (Unbestimmtheit) was Heisenberg’s original name
               for his principle. It is a better name than the more popular uncer-
               tainty, which connotes lack of knowledge. Quantum indeterminacy
               is ontological as well as epistemic lack of information.
                  Heisenberg declared that the new quantum theory disproved cau-
Appendix D




               sality, using facts that were first described by Einstein years earlier.
               But Heisenberg did not reference Einstein’s landmark 1916 work on
               the breakdown of causality.

                 12     Pais, ibid.
                                                                     Chance         391

  Heisenberg simply says:
   “We cannot - and here is where the causal law breaks down - explain why
   a particular atom will decay at one moment and not the next, or what
   causes it to emit an electron in this direction rather than that.”
  Indeed, Heisenberg (and possibly Bohr) were still not convinced
about Einstein’s light quanta as late this remark in 1926!
  He told Einstein directly in a personal meeting,
   “Whether or not I should believe in light quanta, I cannot say at this
   stage. Radiation quite obviously involves the discontinuous elements to
   which you refer as light quanta. On the other hand, there is a continu-
   ous element, which appears, for instance, in interference phenomena,
   and which is much more simply described by the wave theory of light.
   But you are of course quite right to ask whether quantum mechanics has
   anything new to say on these terribly difficult problems. I believe that we
   may at least hope that it will one day.”13
   It is important to note that Einstein’s indeterminism of time and
direction is an intrinsic property of the interaction of radiation
with matter. It does not depend on limits put on measurements,
as Heisenberg’s “uncertainty” suggested, nor on the presence of a
conscious observer, as Bohr’s Copenhagen Interpretation seems
to imply. Where Bohr and Heisenberg describe epistemic limits to
knowledge, Einstein’s light quanta shows us an ontologically inde-
terministic world, independent of any observation or measurement.
Einstein says:
   “If the molecule suffers a loss of energy in the amount of hν without
   external stimulation, i.e., by emitting the energy in the form of radiation
   (spontaneous emission), then this process too is a directional one. There
   is no emission of radiation in the form of spherical waves. The molecule
   suffers a recoil in the amount of hν/c during this elementary process of
   emission of radiation; the direction of the recoil is, at the present state of
                                                                                      Appendix D



   theory, determined by “chance”...
   “The weakness of the theory is, on the one hand, that it does not bring
   us closer to a link-up with the undulation theory; on the other hand, it
   also leaves time of occurrence and direction of the elementary processes
   a matter of “chance.” Nevertheless, I fully trust in the reliability of the
   road taken.”14

  13   “Quantum Mechanics and a Talk with Einstein,” Physics and Beyond, p.67
  14   On the Quantum Theory of Radiation, p.76
         392          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Chance and Free Will
                  Our two-stage model for free will15 sees a role for chance in the
               brain in the form of quantum level noise (as well as pre-quantal ther-
               mal noise). Noise can introduce random errors into stored memo-
               ries. Noise can create random associations of ideas during memory
               recall. Many scientists have speculated that randomness in the brain
               may be driven by microscopic fluctuations that are amplified to the
               macroscopic level. This would not happen in some specific location
               in the brain. It is most likely a general property of all neurons.
                  We can distinguish seven increasingly sophisticated ideas about
               the role of chance and indeterminism in the question of free will.
               Many libertarians have accepted the first two. Determinist and com-
               patibilist critics of free will make the third their central attack on
               chance, claiming that it denies moral responsibility. But very few
               thinkers appear to have considered all seven essential requirements
               for chance to contribute to libertarian free will.
                 • Chance exists in the universe. Quantum mechanics is correct.
               Indeterminism is true, etc.
                 • Chance is important for free will because it breaks the causal
               chain of determinism.
                  • But chance cannot directly cause our actions. We cannot be
               responsible for random actions.
                  • Chance can only generate random (unpredictable) alternative
               possibilities for action or thought. The choice or selection of one
               action must be adequately determined, so that we can take respon-
               sibility. And once we choose, the connection between mind/brain
               and motor control must be adequately determined to see that “our
Appendix D




               will be done.”
                  • Chance, in the form of noise, both quantum and thermal noise,
               must always be present. The naive model of a single random micro-
               scopic event, amplified to affect the macroscopic brain, never made
               sense. Under what ad hoc circumstances, at what time, at what place
               in the brain, would it occur to affect a decision?
                 15     See chapter 4 for details.
                                                            Chance           393

  • Chance must be overcome or suppressed by the adequately
determined will when it decides to act, de-liberating the prior free
options that “one could have done.”
  • To the extent that chance is not completely suppressed by the
will, the resulting choice can be considered to have an element of
randomness. The agent can still take responsibility for allowing the
choice to be partially or completely random, the equivalent of flip-
ping a mental coin, if no available option is clearly best.
   Of those thinkers who have considered most of these aspects of
chance, a small fraction have also seen the obvious parallel with bio-
logical evolution and natural selection, with its microscopic quan-
tum accidents causing variations in the gene pool and macroscopic
natural selection of fit genes by their reproductive success.
   Our two-stage model of free will needs chance for the free gener-
ation of action items and thoughts in an agenda of alternative possi-
bilities to be de-liberated by the will. Chance is the “free” in the first
stage of free will and the source of human creativity. The adequately
determined second stage is the “will” in free will that de-liberates,
choosing actions for which we can be morally responsible.




                                                                               Appendix D
         394   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                    o rd e r
                            ce R e c
                  e r i e n        u ce r
               Exp d Reprod
                 an
Appendix E




                                                                This chapter on the web
                                            informationphilosopher.com/knowledge/ERR
                                                             ERR       395


Experience Recorder
and Reproducer
   The experience recorder and reproducer (ERR) is our functional
basis for an information mind model. The ERR is simpler, but
superior to, computational models of the mind popular in today’s
neuroscience and cognitive science. Mind is immaterial informa-
tion, software in the brain hardware. ERR provides deep insight
into both the problem of “meaning” and the “hard problem” of
consciousness.
  Man is not a machine. And the mind is not a computer.
   Our specific mind model grows out of the biological question
of what sort of “mind” would provide the greatest survival value
for the lowest (or the earliest) organisms that evolved mind-like
capabilities.
   We propose that a minimal primitive mind would need only
to “play back” past experiences that resemble any part of current
experience. Remembering past experiences has obvious relevance
(survival value) for an organism. But beyond survival value, the
ERR touches on the philosophical problem of “meaning.” We sug-
gest the epistemological “meaning” of information perceived is to
be found in the past experiences that are reproduced automati-
cally by the ERR.
   The ERR reproduces the entire complex of the original sensa-
tions experienced, together with the emotional response to the
original experience (pleasure, pain, fear, etc.). Playback is stimu-
                                                                         Appendix E



lated by anything in the current experience that resembles some-
thing in the past experiences, in the five dimensions of the senses
(sound, sight, touch, smell and taste), as well as unique emotional
experiences.
   The ERR model stands in contrast to the popular cognitive
science models of a mind as a digital computer with a “central
processor” or even many “parallel processors.” No algorithms or
stored programs are needed for the ERR model. There is nothing
comparable to the addresses and data buses used to stored and
retrieve information in a digital computer.
         396     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 An approximation might be a non-linear random-access
               data recorder, where data is stored using “content-addressable”
               memory (the memory address - a string of bits in a digital com-
               puter - would be the data content itself).
                  Much simpler than a computer with stored data structures, a
               better technological metaphor for ERR might be a multi-channel,
               multi-track analog video and sound recorder, enhanced with
               the ability to record smells, tastes, touches, and most important,
               feelings. Imagine one channel for each sense, one track for each
               neuron. But of course machines currently do not smell or taste
               and have no feelings, so could not reproduce them.
                  Although there is really no comparison between any current
               technology and the ERR, the closest thing in speed and complete-
               ness of recall, with the precision that recalled items are relevant,
               is state-of-the-art search and retrieval engines like that of Google.
                  But even Google pales in comparison with your ability to
               instantly recall the arrangement of rooms in your house when you
               were a teenager. You can visualize the surroundings of your home,
               maybe the color of the house, the direction to the nearest bus stop,
               etc.
                 And compared to the worldwide network of computers and
               databases that is Google, the biological and neurological basis for
               ERR is very straightforward.
                  No modern computer can surpass the amazing information
               storage capability and rapidity of search and retrieval of informa-
               tion as that of the human neocortex.
                 Unlike most of the brain, the neocortex randomly grows its
Appendix E




               over 10 billion axons, each with 10,000 dendritic connections.
                  As can be seen in Ramón y Cajal’s drawings made at the end
               of the nineteenth century, the neocortex consists primarily of six
               horizontal layers segregated principally by cell type and neuronal
               connections.
                                                                ERR        397


   The neurons are arranged in
vertical structures called corti-
cal columns, with a diameter
of about 1mm. A given column
may respond to a sensory
stimulus coming from a cer-
tain body part or region of
sound or vision. These col-
umns are similar, and can be
thought of as the basic repeat-
ing functional units of the
neocortex. In humans, a
column contains approxi-
mately 70,000 neurons and the
neocortex consists of about Figure 33-1. Cajal’s extraordinary drawings.
500,000 columns.
  The neuroscientist Donald Hebb said in 1949 that “neurons
that fire together wire together.” Our ERR mind model is based on
the simple extension of the Hebb idea to the notion that “neurons
that have been wired together will fire together.”
  • The ERR Recorder: Neurons become wired together (strength-
ening their synaptic connections to other neurons) during an
organism’s experiences, across multiple sensory and limbic sys-
tems.
  • The ERR Reproducer: Later firing of even a part of the previ-
ously wired neurons stimulates firing of all or part of the original
complex, thus “playing back” the original experience (including
                                                                             Appendix E


the emotional reaction to the experience).
   The ERR mind model hypothesizes that related experiences are
likely stored “nearby” (in the many “dimensions” of visual cortex,
hearing pathways, olfactory nerves, etc., etc., plus the amygdala).
         398       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  The ERR model might then nicely explain the philosophical
               notion of association of ideas. If it is neighboring neurons that fire,
               they will likely be closely related in some way (since they were stored
               based on the fundamental pattern of information in the experience).
               Similar experiences are likely stored in adjacent neurons. Note that
               a particular smell could cause the recall of experiences where that
               smell was present, and similarly for other senses.
               The Binding Problem
                  Neuroscientists are investigating how diverse signals from mul-
               tiple pathways can possibly be unified in the brain. The ERR model
               offers an extremely simple insight into this so-called “binding prob-
               lem.” There is an intrinsic binding of the multiple sensory and limbic
               systems present in the original wiring or “recording” of a complex
               experience. So the “binding” of all the original senses and emotion
               in each recalled thought or experience is simply the result of the
               Hebbian “wiring” of neurons during the original experience
                  We assume that whenever a particular experience plays back, it
               refreshes and strengthens the synaptic connections. It might also
               be the case that the current conditions can modify the connections
               somewhat, both slightly modifying the memories of the experience
               and the emotions associated with the experience. ERR might then
               become an explanatory basis for conditioning experiments, classi-
               cal Pavlovian and operant conditioning, and in general a model for
               associative learning.
                  The capability of reproducing experiences is critical to learn-
               ing from past experiences, so as to make them guides for action in
               future experiences. The ERR model is the minimal mind model that
Appendix E




               provides for such learning by living organisms. It is critical that the
               original emotions also play back, along with any differences from
               past emotions that are newly experienced during playback.
                                                              ERR         399

Speed and Power of the ERR
  You might not normally notice the speed with which you can
recall the name of a sixth-grade teacher or childhood friend that
has not occurred to you for decades. Or that a few notes might bring
back music and lyrics of a song not sung for many years. An odd
smell might evoke memories of a foreign country. A taste might
bring on feelings of nausea first experienced long ago. All the senses,
not just visual stimulation, can replay complex, multi-sensory origi-
nal events. How does it work so fast?
   Sometimes when you consciously try to recall a particular name,
it does not come immediately to mind, but you can feel it on “the
tip of your tongue.” Then hours, even days later the forgotten name
just “pops into your head.” It suggests unnoticeable “unconscious”
information processing by the experience recorder and reproducer.
   To make a crude estimate of the speed and power of the brain as a
biological information processor, we can calculate the information
creation going on in the body overall. Estimating how much power
the body consumes (metabolizing of food as negative entropy), we
can then use the fact that the brain uses about 20 percent of that
energy.
   We can take just one bodily process that is also vital to thought,
the continuous replacement of red blood cells, which consumes a
significant fraction of available energy. When 200 million of the 25
trillion red blood cells in the human body die each second, 300 mil-
lion new hemoglobins must be assembled in each of 200 million
new blood cells . With the order of a few thousand bytes of informa-
tion in each hemoglobin, this is 10 thousand x 300 million x 200
million = 6 x 1020 bits of information per second, a million times
                                                                            Appendix E



more information processing than today’s fastest computer CPU.
  What is the brain doing with such immense power consumption
and potential information generation. It could be the “blooming,
buzzing, confusion” that William James imagined gong on just
below his “stream of consciousness.”
         400       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 How can the mind “focus attention,” as James put it? Think of
               how the eye can instantly be drawn to a tiny dark speck moving in
               our peripheral vision, or how quickly it can recall a specific fact not
               thought about for many years.
               How the ERR works
                  The ERR’s operation is nothing like the way a computer searches
               and retrieves information. ERR does not decide what to search for
               and then look systematically through all the information structures
               to find it.
                  We can compare Google’s “distributed search” algorithms, which
               send a search phrase to hundreds of thousands of computers in cen-
               ters around the world. After vast amounts of “parallel distributed
               processing,” each computer returns its relevant pages within a frac-
               tion of a second. These are then assembled into the Google “results”
               pages.
                  By contrast, in the ERR, the current experience travels into the
               brain on neurons which process it in the normal way for storage,
               based on its analysis (breakdown) of the multi-sensory content of
               the image. At the same time, the neurons that are firing together are
               stimulating those nearby to fire, reproducing a vast number of past
               experiences that were (at least partially) recorded in neurons nearby
               the newly firing neurons.
                   It may sound absurd to suggest that the mind can pick anything
               useful out of such a cacophony. But it is precisely the past experi-
               ences found that provide the context for the current experience to
               be “meaningful.” If there were nothing played back, like the infant
               brain, there would be no “meaning” in the experience. In the adult
Appendix E




               mind, a lifetime of experience is available, usually instantly played
               back unconsciously, without our ever having to consciously ask for
               it.
                  We can say that “what it’s like to be” a certain animal depends
               entirely on what its ERR chooses to record and reproduce. A frog,
               for example, famously allows only the signals from certain shapes
                                                              ERR         401

to go beyond the frog’s eye to its brain. In our ERR model, the frog
has no experience recorded of concave-shaped objects moving in its
visual field. Such information then is literally “meaningless.”
  What would the neurophysiological evidence look like that could
confirm or deny the ERR model?
   In part, it will be the discovery by neuroscientists of the physi-
cal locations where memories are stored. Eric Kandel has spent
decades in search of our memory systems.1 Theories range from
the relatively large synaptic structures that connect the neurons, to
absurdly small sub-cellular components like the microtubules that
form the cytoskeletal structures holding up the cell walls.
   Better evidence will come from advances in the speed and res-
olution of tools that image brain activity. They are currently very
slow, reacting to gross blood flows in the active areas. These will be
combined with traditional studies of mental associations, present-
ing a subject with elemental experiences like images, sounds, and
smells and watching where the brain is active as it elicits playback of
important experiences.
The ERR and Consciousness
   Humans are conscious of our experiences because they are
recorded in (and reproduced on demand from) the information
structures in our brains. Mental information houses the content of
an individual character - the fabric of values, desires, and reasons
used to evaluate alternatives for action and thus to make choices.
The information in a human brain vastly exceeds our genetic infor-
mation. Because humans store and retrieve information outside
their minds, it has allowed human beings to dominate the planet.
                                                                            Appendix E



Animals may exceed us in strength and speed, but we have experi-
ence, memory, wisdom, and skills that have accumulated over thou-
sands of generations.
   The relatively small amount transmitted genetically is tiny com-
pared to that stored in the experience recorder and reproducer of
a single human mind. But even that enormous amount is being
rivalled by the total knowledge stored externally (we call it the Sum)
  1    Kandel, et al. 2012
         402       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               now becoming available to all humans because it is being stored on
               the world-wide web and Internet.
                  Consciousness can be defined in information terms as a property
               of an entity (usually a living thing but we can also include artificially
               conscious machines or computers) that reacts appropriately to the
               information (and particularly to changes in the information) in its
               environment.
                  In the context of information philosophy, the experience recorder
               and reproducer can provide us with what we can define as informa-
               tion consciousness.
                  An animal in a deep sleep is not conscious because it ignores
               changes in its environment. By contrast, an inanimate robot may
               be conscious in our sense. Even the lowliest control system using
               negative feedback (a thermostat, for example) is in a minimal sense
               conscious of (aware of, exchanging information about) changes in
               its environment.
                  This definition of consciousness fits with our model of the mind
               as an experience recorder and reproducer (ERR). Can we say that an
               organism is “unconscious” If no past experiences are playing back
               during its current experiences? Can we say that a frog is “not con-
               scious” of the concave objects flying by?
                  A conscious being is constantly recording information about its
               perceptions of the external world, and most importantly for ERR,
               it is simultaneously recording its feelings. Sensory data such as
               sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and tactile sensations are recorded in
               a sequence along with pleasure and pain states, fear and comfort
               levels, etc. We sometimes speak of a “heightened” consciousness
Appendix E




               that excels at this recording.
                  All these experiential and emotional data are recorded in associa-
               tion with one another. This means that when the experiences are
               reproduced (played back in a temporal sequence), the accompany-
               ing emotions are once again felt, in synchronization. Although past
               experiences played back internally are not the same as the current
               external, they can make us currently “conscious” of past pleasure
               and pain states, fear and comfort levels, and so forth.
                                                             ERR         403

   Bernard Baars’s Global Workspace Theory uses the metaphor
of a “Theater of Consciousness,” in which there is an audience of
purposeful agents calling for the attention of the executive on stage.
   In the ERR parallel, vast numbers of past experiences are clamor-
ing for the attention of the conscious mind at all times, whenever
anything in current experience has some resemblance to past expe-
riences. If we define “current experience” as all afferent perceptions
plus the current contents of consciousness itself, we get a dynamic
self-referential system with plenty of opportunities for negative and
positive feedback.
   The “Blackboard model” of Allan Newell and Herbert Simon
imagines pictures or words (concepts, say) being written on a
mental blackboard by our current perceptions. Deep memory struc-
tures are watching what is written on the blackboard. They call up
similar concepts by association and write them to the blackboard,
which is visible to our conscious mind selecting the next things to
think about. The ERR model clearly supports this view and explains
the neural mechanism by which concepts (past experiences) are
retrieved and come to the blackboard.
   In Daniel Dennett’s consciousness model, the mind is made
up of innumerable functional homunculi, each with its own goals
and purposes. Some of these homunculi are information structures
in the genes, which transmit “learning” or “knowledge” from gen-
eration to generation by heredity alone. Others are environmentally
and socially conditioned, or consciously learned through cultural
transmission of information.
Four “Levels” of the ERR
                                                                           Appendix E



  We identify four evolutionary stages in the development of the
experience recorder and reproducer.
   • Instinct. These are animals with little or no learning capabil-
ity. Reactions to environmental conditions have been transmitted
genetically. Information about past experiences (by prior genera-
tions of the organism) is “built in” as inherited reactions.
         404       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 • Learning. Here past experiences of animals guide their current
               choices. Conscious, but mostly habitual, reactions are developed
               through recorded experiences, including instruction by parents and
               peers.
                  • Prediction. - A Sequencer in the ERR system can play back
               beyond the current situation, allowing the organism to use imagina-
               tion and foresight to evaluate the future consequences of its choices.
                  • Reflection. Here conscious deliberation about values influences
               the choice of behaviors. The ERR plays back a range of similar expe-
               riences including the reactions and feelings expressed by others to
               those experiences.
                 All four levels are emergent, in the sense that they did not exist in
               the lower, earlier levels of biological evolution.
                  Even the most primitive of biological systems are cognitive, in
               the sense that they use their internal information structure to guide
               their actions. Some of the simplest organisms can learn from expe-
               rience. The most primitive minds are the earliest experience record-
               ers. They reproduce past experiences as alternative possibilities for
               current actions.
                  In humans, the information-processing structures create new
               actionable information (knowledge) by consciously and uncon-
               sciously reworking the experiences stored in the mind.
                 Emergent higher mental levels exert downward causation
               on the contents of the lower bodily levels, ultimately support-
               ing mental causation and free will.
               What It’s Like To Be A...
Appendix E




                  There are characteristic differences between the mental and the
               physical that modern science, even neuroscience, may never fully
               explain. The most important is the internal and private first-person
               point of view, the essential subjectivity, the “I” and the “eye” of the
               mind, its capability of introspection and reflection, its intentional-
               ity, its purposiveness, its consciousness. The mind records an indi-
               vidual’s experiences as internal information structures and then can
                                                                ERR         405

play back these recordings to compare them to new perceptions,
new external events. The recordings include an individual’s emo-
tional reactions to past experiences, our feelings. The reproduction
of recorded personal experiences, stimulated by similarities in cur-
rent experience, provide the core of “what it’s like to be” a specific
individual.
   The external and public physical world, by contrast, is studied
from the third-person point of view. Although putatively “objective,”
science in fact is the composite “intersubjective” view of the “com-
munity of inquirers,” as Charles Sanders Peirce put it. Although
this shared subjectivity can never directly experience what goes on
in the mind of an individual member of the community, science is
in some sense the collective mind of the physical world. It is a pale
record of the world’s experiences, because it lacks the emotional
aspect of personal experience.
   The world of chemistry and physics has no sense of its history.
It does not introspect or reflect. It lacks an ERR and so lacks con-
sciousness, that problem in philosophy of mind second only to the
basic mind-body problem itself.
Mental States?
   The ERR avoids the vague idea of a “mental state,” whatever that
may be. The ERR stores specific information in the brain’s neural
networks about all the perceptual elements (sight, sound, touch,
taste, smell) of an experience, along with emotions felt during the
experience. They automatically are stored in whichever neurons fire
together.
  Later, any new perceptual element that fires the some part of
                                                                              Appendix E



those neurons can activate the neural network to replay the original
experience, complete with its emotional content. The unconscious
mind is a “blooming, buzzing confusion” playing back many similar
experiences, to some of which we focus our attention, as William
James pointed out.
   This rich spectrum of past experiences provides the “alternative
possibilities” for action that James said was the first stage in his two-
stage model of free will.
         406       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Instead of a general idea of a “mental state,” ERR describes a mind
               full of many possible specific mental states simultaneously, any one
               of which may be focused on as the free thought that leads to the next
               action “self-determined” by the mind, brain, and body.
                  ERR finds support in the idea of empathy and the recent discov-
               eries of “mirror neurons” in higher primates. Observing another
               being having an experience fires similar patterns of neurons that
               play back the observer’s similar experiences, along with emotional
               reactions to those earlier experiences.
                  Different emotional reactions can explain how different individu-
               als can be attracted to or repulsed by otherwise similar experiences.
               Summary
                  The biological model for the experience recorder and reproducer
               is neurons that wire together during an animal’s experiences, in
               multiple sensory and limbic systems, such that later firing of even
               a part of the wired neurons can stimulate firing of all or part of the
               original complex. Where Donald Hebb famously argued that “neu-
               rons that fire together wire together,” our experience recorder and
               reproducer ERR model assumes that “neurons that have been wired
               together will fire together.”
                  Neuroscientists are investigating how diverse signals from mul-
               tiple pathways can be unified in the brain. We offer a simple insight
               into this “binding” problem. There is an intrinsic binding of the
               multiple sensory and limbic systems present in the original wiring
               or “recording” of a complex experience. So the “binding” of all the
               original senses and emotion in each new experience is partly the
               result of the Hebbian “wiring” of neurons during a similar original
Appendix E




               experience
                                                             ERR         407

  Beyond the obvious relevance (survival value) for an organism of
remembering past experiences, we suggest the “meaning” of infor-
mation is found in the experiences reproduced by the ERR, when
presented with that information.
   A conscious being is constantly recording information about its
perceptions of the external world, and most importantly for ERR,
it is simultaneously recording its feelings. Sensory data such as
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and tactile sensations are recorded in
a sequence along with pleasure and pain states, fear and comfort
levels, etc.
   All these experiential and emotional data are recorded in associa-
tion with one another. This means that when the experiences are
reproduced (played back in a temporal sequence), the accompany-
ing emotions are once again felt, in synchronization.
   The capability of reproducing experiences is critical to learn-
ing from past experiences, so as to make them guides for action in
future experiences. The ERR is the minimal mind model that pro-
vides for such learning by living organisms.
  Something like an ERR is obviously present in all the higher pri-
mates and it is unclear how primitive an animal must be before it
cannot learn something from its experiences.



                                                                           Appendix E
         408   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                       e at i o n
                                  ic Cr
                    Cosm
Appendix F




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                        informationphilosopher.com/introduction/creation
                                              Cosmic Creation         409


The Cosmic Creation Process
The Fundamental Question of Information Philosophy
   Our fundamental philosophical question is cosmological and
ultimately is profoundly metaphysical.
   What are the processes that create emergent information
structures in the universe?
   Given the second law of thermodynamics, which says that any
system will over time approach a thermodynamic equilibrium of
maximum disorder or entropy, in which all information is lost,
and given the best current model for the origin of the universe,
which says everything began in a state of thermodynamic equilib-
rium some 13.75 billion years ago, how can it be that living beings
are creating and communicating vast amounts of new informa-
tion every day?
  Why are we not still in that original state of equilibrium?
  Broadly speaking, there are only four major phenomena or
processes that can reduce the entropy locally, while of course
increasing it globally to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics.
Three of these do it “blindly,” the fourth does it with a built-in
“purpose,” or telos.”
  • Universal Gravitation
   • Quantum Cooperative Phenomena (e.g., crystallization, the
formation of atoms and molecules)
  • “Dissipative” Chaos (Non-linear Thermodynamics)
  • Life
                                                                        Appendix F




   None of these processes can work unless they have a way to get
rid of the positive entropy (disorder) and leave behind a pocket
of negative entropy (order or information). The positive entropy
is either conducted, convected, or radiated away as waste matter
and energy, as heat, or as pure radiation. At the quantum level, it
is always the result of interactions between matter and radiation
(photons). Whenever photons interact with material particles,
the outcomes are inherently unpredictable. As Albert Einstein
discovered ten years before the founding of quantum mechanics,
these interactions involve irreducible ontological chance.
         410     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Information philosophy (actually information physics) has
               now identified the exact steps needed to create any new informa-
               tion structures in the universe. This includes the first matter - ele-
               mentary particles like quarks, gluons, photons, and electrons. It
               also includes the first atoms and molecules (which did not appear
               until at least 380,000 years after the origin of the universe).




                  Figure 34-1. An artist’s rendering of the cosmic expansion.

                  The very same steps are needed to form the galaxies, stars, and
               planets, which were starting to form about 400 million years after
               the origin. All these cosmic information structures are informa-
               tionally passive. Their interactions follow the relatively simple
               laws of physics and chemistry. They do not process or communi-
               cate information.
                  Although we call it cosmic creation, the very same steps create
               all life on Earth. But biological structures are far from informa-
Appendix F




               tionally passive. They have the extraordinary active and emergent
               capability of replicating, communicating, and processing infor-
               mation. They are cognitively aware of their environment. They
               exhibit purposeful, teleonomic behavior.
                  Finally, those same two steps are involved in our minds when we
               create a new idea! Information philosophy tells a story of cosmic
               and biological evolution that is one creation process all the way
                                              Cosmic Creation           411

from the original cosmic material to the immaterial minds that
have now explained the creation process itself!
   Sadly, cosmic creation is horrendously wasteful. In the existen-
tial balance between the forces of destruction and the forces of
construction, there is no contest. The dark side is overwhelming.
By quantitative physical measures of matter and energy content,
there is far more chaos than cosmos in our universe. But it is the
cosmos that we prize.
   Information philosophy focuses on the qualitatively valuable
information structures in the universe. The destructive forces are
entropic, they increase the entropy and disorder. The constructive
forces are anti-entropic. We call them ergodic. They increase the
order and information.
   By information we mean a quantity that can be understood
mathematically and physically. It corresponds to the common-
sense meaning of information, in the sense of communicating or
informing. It also corresponds to the information stored in books
and computers. But it also measures the information in any physi-
cal object, like a stone or a snowflake, in a production process like
a recipe or formula, and the information in biological systems,
including cell and organ structures and the genetic code.
The Two Steps in Cosmic Creation
   For some years, we have argued that the creation of any new
information structure requires two fundamental steps. The first
involves quantum mechanics, the second thermodynamics. But
the thermodynamics is not the usual entropy-producing kind. It
must produce negative entropy, the “order out of chaos” that is
new information. We call such a process ergodic and find that it
                                                                          Appendix F




works differently in the material, biological, and mental domains
   Furthermore, the quantum mechanics of information creation
raises metaphysical questions that suggest further analysis might
be helpful. So we may have to break down each of these steps as
needed for the best explanation.
         412         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  The first step in the creation of new information needs the meta-
               physical existence of multiple future possibilities as a precondition.
               In a deterministic universe such possibilities do not exist. There is
               but one possible future. We thus need an ontological commitment
               to the existence of multiple possibilities, which like any “ideas” have
               questionable existential status.
                  For example, where do such possibilities go when one of them
               is actualized? When one “becomes” and now has “being,” are the
               others destroyed? Have they become “nothingness,” as existential-
               ists claimed?
                 In a deterministic universe no new information is ever created.
               Information is a conserved quantity, like matter and energy, say
               many mathematical physicists and theologically minded philoso-
               phers, who think constant information fits well their idea of an
               omniscient god, for whom there is “nothing new under the sun.”
                  Quantum physics provides us with a model for the first step. A
               quantum system has possible states. The wave function provides
               calculable probabilities for each state. And the wave function may
               “collapse,” instantaneously and randomly, into one actual state if
               and when there is an interaction with another system. Some inter-
               actions may project the system into a different linear combination
               (a “superposition”) of possible states, but we shall ignore that here.
                 Because the “collapse” is genuinely random, quantum physics is
               the origin of ontological chance in the universe, as first discovered
               by Albert Einstein, many years before the “founders” of quantum
               mechanics and the “uncertainty principle.”1
                  The inventor of the mathematical theory of the communication
               of information, Claude Shannon, explained how there would be
Appendix F




               no communication of new information without the existence of
               possible alternative messages.
                  A deterministic universe is one in which all messages from the
               past contain only the fixed totality of information in the past,
               nothing is ever “new.” So the indeterminism of quantum mechan-
               ics opens possible futures and gives us humans the chance to be
               creative authors of our lives.

                 1     See Appendix D.
                                                     Cosmic Creation    413

  So why do we need a second step in the creation of information?
The short answer is irreversibility.2
   A quantum event may be reversible. It may not leave a permanent
record in the universe.3 Until it does, we have nothing new. For the
many scientists and philosophers of science who deny the collapse
of the quantum-mechanical wave function, the universe is left for-
ever in a superposition of states. Nothing ever “happens.” Claims
of decoherence theorists that explain the appearance of something
happening are incoherent.4
   Making a quantum event irreversible is the job for thermodynam-
ics in our second step. But thermodynamics is a two-edged sword.
Every thermodynamic process is irreversible. Thermodynamicists
invent hypothetical reversible processes to calculate the efficiency
of engines, but in practice, as Ludwig Boltzmann showed, there
is always an increase in the entropy. So irreversibility alone cannot
help us with the creation of information, which we identify with
local reductions in the entropy. The creation of information requires
the creation of local negative entropy, in the form of an information
structure.
   There are just a few natural processes that can create informa-
tion structures. One is gravitation, which can attract matter from
random distributions of dust and gas into structures with spheri-
cal or circular symmetry like planets, stars, and galaxies. Another
is crystallization, when a snowflake with elaborate hexagonal sym-
metry forms from amorphous water vapor. But the most important
ergodic processes are life and mind.
   In order to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics, which
demands that the overall entropy of the universe must increase,
these anti-entropic or ergodic processes must transfer an amount
                                                                          Appendix F




of positive entropy (we can call Boltzmann entropy) away from the
new information structure with local negative entropy (that we can
also call Shannon entropy).5
  2    See chapter 25.
  3    See appendix C for a reversible quantum experiment.
  4    See chapter 21.
  5    See Appendix B for entropy and the second law.
         414         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Shannon’s information is mathematically the negative of the
               Boltzmann formula for entropy. For Shannon it was the logarithm
               of the number of messages, weighted by their probabilities. For
               Boltzmann it was the logarithm of the number of possible distribu-
               tions of gas particles in phase space.6
                 Should we consider the transfer away of positive entropy only a
               part of the second step? The means by which the transfer occurs is
               somewhat different in material, biological, and mental information
               processes.7
               The Flatness Problem in Cosmology
                 The universe is very likely flat because it was created flat. A flat
               universe starts with minimal information, which is fine since our
               cosmic creation process can create all the information that we have
               today. Leibniz’ question, “Why is there something rather than noth-
               ing?” might be “the universe is made out of something and the
               opposite of that something.”
                  When I was a first-year graduate student in astrophysics at
               Harvard University in 1958, I encountered two problems that
               have remained with me all these years. One was the fundamental
               problem of information philosophy - “What creates the information
               structures in the universe?” The other was the flat universe.
                 At that time, the universe was thought to be positively curved.
               Edwin Hubble’s red shifts of distant galaxies showed that they
               did not have enough kinetic energy to overcome the gravitational
               potential energy. Textbooks likened the universe to the surface of
               an expanding balloon decorated with galaxies moving away from
               one another.
Appendix F




                 That balloon popped for me when Walter Baade came to
               Harvard to describe his work at Mount Wilson. Baade took many
               images with long exposures of nearby galaxies and discovered there
               are two distinct populations of stars. And in each population there
               was a different kind of Cepheid variable star. The period of the
                 6     See appendix A for the mathematics.
                 7     See chapter 28.
                                               Cosmic Creation             415

Cepheid’s curve of light variation indicated its absolute brightness,
so they could be used as “standard candles” to find the distances to
star clusters in the Milky Way.
   Baade then realized that the Cepheids being used to calculate the
distance to Andromeda were 1.6 magnitudes brighter than the ones
used in our galaxy. Baade said Andromeda must be twice as far away
as Hubble had thought.
   As I listened to Baade, for me the universe went from being
positively curved to negatively curved. It jumped right over the flat
universe! I was struck that we seemed to be within observational
error of being flat. Some day a physicist will find the reason for
perfect flatness, I thought.
    I used to draw a line with tick marks for powers of ten in density
around the critical density ρc to show how close we are. Given so
many orders of magnitude of possible densities, it seemed improb-
able that we were just close by accident. We could increase the den-
sity of the universe by thirty powers of ten before it would have the
same density as the earth (way too dense!). But on the lighter side,
there are an infinite number of powers of ten. We can’t exclude a
universe with average density zero, which still allows us to exist, but
little else in the distance.




   In the long run we are approaching a universe with average den-
sity zero. Some say all the non-gravitationally bound systems will
slip over our light horizon as the expansion takes more and more
of them faster than the velocity of light. At this time, galaxies with a
                                                                             Appendix F




redshift greater than z = 1.8 are already over our light horizon. We
can never exchange signals with them.
  But note that we may always be able to see back to the cosmic
microwave background, all the same contents of the universe that
we see today will always be visible, just extremely red-shifted!
  What evidence could there be for a perfectly flat universe?
         416         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  First, there is the problem of the “missing mass” needed to slow
               down the cosmic expansion so that it will never stop, except at an
               infinite time, when there will be no kinetic enrgy left over
                  Second, there is evidence for acceleration of the cosmic expansion.
               It depends on observations of a single kind of “standard candle,” the
               type 1a supernovae.
                  It is essential that some other visible bodies at extreme redshifts
               can be used to show acceleration. The type 1a supernovae that
               exploded at the earliest times might have some systematic difference
               from those that exploded later.
                   Beyond any obdervations, there is pure theory. When Alan Guth
               presented his inflation thesis at Harvard in the 1980’s, I asked him
               why not assume the universe has always been exactly flat. He replied,
               “That’s too easy.” The great cosmologist Steven Weinberg agrees that
               it is easy. He wrote
                     “The simplest solution to the flatness problem is just that we are in a
                     spatially flat universe, in which K = 0 and ρ is always precisely equal to
                     ρcrit.” 8
               The Problem of Missing Mass
                  Given our assumption that the universe is exactly flat, the missing
               mass problem is that there is not enough observable material so
               that in Newtonian cosmology the gravitational binding energy can
               exactly balance the kinetic energy. The visible (luminous mass)
               accounts for only about 4-5 percent of the needed mass. Studying
               the rotation curves of galaxies and galaxy clusters reveals an invis-
               ible mass (called dark matter) contained inside the galaxies and
               clusters that amounts to perhaps 6 times the visible matter, which
               accounts for about 30 percent of the critical mass density needed
Appendix F




               to make the universe exactly flat. Current theory accounts for the
               balance by “dark energy,” an interpretation of the cosmological con-
               stant Einstein considered adding to his equations as a pressure to
               keep it from collapsing (known as “vacuum energy”). But the miss-
                 8       Cosmology, p.39
                                             Cosmic Creation             417

ing mass could just be more dark matter between the galaxies and
clusters. About three times their dark matter would do.
   This much material can close the universe and explain its flatness.
But it would not explain the apparent expansion acceleration seen
in Type 1a supernovae. This might be an artifact of the assumption
they are perfect “standard candles.” Recent evidence suggests that
distant Type 1a supernovae are in a different population than those
nearby, something like Baade’s two populations.
  It seems a bit extravagant to assume the need for an exotic form
of vacuum energy on the basis of observations that could have
unknown but significant sources of error. And I am delighted that
observations are within a factor of three of the critical density ρc.
  When Baade showed the universe was open in the 1950’s, we
needed thirty times more matter for a flat universe. Now we need
only three times more. More than ever, we are obviously flat!
The Horizon Problem
   The horizon problem arises from the perfect synchronization of
all the parts of our visible universe, when there may never have been
a time in the early universe that they were close enough together to
send synchronization signals.
   We propose a solution to the horizon problem based on Einstein’s
insight that in the wave-function collapse of entangled particles,
something is “traveling” faster than the speed of light. That some-
thing is information about possibilities. When the universal wave
function Ψ collapsed at t = 0, parts of the universe that are outside
our current light horizon may have been “informed” that it was time
to start, no matter the physical distance.
                                                                           Appendix F




   This radical idea is consistent with Richard Feynman’s path
integral (or “sum-over-histories”) formulation of quantum mechan-
ics. In calculating the probability of a quantum event, the path inte-
gral is computed over all the possible paths of virtual photons, many
travelling faster than the speed of light.
         418   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                i o t i c s
                      Bi   osem
Appendix G




                                                                    This chapter on the web
                                      informationphilosopher.com/presentations/biosemiotics
                                                  Biosemiotics         419


Biosemiotics
  Biosemiotics is the thesis that the essence of biology involves
the creation, processing, and communication of information, in
the form of a language that uses arbitrary symbols, inside cells,
between cells, and between all organisms and their environment.
   Information philosophy sees a continuous evolutionary devel-
opment from the earliest communications inside cells over three
billion years ago to the creation and communication of informa-
tion by human beings today. When we say that information phi-
losophy goes “beyond logic and language” we mean that many
philosophical problems are not soluble with the particular human
inventions of logic and languages today.
   All life uses negative entropy for its maintenance and
information as a guide to action, representing a repertoire of
behaviors. All living things are communicating with signs. Biose-
mioticians believe that semiosis is coextensive with life.
   We can define semiosis (Greek: σημείωσις, sēmeíōsis, from
σημειῶ, sēmeiô, “to mark”) as any form of activity, conduct, or
process that involves signs, including the production of meaning.1
The term was introduced by Charles Sanders Peirce to describe
a process he called semiotics that interprets signs as referring to
concepts and objects, about the same time that Gottlob Frege
studied denotation and meaning.
  We see this essential nesting of concepts.
  Information>Biology>Communication>Language>Semiosis
  In language we include syntax, semantics, pragmatics, morphol-
ogy (graphology and phonology, but also smells, tastes, touches,
                                                                         Appendix G




as well as emotive expressions, body “language,” sub-linguistic
communications to the “mirror neurons” in others, etc.)
  Even though intra- and inter-cellular communication using
multiple molecules over diverse pathways is getting better and
better understood, biologists have remained wary for decades of
accepting the idea of “information” in biology, with its connotation
  1    See chapter 11.
         420     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               of a conscious intentional sender “informing” a conscious inter-
               pretational receiver. Quantum physics too is plagued by concerns
               over the role of “conscious observers.” And of course philosophers
               do not yet use information as a tool for philosophical analysis. The
               philosophy of information is not information philosophy, just as
               the philosophy of language is not analytic language philosophy.
                  If we define “conscious” as being aware of incoming informa-
               tion and reacting to it with behaviors/actions that indicate the
               information is being interpreted and used correctly, we have a
               very broad definition of mindfulness that can apply to almost the
               whole of biology as well as to the computing and communicating
               machines that humans have built.2
               Will Biologists Accept Biosemiotics?
                  Biosemiotics is as legitimate a science as bioethics, bioinformat-
               ics, biolinguistics, biomathics, and code biology, to name a few at
               the boundaries of biosemiotics. The established professional soci-
               eties in each of these subdisciplines, with journals, international
               meetings, etc., are signs of a Peircean open community of inquir-
               ers that is the hallmark of a science.
                  The greatest barrier to acceptance of semiotics in biology
               may be the devotion of biosemioticians to the work of Charles
               Sanders Peirce. Peirce’s great contributions to logic and science
               are extraordinary, but he sometimes produced nonsense, wishful
               thinking that some of his ideals are actually in the world.
                  Peirce’s greatest mistake was his triadic analysis of 1) thesis and
               firstness of Tychism/chance, setting it “over against” 2) the antith-
               esis and secondness of Ananchism/necessity. The ultimate blow
               was his Hegel-inspired 3) Aufhebung and thirdness of Synechism/
Appendix G




               continuity, his perhaps deeply Christian hope for “evolutionary
               love” to blunt the “greedy” nature of chance in Darwin.
                 Biosemioticians need to decide between being disciples of
               Peirce or a subdiscipline of biology. Ferdinand de Saussure’s
               dyadics may fall short of Peirce’s interpretant, but as a linguist he
               was as great as Peirce and his move to synchronic structure as
                 2     See chapter 14 on consciousness.
                                                               Biosemiotics          421

a diagnostic tool to understand diachronic function and his great
insistence that signs (symbols) are arbitrary inventions may be as
important for communications in molecular biology as Peirce’s
insistence on interpretation.
    Indeed, signaling in biology generally has very little interpreta-
tion in the sense of Shannon’s entropy/uncertainty before a message
is received, which becomes information after receipt. This is because
evolution has for the most part reduced the message “possibilities,”
for example with an artful combination, perhaps left over from the
RNA world, of editing in advance of protein creation (especially in
eukaryotes) and aggressive “error” detection and correction after-
wards. A major task for biosemiotics is to find specific examples in
biology of signaling as signing, i.e. with interpretations of the sign.
Examples in the case of a neurotransmitter being interpreted - in
a context, which Roman Jakobson3 added to Shannon’s informa-
tion communication - in more than one way. We can summarize the
foundations of biosemiotics in the form of a flow chart.




                                                                                       Appendix G




  3    “Linguistics and Poetics,” in Style in Language, ed. T. Sebeok, 1960, p.350
           422   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                    ra p hy
                          ib l i o g
                       B
Bibliography
                                                         Bibliography            423


Bibliography
Arrow of Time
Davies, P. C. W. The Physics of Time Asymmetry. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
       University of California Press, 1977.
Gold, Thomas, ed. The Nature of Time. First Edition edition. Cornell Univer-
       sity Press, 1967.
Price, Huw. Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point: New Directions for the Physics
       of Time. New York: Oxford Paperbacks, 1997.
Reichenbach, Hans. The Direction of Time. Mineola, N.Y: Dover Publications,
       1999.
Zeh, H. Dieter. The Physical Basis of The Direction of Time. 5th edition.
       Springer, 2013.

Biology
Alberts, Bruce, Alexander Johnson, Julian Lewis, David Morgan, Martin Raff,
       Keith Roberts, and Peter Walter. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 6 edi-
       tion. New York, NY: Garland Science, 2014.
Barbieri, Marcello. Code Biology: A New Science of Life. 2015 edition. New
       York, NY: Springer, 2015.
Brooks, Daniel R., and E. O. Wiley. Evolution As Entropy: Toward a Unified
       Theory of Biology. Second Edition edition. Chicago: University of Chi-
       cago Press, 1988.
Mayr, Ernst. Toward a New Philosophy of Biology: Observations of an Evolu-
       tionist. Reprint edition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
       1989.
Monod, Jacques. Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy of
       Modern Biology. Translated by Austryn Wainhouse. New York: Vintage
       Books, 1972.
Morowitz, Harold J. Energy Flow in Biology. Ox Bow Press, 1979.
Murphy, Kenneth. Janeway’s Immunobiology. 8 edition. New York: Garland
       Science, 2011.
Schrodinger, Erwin. What Is Life?: With “Mind and Matter” and “Autobio-
                                                                                   Bibliography




       graphical Sketches.” Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Smith, John, Szathmáry, Eörs Maynard. The Major Transitions in Evolution
       by Maynard Smith, John, Szathmáry, Eörs. Reprint edition. Oxford
       University Press, 1997.
           424      Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Chance
                 Born, Max. Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance. New York: Dover Publi-
                         cations, 1964.
                 Hacking, Ian. The Emergence of Probability: A Philosophical Study of Early
                         Ideas about Probability, Induction and Statistical Inference. 2 edition.
                         Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
                 Lestienne, Remy, and E C Neher. The Creative Power of Chance. University of
                         Illinois Press, 1998.
                 Lucretius, Titus, W. H. D. Rouse, and M. F. Smith. De Rerum Natura: On the
                         Nature of Things. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1924.
                 Monod, Jacques. Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy of
                         Modern Biology. Translated by Austryn Wainhouse. New York: Vintage
                         Books, 1972.
                 Porter, Theodore M. The Rise of Statistical Thinking, 1820-1900. Princeton
                         University Press, 1988.
                 Consciousness
                 Baars, Bernard J. In the Theater of Consciousness: The Workspace of the Mind.
                         New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
                 Chalmers, David J. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory.
                         1st ed. Oxford University Press, USA, 1997.
                 Dennett, Daniel C. Consciousness Explained. 1st ed. Back Bay Books, 1992.
                 Koch, Christof. The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological Approach. 1
                         edition. Denver, Colo: Roberts & Company Publishers, 2004.
                 Koch, Christof, and Joel L. Davis, eds. Large-Scale Neuronal Theories of the
                         Brain. 1 edition. Cambridge, Mass: A Bradford Book, 1994.
                 Nagel, Thomas. Mortal Questions. Cambridge [Eng.]: Cambridge University
                         Press, 1979.
                 Searle, John R. The Mystery of Consciousness. 1st ed. New York Review Books,
                         1990.
                 Strawson, Galen, Peter Carruthers, Frank Jackson, William G. Lycan, Colin
                         McGinn, David Papineau, Georges Rey, J. J. C. Smart, and et al. Con-
                         sciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism?
                         Edited by Anthony Freeman. Exeter, UK ; Charlottesville, Va: Imprint
                         Academic, 2006.
Bibliography




                 Cosmology
                 Holt, Jim. Why Does the World Exist?: An Existential Detective Story. 1 edition.
                         New York: Liveright, 2013.
                 Krauss, Lawrence M., and Richard Dawkins. A Universe from Nothing: Why
                         There Is Something Rather than Nothing. New York: Atria Books, 2013.
                 Layzer, David. Cosmogenesis: The Growth of Order in the Universe. New York:
                         Oxford University Press, 1991.
                                                           Bibliography             425

Liddle, Andrew. An Introduction to Modern Cosmology.Wiley, 2015.
Weinberg, Steven. Cosmology. OUP Oxford, 2008.
Weinberg, Steven. The First Three Minutes: A Modern View Of The Origin Of
       The Universe. New York: Basic Books, 1993.
Decoherence
Joos, Erich, H. Dieter Zeh, Claus Kiefer, Domenico J. W. Giulini, Joachim
       Kupsch, and Ion-Olimpiu Stamatescu. Decoherence and the Appearance
       of a Classical World in Quantum Theory. 2nd ed. 2003 edition. Berlin,
       Heidelberg: Springer, 2010.
Schlosshauer, Maximilian A. Decoherence and the Quantum-to-Classical Tran-
       sition. Berlin ; London: Springer, 2008.
Tegmark, Max. Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest for the Ultimate Nature
       of Reality. New York: Vintage, 2015.
Einstein
Bernstein, Jeremy. Einstein. Penguin, 1979.
———. Secrets of the Old One: Einstein, 1905. 2006 edition. New York: Coper-
       nicus, 2005.
Einstein, Albert. Ideas And OpinionsNew York: Broadway Books, 1995.
———. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Volume 2: The Swiss Years:
       Writings, 1900-1909. Edited by John Stachel, David C. Cassidy, Jürgen
       Renn, and Robert Schulmann. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
       Press, 1990.
———. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Volume 6: The Berlin Years:
       Writings, 1914-1917. Edited by A. J. Kox, Martin J. Klein, and Robert
       Schulmann. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996.
Einstein, Albert, and Max Born. The Born - Einstein Letters: Friendship, Politics
       and Physics in Uncertain Times. Macmillan, 2005.
Einstein, Albert, and Roger Penrose. Einstein’s Miraculous Year: Five Papers
       That Changed the Face of Physics. Edited by John Stachel. Princeton,
       NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Frank, Philipp. Einstein: His Life And Times. Cambridge, Mass.: Da Capo
       Press: Da Capo Press, 2002.
Gamalath, Wijewardena. Einstein: His Life and Works. 1 edition. Oxford:
       Alpha Science International Ltd, 2012.
Isaacson, Walter. Einstein: His Life and Universe. New York, NY: Simon &
                                                                                      Bibliography




       Schuster, 2008.
Lanczos, Cornelius. The Einstein Decade, 1905-1915. New York: Academic
       Press, 1974.
Stachel, John. Einstein from “B” to “Z.” Boston: Birkhäuser, 2001.
           426        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Emergence
                 Alexander, Samuel. Space, Time, and Deity: The Gifford Lectures at Glasgow,
                         1916-1918. HardPress Publishing, 2012.
                 Beckermann, Ansgar, Hans Flohr, and Jaegwon Kim, eds. Emergence or Reduc-
                         tion?: Essays on the Prospects of Nonreductive Physicalism. Berlin ; New
                         York: de Gruyter, 1992.
                 Chaisson, Eric J. Cosmic Evolution: The Rise of Complexity in Nature. Cambridge,
                         Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002.
                 Clayton, Philip, and Paul Davies, eds. The Re-Emergence of Emergence: The
                         Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion. . Oxford: Oxford Univer-
                         sity Press, 2008.
                 Corradini, Antonella, and Timothy O’Connor, eds. Emergence in Science and
                         Philosophy. New York: Routledge, 2013.
                 Holland, John H. Emergence: From Chaos To Order. Cambridge, Mass: Basic
                         Books, 1999.
                 Koestler, Arthur, and J. R. Smythies. Beyond Reductionism New Perspectives In
                         The Life Sciences. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co, 1971.
                 Lewes, George Henry. Problems of Life and Mind. University of Toronto Librar-
                         ies, 2011.
                 Mill, John Stuart. A System of Logic. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Plat-
                         form, 2012.
                 Morgan, C. Lloyd. Emergent Evolution. Chandra Chakravarti Press, 2007.
                 Morowitz, Harold J. The Emergence of Everything: How the World Became Com-
                         plex. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
                 Waldrop, M. Mitchell. Complexity The Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and
                         Chaos. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 1992.
                 Zurek, Wojciech H., ed. Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information. Red-
                         wood City, Calif: Westview Press, 1990.
                 Entanglement
                 Gilder, Louisa. The Age of Entanglement: When Quantum Physics Was Reborn.
                         10.11.2009 edition. New York: Vintage, 2009.
                 Jaeger, Gregg. Entanglement, Information, and the Interpretation of Quantum
                         Mechanics. 2009 edition. Berlin: Springer, 2009.
                 Epistemology
Bibliography




                 Almeder, Robert. Harmless Naturalism: The Limits of Science and the Nature of
                       Philosophy. Chicago: Open Court, 1999.
                 Armstrong, D. M. Belief, Truth and Knowledge. London: Cambridge University
                       Press, 1973.
                 Dancy, Jonathan, Ernest Sosa, and Matthias Steup, eds. A Companion to Episte-
                       mology.. Chichester, West Sussex, U.K. ; Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell,
                       2010.
                                                          Bibliography               427

Goldman, Alvin I. Epistemology and Cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
       University Press, 1988.
Kornblith, Hilary, ed. Naturalizing Epistemology. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press,
       1985.
Popper, Karl. Evolutionary Epistemology, Rationality, and the Sociology of Knowl-
       edge. Edited by Gerard Radnitzky and W. W. Bartley. La Salle Ill.: Open
       Court Publishing Company, 1993.
Quine, W. V. Ontological Relativity & Other Essays. New York: Columbia Univer-
       sity Press, 1969.
Russell, Bertrand. Our Knowledge of the External World. London ; New York:
       Routledge, 2009.
Sosa, Ernest, Jaegwon Kim, Jeremy Fantl, and Matthew McGrath, eds. Epistemol-
       ogy: An Anthology. . Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2008.
Swinburne, Richard, ed. Justification of Induction. London: Oxford University
       Press, 1974.
Free Will
Dennett, Daniel C. Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology.
        The MIT Press, 1981.
Doyle, Bob. Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: Information
        Philosopher, 2011.
Fischer, John Martin, ed. Free Will: Critical Concepts in Philosophy. London ;
        New York: Routledge, 2005.
Gazzaniga, Michael S. Who’s in Charge?: Free Will and the Science of the Brain.
        New York: Ecco, 2012.
Hobbes, Thomas, and John Bramhall. Hobbes and Bramhall on Liberty and
        Necessity. Edited by Vere Chappell. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Honderich, Ted. How Free Are You?: The Determinism Problem. Oxford Univer-
        sity Press, USA, 2002.
Inwagen, Peter Van. An Essay on Free Will. Oxford University Press, USA, 1983.
James, William. The Will to Believe : And Other Essays in Popular Philosophy,
Kane, Robert. A Contemporary Introduction to Free Will. Oxford University
        Press, USA, 2005.
———. The Oxford Handbook of Free Will. Oxford University Press, USA, 2005.
Murphy, Nancey C. Did My Neurons Make Me Do It?: Philosophical and Neu-
        robiological Perspectives on Moral Responsibility and Free Will. Oxford:
        Oxford University Press, 2007.
                                                                                       Bibliography




Murphy, Nancey, George F. R. Ellis, and Timothy O’Connor, eds. Downward
        Causation and the Neurobiology of Free Will. 2009 edition. Berlin ;Heidel-
        berg: Springer, 2009.
Searle, John R. Freedom and Neurobiology: Reflections on Free Will, Language,
        and Political Power. Columbia Themes in Philosophy. New York: Colum-
        bia University Press, 2007.
Swinburne, Richard, ed. Free Will and Modern Science. Oxford ; New York: Brit-
        ish Academy, 2012.
           428        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Information in Biology
                 Avery, John. Information Theory and Evolution. World Scientific Publishing
                        Company, 2003.
                 Campbell, Jeremy. Grammatical Man: Information, Entropy,Language and Life.
                        Ward & Balkin Agency, Inc., 2012.
                 Gatlin, Lila L. Information Theory and the Living System. New York: Columbia
                        University Press, 1973.
                 Quastler, Henry, Ed. Information Theory in Biology. University of Illinois Press,
                        1953.
                 Witzany, Guenther. Biocommunication and Natural Genome Editing. 2010 edi-
                        tion. Place of publication not identified: Springer, 2014.
                 Yockey, Hubert P. Information Theory, Evolution, and The Origin of Life. Cam-
                        bridge University Press, 2005.
                 Information
                 Brillouin, Leon. Science and Information Theory: Second Edition. Mineola, New
                        York: Dover Publications, 2013.
                 Chaitin, Gregory J. Information Randomness and Incompleteness: Papers on
                        Algorithmic Information Theory. Singapore ; New Jersey: World Scientific
                        Pub Co Inc, 1990.
                 Cover, Thomas M., and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory 2nd Edi-
                        tion. Hoboken, N.J: Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
                 Davies, Paul, and Niels Henrik Gregersen. Information and the Nature of Reality.
                        Cambridge University Press, 2011.
                 Newell, Allen. Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall,
                        1972.
                 Reading, Anthony. Meaningful Information: The Bridge Between Biology, Brain,
                        and Behavior. New York: Springer, 2011.
                 Roederer, Juan. Information and Its Role in Nature. Berlin: Springer, 2010.
                 Sebeok, Thomas. Style in Language. MIT Press, 1964.
                 Shannon, Claude E., and Warren Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Commu-
                        nication. University of Illinois Press, 2015.
                 Weber, Bruce H., David J. Depew, and James D. Smith, eds. Entropy, Informa-
                        tion, and Evolution: New Perspectives on Physical and Biological Evolution.
                        Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1988.
                 Wicken, Jeffrey S. Evolution, Thermodynamics, and Information: Extending the
Bibliography




                        Darwinian Program. Oxford University Press, USA, 1987.
                 Meaning
                 Carnap, Rudolf. Meaning and Necessity: A Study in Semantics and Modal Logic. 1
                       edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
                 Dreyfus, Hubert L., and Harrison Hall, eds. Husserl, Intentionality, and Cognitive
                       Science. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1984.
                                                          Bibliography             429

Husserl, Edmund, and Dermot Moran. Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phe-
       nomenology. London ; New York: Routledge, 2012.
MacKay, Donald M. Information, Mechanism and Meaning. Cambridge, Mass:
       The MIT Press, 1969.
Nagel, Ernest & Brandt, Richard B. Meaning and Knowledge: Systematic Readings
       in Epistemology. Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1965.
Ogden, C. K., and I. A. Richards. Meaning Of Meaning. San Diego: Mariner
       Books, 1989.
Polanyi, Michael, and Harry Prosch. Meaning. Chicago: University Of Chicago
       Press, 1977.
Putnam, Hilary. Meaning and the Moral Sciences. London: Routledge, 2010.
Metaphysics
Chisholm, Roderick M. On Metaphysics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
       Press, 1989.
Lowe, E. J. A Survey of Metaphysics. Oxford ; New York: Oxford University
       Press, 2002.
Rea, Michael, ed. Metaphysics. London ; New York: Routledge, 2008.
Taylor, Richard. Metaphysics. Prentice-Hall Foundations of Philosophy Series.
       Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall, 1963.
van Inwagen, Peter. Metaphysics. Fourth Edition, Boulder: Westview Press, 2014.
Mind
Andersen, Elizabeth A., Peder Voetmann Christiansen, Claus Emmeche, and
       Niels Ole Finnemann. Downward Causation: Minds, Bodies and Matter.
       Aarhus: Aarhus University Press, 2001.
Annas, Julia. Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind. Hellenistic Culture and Society 8.
       Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.
Bechtel, William, and George Graham, eds. A Companion to Cognitive Science.
       Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell, 1999.
Chalmers, David J. Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings.
       Oxford University Press, USA, 2002.
Churchland, Patricia Smith. Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of the
       Mind-Brain. The MIT Press, 1989.
Crick, Francis. The Astonishing Hypothesis: The Scientific Search for the Soul.
       Reprint edition. London: Scribner, 1995.
Damasio, Anthony. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain.
                                                                                     Bibliography




       Reprint edition. London: Penguin Books, 2005.
Damasio, Antonio. Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. Re-
       print edition. New York: Vintage, 2012.
Davidson, Donald. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford : New York: Clarendon
       Press, 2001.
Delbruck, Max. Mind from Matter?: An Essay on Evolutionary Epistemology.
           430        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                         Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1986.
                 Descartes, René. Meditations on First Philosophy. Hackett Publishing, 1993.
                 Descartes, René. Discourse on Method and Related Writings. Translated by Des-
                         mond M. Clarke. London ; New York: Penguin Classics, 2000.
                 Donald, Merlin. A Mind So Rare: The Evolution of Human Consciousness. New
                         York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2002.
                 Eccles, John C. How the Self Controls Its Brain. Springer-Verlag Telos, 1994.
                 Feigl, Herbert, Michael Scriven, and Grover Maxwell, eds. Concepts, Theories,
                         and the Mind-Body Problem. Minnesota Archive Editions edition. Min-
                         neapolis: Univ Of Minnesota Press, 1958.
                 Flanagan, Owen. The Problem Of The Soul: Two Visions Of Mind And How To
                         Reconcile Them. New York: Basic Books, 2003.
                 Foster, John. The Immaterial Self: A Defence of the Cartesian Dualist Conception
                         of the Mind. London: Routledge, 1991.
                 Hasker, William. The Emergent Self. Ithaca, N.Y. ;London: Cornell University
                         Press, 2001.
                 Hebb, D. O. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. Mah-
                         wah, N.J: Psychology Press, 2002.
                 Heil, John, ed. Philosophy of Mind: A Guide and Anthology. Oxford ; New York:
                         Oxford University Press, 2004.
                 ______, and Alfred Mele, Mental Causation. Oxford, England: Clarendon, 1993.
                 Kandel, Eric R., James H. Schwartz, Thomas M. Jessell, Steven A. Siegelbaum,
                         and A. J. Hudspeth, eds. Principles of Neural Science, Fifth Edition. New
                         York: McGraw-Hill Education / Medical, 2012.
                 Kim, Jaegwon. Mind in a Physical World: An Essay on the Mind-Body Problem
                         and Mental Causation. Cambridge, Mass.: A Bradford Book, 2000.
                 ———. Philosophy of Mind. Third Edition, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2010.
                 ———. Physicalism, or Something Near Enough. Princeton: Princeton University
                         Press, 2007.
                 Lange, Frederick Albert. The History of Materialism. Third edition. Humanities
                         Press, 1950.
                 Libet, Benjamin. Mind Time: The temporal factor in consciousness. Harvard
                            University Press, 2009.
                 Lowe, E. J. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge, U.K. ; New
                         York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
                 Moser, Paul K., and J. D. Trout, eds. Contemporary Materialism: A Reader. Lon-
Bibliography




                         don ; New York: Routledge, 1995.
                 Nagel, Thomas. Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Concep-
                         tion of Nature Is Almost Certainly False. New York: Oxford University
                         Press, 2012.
                 O’Connor, John. Modern Materialism: Readings on Mind-Body Identity. Har-
                         court, Brace, 1969.
                 O’Hear, Anthony. Contemporary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge,
                         U.K. ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
                                                            Bibliography               431

Penrose, Roger. The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the
        Laws of Physics. New Ed. Oxford University Press, USA, 2002.
———. The Large, the Small and the Human Mind. 1st ed. Cambridge University
        Press, 2000.
Rosenthal, David M., ed. Materialism and the Mind-Body Problem. Englewood
        Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1971.
Ryle, Gilbert. The Concept of Mind. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1949.
Sayre, Kenneth M. Cybernetics and the Philosophy of Mind. Atlantic High-
        lands, N.J: Humanities Press, 1976.
Schilpp, Paul Arthur, ed. The Philosophy of Karl Popper. La Salle, Ill: Open Court
        Publishing Co ,U.S., 1977.
Searle, John. Minds, Brains and Science. Harvard University Press, 1986.
Searle, John R. Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge
        Cambridgeshire ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Sellars, Wilfrid, and Richard Rorty. Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind.
        Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1997.
Stapp, Henry P. Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating
        Observer. Berlin ; New York: Springer, 2011.
Strawson, Galen. Real Materialism: And Other Essays. Oxford University Press,
        USA, 2007.
Swinburne, Richard. The Evolution of the Soul. Oxford England : New York:
        Clarendon Press, 1997.
Thagard, Paul. Mind: Introduction to Cognitive Science, Cambridge, Mass: A
        Bradford Book, 2005.
Walter, Sven, and Heinz-Dieter Heckmann, eds. Physicalism and Mental Causa-
        tion. Exeter, UK ; Charlottesville, VA: Imprint Academic, 2003.
Warner, Richard, and Tadeusz Szubka, eds. The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide
        to the Current Debate. Oxford, UK ; Cambridge, USA: Wiley-Blackwell,
        1994.
Origin of Life
Cairns-Smith, A. G. Seven Clues to the Origin of Life: A Scientific Detective Story.
       New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Cairns-Smith, Alexander Graham, and H. Hartman, eds. Clay Minerals and the
       Origin of Life. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Crick, Francis. Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature. New York: Touchstone, Simon &
                                                                                         Bibliography




       Schuster, 1982.
Dyson, Freeman. Origins of Life. Cambridge England ; New York: Cambridge
       University Press, 1999.
Eigen, Manfred. The Hypercycle: A Principle of Natural Self Organization. Berlin ;
       New York: Springer-Verlag, 1979.
Eigen, Manfred, and Ruthild Winkler-Oswatitsch. Steps towards Life: A Perspec-
       tive on Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Gregersen, Niels Henrik, ed. From Complexity to Life: On The Emergence of Life
       and Meaning. Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.
           432        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Hazen, Robert. Genesis: The Scientific Quest for Life’s Origins. Joseph Henry
                         Press, 2007.
                 Kauffman, Stuart. At Home in the Universe: The Search for the Laws of Self-Orga-
                         nization and Complexity. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
                 Küppers, Bernd-Olaf. Information and the Origin of Life. Cambridge, Mass: The
                         MIT Press, 1990.
                 Luisi, Pier Luigi. The Emergence of Life: From Chemical Origins to Synthetic Biol-
                         ogy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
                 Morowitz, Harold J. Beginnings of Cellular Life: Metabolism Recapitulates Biogen-
                         esis. Yale University Press, 2004.
                 Oparin, A. I. Life: Its Nature, Origin and Development. Academic Press, 1961.
                 Orgel, Leslie E. Orgel: The Origins of Life. New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc,
                         1973.
                 Smith, John Maynard, and Eors Szathmary. The Origins of Life: From the Birth of
                         Life to the Origin of Language. Oxford Paperbacks, 2000.
                 Philosophy
                 Ajdukiewicz, K. Problems and Theories of Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge
                        University Press, 1975.
                 Ayer, A. J. The Central Questions of Philosophy. New York: W. Morrow, 1975.
                 Feinberg, Joel, and Russ Shafer-Landau. Reason and Responsibility: Readings in
                        Some Basic Problems of Philosophy. Australia: Cengage Learning, 2013.
                 James, William. Some Problems of Philosophy: A Beginning of an Introduction to
                        Philosophy. HardPress Publishing, 2013.
                 Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. New York: Oxford
                        University Press, 1979.
                 Moore, George Edward. Some Main Problems of Philosophy. Routledge, 2015.
                 Rader, Melvin M., and Jerry H. Gill. The Enduring Questions: Main Problems of
                        Philosophy. Fort Worth: Holt Rinehart and Winston, 1990.
                 Russell, Bertrand. The Problems of Philosophy. Radford, VA: Wilder Publications,
                        2009.
                 Stumpf, Samuel Enoch, and James Feiser. Philosophy: History and Problems: 6th
                        Edition. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2003.
                 Wittgenstein, Ludwig, and Bertrand Russell. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus:
                        German and English. Translated by C. K. Ogden. New Ed edition. Lon-
                        don ; New York: Routledge, 1981.
Bibliography
                                                          Bibliography              433


Physics
Bohm, David. Quantum Theory. Dover Publications, 1989.
Boltzmann, Ludwig. Lectures on Gas Theory. New York: Dover Publications,
        2011.
Cassidy, David C. Uncertainty: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg. W. H.
        Freeman, 1993.
Cassirer, Ernst. Determinism and Indeterminism in Modern Physics. Yale, 1956.
Cercignani, Carlo, and Roger Penrose. Ludwig Boltzmann: The Man Who
        Trusted Atoms. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Eddington, A. S. The Nature of the Physical World. Kessinger Publishing, LLC,
        2005.
Eddington, Sir Arthur. New Pathways In Science. Frazer Press, 2007.
Einstein, Albert. Ideas And Opinions. New York: Broadway Books, 1995.
———. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Volume 2: The Swiss Years: Writ-
        ings, 1900-1909. Edited by John Stachel, David C. Cassidy, Jürgen Renn,
        and Robert Schulmann. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990.
———. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Volume 6: The Berlin Years: Writ-
        ings, 1914-1917. Edited by A. J. Kox, Martin J. Klein, and Robert Schul-
        mann. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996.
Einstein, Albert, and Max Born. The Born - Einstein Letters: Friendship, Politics
        and Physics in Uncertain Times. Macmillan, 2005.
Greenspan, Nancy Thorndike. The End of the Certain World: The Life and Science
        of Max Born, 2005.
Lindley, David. Boltzmanns Atom: The Great Debate That Launched A Revolution
        In Physics. 1st ed. Free Press, 2001.
———. Uncertainty Einstein Heisenberg Bohr And The Struggle For The Soul Of
        Science. New York; Anchor Books:, Random House 2007
Moore, Walter J. Schrödinger: Life and Thought. Cambridge University Press,
        1992.
Pais, Abraham. Niels Bohr’s Times,: In Physics, Philosophy, and Polity. Oxford
        University Press, USA, 1994.
———. Subtle Is the Lord: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford
        University Press, USA, 2005.
Pauli, Wolfgang, L. Rosenfeld, and V. Weisskopf, eds. Niels Bohr and the Devel-
        opment of Physics; Essays Dedicated to Niels Bohr on the Occasion of His
        Seventieth Birthday. McGraw-Hill, 1955.
                                                                                      Bibliography




Planck, Max. Where Is Science Going? Ox Bow Press, 1981.
Prigogine, Ilya. Order Out of Chaos. Shambhala, 1984.
Reif, Frederick. Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics. McGraw-Hill
        Science/Engineering/Math, 1965.
Wigner, Eugene Paul. Symmetries and Reflections. Woodbridge, Conn.: Ox Bow
        Pr, 1979.
           434        Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Psychology
                 Antonietti, Alessandro, Antonella Corradini, and E. Jonathan Lowe, eds. Psycho-
                        Physical Dualism Today: An Interdisciplinary Approach. Lanham, MD:
                        Lexington Books, 2008.
                 Brentano, Franz. Psychology from An Empirical Standpoint. Routledge, 2014.
                 James, William. The Principles of Psychology, New York: Dover Publications,
                        1950.
                 Roback, A. A. A History of American Psychology, New York: Collier Books, 1964.
                 Schacter, Daniel L., Daniel T. Gilbert, and Daniel M. Wegner. Psychology. New
                        York: Worth Publishers, 2007.
                 Skinner, B. F. Science And Human Behavior. New York, NY: Free Press, 1965.
                 Watson, John B. Behaviorism. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1970.
                 Watson, John B., and William MacDougall. The Battle Of Behaviorism: An Expo-
                        sition And An Exposure. Kessinger Publishing, LLC, 2010.


                 Quantum Mechanics
                 Bacciagaluppi, Guido, and Antony Valentini. Quantum Theory at the Crossroads:
                          Reconsidering the 1927 Solvay Conference. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
                          versity Press, 2013.
                 Bell, J. S., and Alain Aspect. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechan-
                          ics: Collected Papers on Quantum Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge
                          University Press, 2004.
                 Bohm, David. Quantum Theory. Dover Publications, 1989.
                 Bohr, Niels. Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge. Mineola, N.Y: Dover Publi-
                          cations, 2010.
                 Davies, P. C. W., and Julian R. Brown, eds. The Ghost in the Atom: A Discussion
                          of the Mysteries of Quantum Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                          Press, 1993.
                 Dirac, Paul A. M. Lectures on Quantum Mechanics. 4th edition. New York: Clar-
                          endon Press, 1982
                 Jammer, Max. The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics. McGraw
                          Hill, 1966.
                 ———. The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics: The Interpretations of Quantum
                          Mechanics in Historical Perspective. New York: Wiley, 1974.
                 Lifshitz, L. D. Landau and E. M. Quantum Mechanics: Non-Relativistic Theory.
Bibliography




                          Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1958.
                 Mehra, Jagdish, and Helmut Rechenberg. The Historical Development of Quan-
                          tum Theory Volumes 1-6. New York: Springer, 2001.
                 Neumann, John von. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Princ-
                          eton: Princeton University Press, 1996.
                 Pais, Abraham, Maurice Jacob, David I. Olive, and Michael F. Atiyah. Paul Dirac:
                          The Man and His Work. Cambridge University Press, 2005.
                                                            Bibliography           435

van der Waerden, B. L., ed. Sources of Quantum Mechanics. New York, N.Y:
      Dover Publications, 1968.
Wheeler, John Archibald, and Wojciech Hubert Zurek. Quantum Theory and
      Measurement. Princeton Univ Pr, 1984.
Theology
Boyd, Gregory A., David Hunt, William Lane Craig, and Paul Helm. Divine
       Foreknowledge: Four Views. Edited by James K. Beilby and Paul R. Eddy.
       Downers Grove, Ill: IVP Academic, 2001.
Dawkins, Richard. The God Delusion. Mariner Books, 2008.
Dennett, Daniel C. Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon. Viking,
       2007.
Flew, Antony G. God, Freedom and Immortality. Amherst, N.Y: Prometheus
       Books, 1984.
Hume, David, and Richard H. Popkin. Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion:
       The Posthumous Essays of the Immortality of the Soul and of Suicide.
       Hackett Pub Co, 1998.
Value
Nagel, Thomas. The View from Nowhere. New York: Oxford University Press,
        1986.
Peirce, Charles. Values in a Universe of Chance: Selected Writings of Charles S.
        Peirce. Dover Publications, 1958.




                                                                                     Bibliography
    436             Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

        Index                                               as language game 17, 103, 331
                                                            attack on metaphysics 53
                                                            causa sui an oxymoron 217–220
        A                                                   not philosophy of language 420
        abduction 132–137, 145                              paradoxes of xiii
        absorber theory of radiation 283                    pseudo problems of 132
        abstract entities                                 Annas, Julia 69
          epistemology and 103                            a posteriori 29, 111–115, 150
          information as 5–6, 57, 331–334                 a priori
          in the mind 157, 304                              as science foundation 116
          metaphysics and 17, 25                            Bertrand Russell on 219
          ontology and 55                                   epistemology and 107–111
          universals as 120                                 information philosophy and xiii, 331–334
        acausality 71–77, 152, 172, 255                     Kant and 111
        action-at-a-distance 132–137, 233, 377              metaphysics and 18–19, 28
        actualism 23, 28–30, 107–117                        mind and 150
        actual possible 25–27                             Aquinas 131
        adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 323–326              Arcesilaus 108
        adequate determinism                              Aristotle
          as result of averaging 7, 198, 308                determinism and 218, 223
          as statistical 219                                entelechy and 12
          detailed balancing and 291                        epistemology and 104
          free will and 71-72 70–77, 163, 172, 247, 385     mind and 151–153, 156
          mental causation and 187                          on being 19
          mind and 157, 189–198                             on chance and free will 71-74, 379
          physical laws and 218                             on essentialism 41–42
        Aenesidemus 108                                     on metaphysics 35–39, 50
        agent causality 63, 75–77, 172                      on the good 80
        Alexander, Samuel 298                               on time 279
        Allen, Woody 101                                    ontology and 55
        Alston, William 114                                 on universals 119
        alternative possibilities                         Armstrong, David 114
          animals have 82                                 Arrow, Kenneth 92
          as agenda in mind 221–222                       arrow of time
          as metaphysical 27                                cosmological arrow 277, 283
          come to mind 187                                  decoherence and 251, 254–257
          free will and 22, 73–77, 332–335, 392–393         growth of information 338, 343
          Harry Frankfurt denied 113                        historical arrow 281
          in cosmic creation 412–415                        irreversibility and 285
          past experiences as 405–407                       radiation arrow 282
          quantum chance and 66, 157, 163                   thermodynamic arrow 277
          R. E. Hobart and 220–221                        Aspect, Alain 238
          Schrödinger’s cat and 274                       association of ideas 167, 173, 398
Index
Index




          the will evaluating 172                         atheism 71, 99, 382, 384
          William James on 385                            ATP synthase 184–187, 321–329
        amino acids 181                                   Augustine 185
        analytic language philosophy                      autocatalytic 314–317
          analytic-synthetic distinction 110, 122         axiom of measurement 190, 192, 201, 234,
          as ambiguous 20                                     252–255, 367–372
                                                                          Index        437
Ayer, A. J. xi, 112–116                        Boltzmann entropy
                                                arrow of time and 277
B                                               cosmic creation and 413
Baade, Walter 414–417                           flows of 354
Baars, Bernard 72,73, 167, 403                  measurement and 203, 209
Bacon, Francis 83–89, 131                       recurrence and 294
Barthes, Roland 141                             Shannon entropy and 350
Bauer, Edmond 212                              Boltzmann, Ludwig
becoming 19                                     arrow of time and 277
behaviorism 141, 148                            Boltzmann factor and 290, 346, 352, 361
being 19, 41, 50–52, 106                        Boltzmann principle 290
Bell inequalities 237, 238                      H-Theorem of 93, 285, 334–337
Bell, John Stewart                              Loschmidt reversibility and 260–267
  decoherence and 253–256                       on entropy increase 413–416
  on entanglement 245–247                       on existence of atoms 46, 52–53, 134, 362
  on his inequalities 237                       on gas laws 161, 345, 382
  on measurement 213                           Born, Max 230, 250–253, 365, 376, 383
  on observables and beables 192               Born rule 367–368
  on the shifty split 211, 259                 bottom-up 160, 180, 186, 297, 306
Belsham, William 222                           Brahe, Tycho 131
Bergson, Henri 300                             Brentano, Franz 144
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von 334–337                Brillouin, Leon 278, 334–337
beyond logic and language 153, 419–421         British empiricists 121, 180
binding problem 166, 168, 398                  Broad, C.D. 299
biocommunications 41, 319–322, 419–421         Brownian motion 345
biological information processor 12–13, 141,   Brown, Robert 134
   148, 311–314, 320–323                       Buckle, Henry Thomas 348, 382
biological machines 319–329                    Burke, Michael 34
biosemiotics 20, 63, 419–421
birefringent crystal 207–212                   C
blackboard model 72 167                        Cajal, Santiago Ramón y 396
Black, Max 32                                  calculus of probabilities 345, 381
Bohm, David 213, 235, 237, 239, 253–256,       Calvin, Melvin 313
   266–267                                     Campbell, Donald 64, 177
Bohr atom 135, 364, 387                        Campbell, Jeremy 319
Bohr, Niels                                    Carnap, Rudolf 52–53, 112–116, 126, 144, 159
  and Lord Rutherford 387                      Carneades 108
  denied light quanta 353                      Cartesian theater 167
  measurement problem and 212                  carving nature at joints 44, 58, 126–129
  on Copenhagen Interpretation 192, 201        Cassirer, Ernst 211, 223
  on Correspondence Principle 193, 198         causal closure
  on decoherence 249–252, 258–261               bottom up 186, 297–298
  on free choice of experimenter 246–247        eliminative materialism and 172
                                                                                              Index




  on universals 123                             mental causation and 187
  quantum postulates of 269                     of physical world xi
  uncertainty principle and 203                 philosophy of mind and 148
  von Neumann processes and 205                causality
Bois-Reymond, Emil du 223                       agent. See agent causality
Boltzmann constant 334, 351                     Aristotle on 106
    438             Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
          determinism and 218                                decoherence and 252–257
          event. See event causality                         Einstein and 363
          mind as causal force 21, 57, 155                   entanglement and 233, 235, 237, 240
        causa sui 72, 217, 218, 380, 386                     irreversibility and 285
        certainty 18–53, 110–114, 122–129, 190–195,          many worlds split by 29
            218, 231                                         measurement and 201
        Chaisson, Eric 354                                   von Neumann process and 205
        Chalmers, David 22, 162, 168                        colocation 33–35
        chance 379–393                                      communication 10, 19
          as atheistic 71, 99                               community of inquirers 405–407
          as fifth cause 106, 129, 379                      compatibilism 70, 75–77, 157, 218, 223
          as greedy in Darwin 420                           complementarity 123–129, 201
          as ontological 196–199, 335, 354, 409             complex adaptive system 313
          as real 5, 345                                    composition 39, 43
          calculus of probabilities and 381                 Compton, Arthur Holly 69-71
          cosmic creation and 412                           computational mind 148, 185, 311–314,
          C. S. Peirce and 420                                 395–398
          De Moivre doctrine of 382                         computer model 332–335
          determinism and 217                               Comte, August 52
          Einstein’s discovery of 291, 354, 369, 376, 388   concept of mind 153
          Epicurus on 379                                   conceptual analysis 20–53
          free will and 69, 75–77, 392                      connectionist 165, 171
          God and 99                                        consciousness 165–169
          metaphysics and 15                                 binding problem and 166
          ontology and 57                                    emergence of 304
          open future and 219                                ERR and 395–398, 401–404
          origin of life and 315, 322–325                    hard problem of 3, 22, 153, 341
          physicists on 261, 365                             measurement and 212
          Schrödinger’s cat and 272                          mind and 147, 151
          second law and 382                                 mind-body and 157
          von Neumann process and 370                        self and 171, 173
        chaperone 305, 318–329                               Theater of 72
        character 65, 73, 157, 163, 172, 221, 401           conscious observer
        chemiosmosis 323, 328                                biosemiotics and 420
        Chisholm, Roderick 34, 40, 63, 114                   dependence on 391
        Chrysippus 34, 71, 109–113, 380                      measurement by 189, 207, 210–214, 257–258
        Churchlands, Paul and Patricia 162                   required 190, 198–199, 225
        Cicero, Marcus Tullius 108                          conservation laws 240–243
        citric acid cycle 314, 329                          constitution 43, 44
        Clarke, Randolph 63                                 content-addressable memory 396
        Clauser, John 238                                   contingency xiii, 23–25, 29, 49, 331–334
        coarse-grained 347, 350, 352                        continuity 7, 43, 46, 48, 58, 377
        codon 318                                            or discreteness 58
Index
Index




        Cogito 66, 109–113, 171                             Conway, John 246–247
        cognitive science 12, 147, 340                      Copenhagen interpretation 189, 190, 192–195,
        coinciding objects 33–35                               201, 241, 252–255, 377, 391
        collapse of the wave function 225–231               copy theory 120
          actualizing a possibility 25, 190, 195–196        correspondence principle 193, 197, 203–206,
          cosmic creation and 412                              267
                                                                           Index          439
correspondence theory xiii, 6, 331–334         detailed balancing 290
cosmic creation process 409–417                determination 217
  all information created by 10, 341           determinism 217–223
  emergence and 297, 304                        adequate. See adequate determinism
  free will and 332                             chance and 379, 392
  God and 98, 98–101                            decoherence and 255
  information structures and 191–192            determination and 220
  measurement and 210–213                       emergence of 186, 222, 297, 307, 342
  mind and 149                                  free will and 70-73
  mind-body and 155                             history of 222
  value and 86                                  illusion of 5
cosmology 50                                    indeterminism and 219
  flatness problem 414                          in physics 48–49
  horizon problem 417                           laws of motion and 190
  missing mass 416                              measuring apparatus and 189
creativity 11–13, 64, 71–77, 81–89, 133–137,    one future of. See one possible future
    157, 304                                    philosophers on 28, 110–114
Crick, Francis 162                              return of 204, 365, 377
criterion                                       Schrödinger’s cat and 269
  for essence 32                                statistical. See statistical determinism
  for identity 31                               superdeterminism and 245
crystallization 413                             time when no 308
cybernetics 334                                Dewey, John 112
                                               DeWitt, Bryce 253
D                                              Diodorus Cronus 28, 107–111
Dalton, John 134                               Dion and Theon 15, 34–36
Darwin, Charles 80–89                          Dirac 3-polarizers 193, 238, 273, 275
Davidson, Donald 162, 177                      Dirac, P.A.M.
Davies, P. C. W. 245                            projection postulate of 201, 214, 225, 234, 261
De Broglie, Louis 230, 364, 377                 quantum mechanics and 250–253, 366–374
decoherence 249–267                             superposition and 270
 cosmic creation and 413                       discovery 18, 21, 56, 98–101, 120–129
 denies projection postulate 369               discreteness 58, 336. See also continuity
 measurement and 194, 202                      dissipative systems 313, 409–412
 what’s right with 261                         DNA 80–89, 181–187, 194, 314–317
 what’s wrong with 263                         Donald, Merlin 127, 150
deduction 132                                  downward causation 160, 177, 187, 298, 303,
de-liberation 71                                  305
Democritus 218, 347, 379                       Dretske, Fred 114
De Moivre, Abraham 382                         Driesch, Hans 300
Dennett, Daniel 28, 69-72 162, 167, 403        dual-aspect 162
Derrida, Jacques 122, 140, 144                 dualisms 155, 162, 172, 304
Descartes, René                                 in metaphysics 49–50
                                                                                                  Index




 knowledge and 51, 109                         Duns Scotus, John 51–53
 mind-body and 152, 156, 160                   dynamic information model 6, 7, 48, 332–335
 on Newton 237
 reflex arc and 171                            E
 substances and 177, 304                       Eccles, John 66, 157, 162
 value as Ergo and 83–84                       Eddington, Arthur Stanley 277, 285, 295,
                                                  337–340
    440            Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
        Edwards, Jonathan 42                              ERR and 404
        Ego 171, 259–262                                  higher-level properties and 160
        Ehrenfest Theorems 252                            laws of motion and 190–193
        Eigen, Manfred 313                                major emergences 149–150
        eigenstate 192, 205–208                           mental causation and 177
        einselection 252                                  mind from matter as 179–180
        Einstein, Albert                                  of determinism 186
          atoms existence proven by 46, 52                origin of life as 311
          blackbody radiation and 353, 376                thoughts as emerging 63
          Bohr and 203                                    three kinds of 339
          Bohr atom and 364                              emotions 167
          Born rule and 366                              empiricism
          Brownian motion and 345                         British 51, 180
          critic of quantum theory, as 217                logical 112, 132
          determinism return and 365                      naturalism and 19
          discoveries in quantum mechanics 235           endurance 60
          entanglement and 233, 377                      energy
          father of quantum theory, as 354                ATP carriers of 321–325
          fluctuations and 93                             Boltzmann factor and 352
          ghost field 230, 365, 377                       communicates information 16, 343
          God and dice and 261, 354, 369, 384             conserved 12, 16, 55, 155, 240
          incoming spherical waves and 282                flows 354
          induction failure and 134                       free 313
          light quantum hypothesis of 361–364, 377        levels in Bohr atom 269, 353, 364
          local reality and 234                           matter converted to 43
          Maxwell-Boltzmann and 353                       mental causation and 185
          nonlocality and 229                             momentum and 388
          nonseparability and 234, 377                    quanta of 353, 361, 363
          on faster than light 256                        solar 358
          ontological chance and 99, 196, 261, 412–415   entanglement 233–247
          photoelectric effect and 362                    decoherence and 252, 264
          Podolsky and Rosen and 235, 264                 Einstein’s discovery of 377
          quantum statistics and 377                      instantaneous information and 231
          Schrödinger’s cat and 269                       Schrödinger’s cat and 269–270
          transition probabilities and 377               entelechy 12, 45, 301, 303
          visualization of reality and 192               entropy
          wave-particle duality and 363, 377              arrow of time and 277–283
        Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen 204, 231, 233, 237,       Boltzmann. See Boltzmann entropy
            240                                           information and 334–337, 342
        electrochemical gradient 326                      irreversibility and 288
        electron transfer chain 328                       mind-body and 155
        eliminative materialism 17, 23, 55, 148,          negative. See negative entropy
            159–163, 172                                  second law and 7–9, 345–359
Index
Index




        embodiment 92–95, 155, 163, 178, 185,             Shannon. See Shannon entropy
            332–335                                       value and 81–89
        emergence 297–309                                Epicurus 69, 223, 379
          biological machines as 184                     epiphenomenal 148, 160, 162, 174, 298
          determinism as 220, 222, 307–308               epistemology 103–117
          dualisms and 162                                history of 104
                                                                         Index        441
  internalist 109                             external world
  metaphysics and 17, 106                      alternative possibilities and 74
  naturalized 115, 141                         epistemology and 107, 116, 153
  other minds and 174                          metaphysics and 21
  Schrödinger’s cat and 272                    ontology and 56
equilibrium 409                                self and 173
Ergo 83–89, 100, 171, 343                     extrinsic information 30–35
Ergod 83–89, 100
ergodic 84–89, 100, 311–314, 341, 411–414
                                              F
ERR. See experience recorder and reproducer   faster-than-light 61, 204–207, 230, 233, 234,
error detection 421                               235, 256
essentialism 16, 32, 42, 45–47, 331–334       fatalism 218
ethics 79–89                                  Feigl, Herbert 159, 162, 186, 309
event causality 63                            Feynman, Richard 226, 234, 270, 283, 345, 417
Everett III, Hugh 29, 42, 76, 225, 253–256,   Fischer, John Martin 69
    267, 369                                  Fisher, R.A. 142
Evil 91–95, 98                                Fitch, F. B. 24
evolution                                     flagellum 321–329
  chance element in 315–318                   flatness problem 414
  emergent 303                                flows
  ERR and 403                                   communicating information 145, 333
  metaphysics and 22                            matter and energy 9, 12, 311, 317
  mind and 149                                  negative and positive entropy 313, 339, 354
  story of 311–314                            Foot, Phillipa 220
  teleonomy in 41                             form 5–8, 91, 119, 331–334
  universe and 312                            Fouillée, Alfred 384
excluded middle 106                           Fox, George 328
existentialism 79–89                          Frankfurt cases 113
Exner, Franz 383                              Frankfurt, Harry 113
experience recorder and reproducer 395–407    free choice of experimenter 195, 246, 250–253
  binding problem and 398                     free creation 71, 137
  consciousness and 165, 401                    of human mind xvii, 134
  Donald Hebb and 6                           Freedman, Stuart j. 238
  epistemology and 116                        freedom 71
  free will and 63, 73                        free energy 311–313, 354–357
  ideas and 33                                free will 63–77
  material change and 358                       alternative possibilities and 74
  meaning and 139, 141, 144                     behaviorists denied 148
  meanings of words and 48                      chance and 385, 392
  mind and 151, 405                             creativity and 77
  mind-body and 163                             determinism and 217–220
  neural correlates and 187                     emergence and 304
  self and 171–173                              information and 332, 342
                                                                                              Index




  speed and power of 399                        neuroscientific evidence for 66
  value and 82                                  temporal sequence in 71
  what it’s like to be 405                      two-stage model of 64
  workings of 400                             Free Will Theorem 246–247
extensionalism 32, 141, 145                   Frege, Gottlob 9–13, 33, 126, 140, 144,
                                                  419–421
                                              fundamental question 280, 409–412
    442            Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
        G                                                H
        Gabor, Dennis 142                                Hadamard, Jacques 69
        galaxies, stars, and planets                     Haldane, J.B.S. 313
         cosmic creation and 11, 410–413                 Hameroff, Stuart 162
         downward causation and 180                      Hamilton, Sir William 223
         emergence of 304                                hard determinism 73
         entropy and 341, 356                            hard problem. See consciousness
         measurement and 203                             Hartman, Hyman 328
         mind and 153                                    heat death 337–340, 355
         open universe and 8                             Hebb, Donald 6, 165, 397, 406–407
         origins of 311–314, 316                         Heidegger, Martin 21, 69, 122
         self-organization of 150                        Heil, John 177
        Gatlin, Lila 314                                 Heisenberg, Werner
        Geiger counter 202, 271                           on classical world 198
        genetic code 328                                  on free choice 162, 212
        geophysics 312                                    on observables 135
        Georgescu-Roegen, Nicolas 89                      on the cut (Schnitt) 193, 210, 249–252
        Gettier, Edmund 113–114                           on visualization 192
        Gettier problems 113                              uncertainty principle of 202, 205, 307, 390
        ghost in the machine 147, 157, 171, 304, 340     Helmholtz, Hermann 337–340
        Gibbs, J. Willard 279, 287                       hidden variables 198, 204–207, 217, 237, 238,
        Gifford Lectures 300                                369
        Gisin, Nicolas 239, 245                          history 9
        Global Workspace Theory 72, 167, 403             Holt, Richard 238
        God 97–101                                       Homer 101
         Aristotle’s 50–53                               horizon problem 417
         causa sui and 386                               Horne, Michael 238
         chance and 68, 382                              H-Theorem 93, 285–291, 287, 334–337, 351,
         determinism and 218                                383
         Ergod and 99                                    Hubble, Edwin 277, 414–417
         existence of 98                                 human ignorance xvii, 99, 379, 381, 382
         foreknowledge of 336                            Hume, David
         Kant and 147                                     on bundle theory of self 173–174
         occasionalists and 162                           on causality 219
         omniscience of 99                                on chance and necessity 386
         theodicy and 98                                  on induction 131
         value and 79                                     on metaphysics 110
        God does not play dice 261, 354, 369, 376, 390    on naturalism and determinism 21, 84
        Goldman, Alvin 114                                on “ought” from “is” 79
        Good 79, 91–95, 97, 150                           on primary and secondary experience 121
        Google xviii, 396–399                             on religion 108
        Gottfried, Kurt 250–253                           on uniformity of nature 136
Index
Index




        Great Year 293                                   Husserl, Edmund 32, 144
        Grice, H. P. 141                                 hydrophobic 326
        Growing Argument 15                              hydrophylic 326
        Guth, Alan 416                                   hypothetico-deductive method 133
                                                                           Index         443

I                                                 von Neumann Process 1 and 370
                                                indistinguishable 236, 240, 266–267, 270
icon 145
                                                induction 110–117, 131–137
idealism 16–19, 49–50, 92, 155, 331–334
                                                information 331–343
identity
                                                  age 149
  Aristotle on 106–107
                                                  consciousness 165, 402
  criterion for 31
                                                  generation 191, 313–316
  relative 30
                                                  immortality and 101
  self- 30
                                                  in biology 317–326, 419–421
  transworld 24
                                                  intrinsic and extrinsic 30
illusion
                                                  negative entropy and 334, 342
  determinism as 5, 345
                                                  not a conserved quantity 155, 191
  free will as 76
                                                  objective value as 84
  metaphysics as 51
                                                  ontology and 55
  mind as 158, 298
                                                  origins of 311
Immanuel Kant
                                                  out of order 306, 340
  on noumena and phenomena 147
                                                  processing xi, 82
immaterial
                                                  science 340
  abstract entities as 57
                                                  theory 340
  arrangement as 16
                                                information interpretation of quantum
  concepts, thoughts as 86, 172
                                                    mechanics 189–199, 234, 254–257
  Ego or self as 171
                                                information philosophy
  God as 97
                                                  defined 3–4
  human spirit as 52
                                                  three worlds of 9–13
  hypothesis as 133
                                                information structures
  information as xiii, 3, 117, 306
                                                  arrangements of matter 155
  mind as 63, 141, 147, 150, 155
                                                  as objective value 85–89, 92
  Plato’s forms as 91
                                                  biological machines as 319
  probability and possibilities as 366
                                                  brain as 141, 185
  soul and spirit as 377
                                                  chaperones as 326
immortality 52–53, 86–89, 97–101, 147
                                                  creation of 13, 94, 354–356, 411–414
indeterminacy
                                                  dynamic models of 7, 48, 331–338
  causa sui and 72
                                                  elementary particles as 356
  Heisenberg principle and 201, 265, 286, 307
                                                  emergence of 11, 198, 297, 302
  ontological chance and 390
                                                  ERR and 151, 166, 400
indeterminism 219–220
                                                  experiments and 133, 370
  alternative possibilities and 74–75
                                                  fundamental question and 280, 409
  as averaged over 198
                                                  galaxies, stars, planets as 8, 46, 150, 153
  as “true” 71, 380, 392
                                                  good as embodied in 92
  Dennett rejects 66
                                                  guides to action 404
  Descartes on 147
                                                  in measurements 192–193
  determinism and 217
                                                  knowledge in mind as 21, 117, 158, 174, 185
  Einstein and 377, 387, 391
                                                  life as 150
                                                                                                Index




  free will and 74-75, 247
                                                  material objects as 120
  in biology 321
                                                  negative entropy as 191–192
  open futures and 412
                                                  origins of 311–316
  quantum mechanics and 189
                                                  recorded experiences as 166
  self and 171
                                                  value to preserve 83
  some physicists deny 377
                                                instinct 82, 169, 299, 403
  unhelpful in mind 160
    444            Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
        intention 141, 333–336, 404–407                  K
        interactionism 156, 162, 163
                                                         Kane, Robert 72, 75–77
        interactor 48–49, 317
                                                         Kant, Immanuel
        internalism 109–113, 114
                                                           on a priori reason 52
        interpretant 144, 145
                                                           on deterministic social laws 382
        interpretations
                                                           on Hume skepticism 110–111
          Copenhagen. See Copenhagen interpretation
                                                           on noumena and phenomena 91, 121, 152
          of signs. See biosemiotics
                                                           on scandal in philosophy 116
          other, of quantum mechanics 198
                                                         Kelvin, Lord 223, 334–337
          statistical. See statistical interpretation
                                                         Kepler, Johannes 131
        intersubjective agreement 48, 111–117, 175
                                                         Kim, Jaegwon 15–53, 160, 162, 178, 186
        intrinsic information 30–35, 49
                                                         kleos 101
        introspection 106–107, 110, 148, 151, 404. See
                                                         knowledge 5, 103–117, 119, 139, 331–334
            also reflection
                                                         Koch, Christof 162
        invention 15, 18, 21, 56, 120–129
                                                         Kochen, Simon 246–247
        ion pump 183, 306, 321–324
                                                         Kosslyn, Stephen 69
        iron-sulfur 328
                                                         Kripke, Saul 24–27, 32, 34, 76, 145
        irreversibility 285–291
                                                         Küppers, Bernd-Olaf 319
          arrow of time and 277
          cosmic creation and 413                        L
          decoherence and 252–255, 257–260               Landau, Lev 204, 213, 250–253
          in measurements 208                            language
          Loschmidt objection to 351                       ambiguity-free 4, 48, 137, 139
          quantum mechanics and 189                        as game 17, 103, 331–334
          von Neumann Process and 371                      biosemiotics and 317–320
        isomorphism                                        philosophy. See analytic language philosophy
          as experimental evidence 133                   Laplace, Pierre Simon, Marquis de 335–338,
          as metaphysical facts 21                            381
          correspondence theory and 117                  Laplace’s demon 28, 335–338, 342
          epistemology and 103                           large quantum numbers 203, 265–267
          in concepts 33                                 law of large numbers 193, 198
          knowledge as 5, 17, 153, 174, 331–334          laws of nature 21, 71, 186, 197, 220, 299, 343,
          representation as 56                                383
        J                                                Layzer, David 69, 210, 280, 337–340, 356
                                                         learning 404
        Jakobson, Roman 143, 421
                                                         Lehrer, Keith 63
        James, William
                                                         Leibniz, Gottfried 4, 18–53, 48, 48–51,
          on alternative possibilities 385
                                                              110–114, 139
          on antipathy to chance 261, 274
                                                         Leśniewski, Stanislaw 39
          on compatibilism 218
                                                         Leucippus 218, 347, 379
          on dilemma of determinism 223
                                                         Lewes, George Henry 298
          on loosemess in joints 180
                                                         Lewis, C.I. 114, 144
          on neutral monism 161
Index
Index




                                                         Lewis, David 23, 25, 29, 42–44, 46, 47, 60, 76
          on stream of consciousness 167, 399
                                                         libertarian 70, 75–77, 157, 171, 222–223
          on two-stage model of free will 69
                                                         Libet, Benjamin 66-68
          on unconsciousness 405
                                                         life
        Joos, Erich 251–254, 260–267
        Jordan, Pascual 192, 250–253                       emergence of 150
                                                           information in 12
                                                           love and death and 327
                                                           origin of 311–329
                                                                       Index       445
light quantum hypothesis 269, 353, 361–367      problem of 4, 139
linguistic analysis. See analytic language      reference and 126
    philosophy                                  sense and 9, 33, 126
linguistic turn 136                            measurement
Lloyd Morgan, C. 298                            apparatus 189, 202, 249
Locke, John 51–53, 121                          axiom of. See axiom of measurement
logical empiricism 132                          collapse and 215, 225
logical positivism 132                          conscious observer and 211, 214
logical puzzles 17–21, 37, 103, 331–334         in decoherence 251
London, Fritz 212                               in Dirac 3 polarizers 375
Long, Anthony 69                                in entanglement 234
loopholes 239, 246–247                          in quantum physics 3
Lorenz, Konrad 111, 150                         irreversible 208, 288
Loschmidt, Josef 260–267, 285, 293, 350, 383    observation and 214
Loschmidt paradox 263–267, 287, 293 .           problem of 201–215
Lowe, E. Jonathan 22, 34, 63, 69                von Neumnn Processes and 205
LUCA (last universal common ancestor) 322      measurement apparatus 189, 202–205,
Lucretius 69-70, 379                              207–210, 249–252
                                               measurement problem 201–215, 251–264, 275
M                                              Mele, Alfred 68-69, 177
Mach, Ernst 52–53, 133, 161                    mental causation 177–187
MacKay, Donald 142                              adequately determined 186
MacLeish, Archibald 99                          as downward causation 158, 160, 298
macroscopic superpositions 251                  emergence of 179
man not a machine 152, 395                      ion pumps and 183
many worlds 49, 204, 225, 253–256               Kim on 179
Marcus, Ruth Barcan 24, 47                      molecular machines and 187
Margenau, Henry 69                              problem of 152
master argument 28                             mental event 177, 186
material 11–13, 19–20, 151, 179–180            mental state 405–407
materialism                                    mereological essentialism 40
 eliminative. See eliminative materialism      mereological nihilism 40, 47
 idealism and 49, 92, 155, 331                 mereological universalism 39, 47–50
 in metaphysics 15–18                          messages 141, 144, 311–314, 314–317,
Maxwell-Boltzmann 348, 352, 388                   317–320, 333
Maxwell, James Clerk 134, 278, 345, 361        messenger RNA 318
Maxwell’s Demon 184                            Messiah, Albert 250–253
Mayr, Ernst 41                                 metabolic cycle 314, 328
McCall, Storrs 69                              metaphysicians 21
meaning 139–145                                metaphysicist 21, 22
 as use 20, 140, 145, 318, 333                 metaphysics 15–53
 epistemology and 115                           actualism and 28
 ERR and 395                                    Aristotle’s 35, 106, 120
                                                                                           Index




 in biosemiotics 419–421                        coinciding objects and 33
 information and 333                            composition and 39
 intension and extension as 125                 cosmic creation and 411
 of meaning 139–140                             epistemology and 17, 106
 of messages 311, 317                           essentialism in 45
 of words 332                                   history of 49–52
    446            Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
         Hume on 110                                   Wittgenstein’s xiii
         identity and 30                              modern 128
         immaterial information and 3, 331            molecular disorder 285, 287
         mind and 147, 151, 153, 156, 307             monadology 162
         modal logic is not 47                        Monod, Jacques 41
         naming and 24                                Moore, G. E. xi
         nature of reality and 15                     moral responsibility 74–77, 75–77
         ontology and 56                              morphology 318, 419–421
         panicky 53, 63                               motion we call heat 355
         possibilities in 5, 19                       motive power 326
         possible worlds and 22                       mysteries
         puzzles in 37                                 of entanglement 233, 266
         self and 171, 175                             of nonlocality 241
         Stoics and 35–37                              of quantum mechanics 157, 204, 226, 234
         temporal parts in 42
         universals and 119
                                                      N
        microscopic reversibility 263                 Nagel, Thomas 142
        Miller, Stanley 313                           naturalism 19, 52–53
        Mill, John Stuart 84–89, 140, 298             naturalized epistemology 117, 141
        mind 147–153                                  natural kinds 32, 45–49, 58
         as immaterial 147, 148, 155                  necessity. See also possibilities
         causal closure of 152                         Aristotle and 107
         computational 148, 185, 311, 395              chance and 19, 379
         ERR and 163                                   contingency and 24
         identical to brain 158–163                    determinism and 223
         information evolved to 149                    Hume on 219
         mind-body and 155–163                         in natural world none 18, 49
         model of 63, 150–151, 166, 175, 395           Leucippus on 218
         not a computer 395                            metaphysical 47
         of conscious observer 206–209                 modal logic and 47
         other minds and 173                           necessitism and 25
         over matter 172                               of identity 5, 24, 49
         philosophy of 149, 152, 161, 177, 405         of naming 24, 145
         scandal in psychology 147                     parts as 45
        mind-body problem 91, 155–163, 186             true in all possible worlds 49
        mind-brain identity 158, 162, 163              truth and xiii, 331
        Minsky, Marvin 167                            negative entropy
        mirror neurons 406, 419–421                    as objective good 92
        missing mass 416                               as providence 86
        mitochondria 184–187                           as Shannon entropy 335
        Mnesarchus 35, 38                              as value 8, 89
        modal logic 47–53                              biosemiotics and 419
        models. See two-stage model; mind, model of    communications and 143
Index
Index




         as knowledge representation 48                cosmic creation and 409–414
         as visualizations 4                           decoherence and 258–261
         biological machine 320–329                    dissipative processes and 313–316
         connectionist 152                             emergence of 338
         dynamical 6                                   Ergod and 100
         of information structures 331                 flows of 94, 143, 339, 355–359
                                                                          Index         447
 in economics 89                             omniscience 97
 information as 8, 191                       one possible future 5, 23, 28, 70, 217, 219, 361,
 Layzer on 280                                  386
 life feeds on 183, 303, 334                 ontological chance 196, 345, 412–415
 measurement and 215                         ontology 17–23, 50, 55–61, 119, 150
 moral code and 84                           open future 70, 217, 361, 380
 negentropy or 278                           Operin, A.I. 313
 order out of order 306                      order
 quantum physics and 361                      out of chaos 11, 61, 302, 313–316, 339–342
neural correlates 158, 165, 187               out of order 183, 303, 306, 339–342
neurons                                      origin of information 311–329
 ion pumps in 183, 325                       origin of life 311–329
 mirror 406, 419                             other minds 173–175
 wired together 165, 406                     otherwise 23, 70
neuroscience 147, 177                        ought from is 79
evidence for free will 66-68                 outside space and time
neutral monism 161                            as solution to nonlocality 246
Newell, Allan 72, 167, 403                    determinism restored 217
Newton, Isaac 84, 131, 278                    ideal world as 9
Nietzsche, Friedrich 21, 293                  information not 16
noise 157, 258, 332–335, 392                  Kant’s noumena as 152
nominalism 119                                Plato’s forms as 91
non-contradiction 106                         truth as 19, 49
non-existent objects 58
nonlocality                                  P
 as mystery 241                              pain 174
 decoherence and 252                         panicky metaphysics 53, 63
 Einstein’s discovery of 233–236, 363, 376   panpsychism 149, 161, 162
 in entanglement 265–266                     paradoxes 331
 in quantum world 198                        parallel universes 198, 234
 of entangled particles 233                  Parmenides 19, 50–53
 of single particle 229                      part 44
 outside space and time 246                  path 206
non-reductive physicalism 163, 185           path information
nonseparability 377                           collisions erase 258, 262–263
 Einstein’s discovery of 235–237, 377         determinism conserves 288
 in entanglement 234, 241                     irreversibility and 287–290
normal distribution 382                       unobservable 135, 206
nothingness 412                              Pauli exclusion principle 270
noumenal 21, 91–95, 121–129, 147             peculiar qualifications 30, 36
nucleotide 318–321                           Peirce, Charles Sanders 10, 132, 384, 405–407,
O                                               419–421, 420–421
                                             Penrose, Roger 69, 162, 244, 282
                                                                                                 Index




objective value 89                           perdurance 60
observable 135                               Perrin, Jean 134
Occam’s Razor 43                             persistence condition 35, 42, 60
Occam, William of 131                        phase space 346–351, 383
O’Connor, Timothy 63                         phenomena 21, 91–95, 121–129, 147
Ogden, C.K. 140                              Philo of Larissa, 108
omnipotence 97–99
    448            Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
        philosophy                                      prediction 404
         of information 420                             Presocratics 104
         of language 3, 420                             Price, Huw 246
         of mind 177                                    Prigogine, Ilya 313
        photons                                         principle of sufficient reason 110
         as fundamental particles 10, 410               principle of superposition
         as light quanta 361                             as standard quantum physics 190, 367–372
         Einstein’s discovery of 361                     collapse and 225, 231
         in cosmic background 309                        decoherence and 252–255
         in EPR tests 238                                entanglement and 234–235
         measurement of 207                              in Dirac 3 polarizers 371–375
         photosynthesis and 326                          measurement and 201, 208
         solar 94, 312, 317                              Schrödinger’s cat and 270
         waves large numbers of 264                     probabilities
        physicalism 15, 156, 297                         calculus of 345, 381
        picture of reality 48, 145, 331–334              for each possibility 196
        Pittendrigh, Colin 41                            near certainty 71
        Place, U.T. 159                                 probability amplitude
        Planck constant 142, 193, 202–205, 288, 307,     as immaterial 366
            347                                          Born rule 366, 389
        Planck, Max 235, 269, 274, 294, 346–353, 361,    collapses 225
            387                                          entanglement and 240
        Plato 19, 80–89, 91, 104–109, 119, 151           evolving deterministically 255, 371
        Platonic ideas 5, 16, 119, 156                   for two particles 266
        Plutarch 36                                      in decoherence 254
        Podolsky, Boris 235                              interference with itself 272, 229–230
        Poincaré, Henri 69, 294, 351, 386                in two-slit experiment 229
        pointer states 258–261, 262–267                  measurement and 201
        Popper, Karl 9–13, 112–116, 126, 137, 157,       wave function as 29
            162                                         problems
        positivism 52–53                                 measurement. See measurement problem
        possibilism 25, 49                               metaphysical. See metaphysics
        possibilities. See alternative possibilities     mind-body. See mind-body problem
         actualization of 189, 195                       of evil. See evil
         existence of 5, 412                             of free will. See free will
         free will and 71–77                             of induction. See induction
         function 190, 196                               of knowledge. See epistemology
         in horse race 229                               of meaning. See meaning
         in mental causation 185                        processes, von Neumann
         in metaphysics 15, 19, 22                       process 1 205, 208, 214, 265–267, 285, 370
         metaphysical 19–20                              process 2 206, 265–267
         possible worlds and 22, 49                      process 3 207
         truths not basis for 47                        projection postulate 367–371. See
Index
Index




         universe expansion and 16                         also collapse of the wave function
         wave function as 265                            actualization of possibilities 195–196
        possible worlds 18, 47, 49, 53, 76, 112–117      as standard quantum physics 190, 197, 231
        post-modern 128, 141                             decoherence and 202, 251–254, 261–262
        pragmatics 318, 419–421                          entanglement and 234
        pre-determinism 70, 186, 217, 223, 241, 307      in measurement 201, 214
                                                                           Index        449
proper part 41–43, 44                           R
propositions 103, 136
                                                radiation distribution law 352–353
Protagoras 95
                                                Ramsey, Frank 114
Providence 21, 81–89, 99
                                                randomness 71, 189, 217, 304, 325–328. See
pseudo-isotropy 291
pseudo-problems 132
                                                    also chance; indeterminism
psychology                                      reader-response theory 144
 behaviorism in 141                             receiver 144, 332–335
                                                recurrence
 information in 3
                                                  entropy and 351
 metaphysics and 51
                                                  extreme improbability of 295
 reduction of epistemology to 115
                                                  problem of 293–295
 scandal in 147
                                                  Zermelo and 351
 two-stage model in 64
                                                red blood cells 183, 305
 without a psyche 147
                                                redistribution 85
psychology without a psyche 147, 160
                                                reductionism
psycho-physical parallelism 162, 163, 249–252
                                                  bottom-up 161
purpose. See also teleonomy
                                                  causal closure and 160
 in artifacts 41, 44
                                                  emergence vs 297
 in biology 181, 301–304, 311, 318, 409
                                                  mental causation and 177
 in the universe 12, 20, 117, 150, 315
                                                  of biology to molecules 180, 319
Putnam, Hilary 244
                                                  of life to machines 147
Pyhrro of Ellis 108
                                                  of mind to brain 158
Q                                                 to physics and chemistry 117
quantum cooperative phenomena 311–314           reduction of the wave packet 195, 205, 225,
quantum jumps 241, 242, 252–259, 269                254–257
quantum mechanics 361–377                       reflection 151, 404. See also introspection
 basics of 366                                  reflex arc 171
 determinism and 217                            reflexology 171
 Dirac’s 3 polarizers in 371                    Reid, Thomas 63, 223
 Einstein’s discoveries in 376–377              relative identity 30–33, 58
 entanglement and 233                           Renouvier, Charles 384
 foundations of 251                             representation 332–335
 God and 99                                       dynamical model as 6
 information interpretation of 189–199            Frege on 33, 144
 irreversibility in 285                           information as 47–53
 measurement problem in 201                       in mind 120, 153
 other interpretations 198                        isomorphism as 56
quantum of action 347                             possible world as 76
quantum-to-classical transition 190–193,        reproductive success 315
   251–254, 263–267, 291, 307                   responsibility
quantum world 198                                 free will and 65, 332–335
quasi-molecule 286                                information creation and 343
                                                                                              Index




Quételet, Adolph 348, 382                         moral 72, 222
Quine, Willard Van Orman 24–53, 60,               self and 172
   112–116, 126, 141, 144                         ultimate 75
                                                ribosome 181–187, 305, 318, 321–324, 328
                                                Richards, I.A. 140
                                                Rietdijk, C.W. 244
                                                RNA 181–187, 314–317, 328
    450             Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
        Rosen, Nathan 235                              self 171–175
        Russell, Bertrand xi, 53, 112–116, 140, 144,   self-contemplation 316
           162, 219, 386                               self-determination 172
        Russell’s Residue xiv                          self-identity 30–35
        Rutherford, Lord Ernest 261–267, 369, 387      self-organization 304
        Ryle, Gilbert 153                              self-replication 304, 315–318
                                                       semantics 27, 76, 318, 419–421
        S                                              semiosis 317, 419–421
        Santa Claus 97                                 sender 144, 332–335
        Sartre, Jean-Paul 123, 196                     sense. See meaning
        Saussure, Ferdinand de 140, 420–421              reference and 126, 140, 144
        scandal                                          teleonomic 44
          in philosophy 63, 65, 116                    Sextus Empiricus 108
          in psychology 147                            Shannon, Claude 141, 197, 280, 317–320,
        Scarani, Valerio 245                               334–337, 350, 412
        Schlick, Moritz 52–53, 112–116                 Shannon entropy 143, 203, 209, 350, 421
        Scholastics 131                                shifty split 211–214, 259
        Schopenhauer, Arthur 122                       Shimony, Abner 162, 238
        Schrödinger equation                           Simon, Herbert 72, 167, 403
          decoherence and 251, 255, 263                Simonton, Dean Keith 64
          determinism and 7, 259–263                   simulations 332
          evolving deterministically 197               Skeptics 34, 41, 58, 104, 108–112
          in metaphysics 29                            Skinner, B. F. 148
          interference and 365                         Smart, J.J.C. 159, 186
          measurement and 201–207, 210                 smartphone 7, 83–89, 97, 332–335 Smith,
          reversibility and 285, 288–289, 367          Adam 84
          standard quantum physics 190–193             social contract 87–89
          visualization of 242                         Socrates 105
        Schrödinger, Erwin                             software in the hardware
          decoherence and 250, 253                       free will and 63
          no particles or quantum jumps 253              ideas as 18
          on determinism 217, 383–384                    information as 61
          on entanglement 233–235, 241                   mind as 57, 155, 165, 185
          on entropy and information 334                 multiply realizable 307
          on indeterminism 377                         Solvay conference 203, 229, 235
          on order out of order 127, 183, 303, 305     soul
          physical laws are statistical 383              Aristotle on 152
          Schrödinger’s cat 269–275                      as immaterial 15
          visualization and 192, 241                     Descartes and 156
          wave equation of 230, 364–365                  information and 52, 149, 306, 340, 343
          What Is Life? 303                              non-physical 178
        Schrödinger’s cat 191, 202, 204, 251–254,        psychologists deny 147
            256–259, 269–275                             self or ego as 171–172
Index
Index




        Scientific American 281                        space and time 16
        scientific method 137                            outside of. See outside space and time
        Searle, John 69                                special frame 242–245
        second law of thermodynamics.                  special theory of relativity 28, 134, 235, 277,
            See thermodynamics, second law of              362
        Sedley, David 69                               Sperry, Roger 177
                                                                          Index        451
spirit 171, 306, 340, 343, 365, 377             T
spooky action at a distance 229, 237, 256–259
                                                tautology 112
standard argument against free will 65, 74–77
                                                Tegmark, Max 251, 252–255
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy xviii
                                                teleology 300
Stapp, Henry 162
                                                teleonomy
statistical determinism. See adequate
                                                  as purpose in artifacts 46
    determinism; quantum-to-classical
                                                  as purpose in biology 12, 304
    transistion
                                                  as purpose in metaphysics 41
  close to certainty 218
                                                  emergence of 303
  decoherence and 254–257
                                                  epistemology and 117
  emergence of 307
                                                  in biocommunications 410–413
  for large objects 71, 288
                                                  in metaphysics 44
  laws of nature and 7
                                                  teleology and 20
  mind and 189
                                                telos 41, 44, 46, 409–412
  quantum theory and 364
                                                temporal parts 42–45, 60
statistical interpretation
                                                temporal sequence 71–77
  Born rule 366, 389
                                                tetrads 129
  Einstein’s original idea 368
                                                Theater of Consciousness 72-73, 167, 403
statistics 377
                                                theodicy. See evil
Statue and the Clay 15, 34
                                                theology
Stern-Gerlach 214, 250–253
                                                  good and 80
stimulated emission 388
                                                  ideas about 97
Stoics 34–38, 41, 109–113
                                                  in metaphysics 50
Strawson, Galen 74–77, 162
                                                theory 376, 377
Strawson, P.F. 53, 63
                                                thermodynamic equilibrium 262, 280
Suarez, Antoine 245
                                                thermodynamics
subjectivity 151
                                                  arrow of time and 277
substance
                                                  good and evil and 93
  Descartes’ immaterial 147, 177, 304
                                                  information and 143
  dual aspect 162
                                                  mind-body and 155
  in Aristotle’s metaphysics 35
                                                  value and 81
  in chemistry 299
                                                thermodynamics, second law of
  in mind-body problem 155, 307
                                                  chance in 382–384
  in vitalism 300
                                                  cosmic creation and 413
  Stoics on 59
                                                  entropy and 7, 345–359
Sum of human knowledge 83, 85–89, 104, 150,
                                                  equilibrium and 280
    171, 401
                                                  Ergod and 100–101
Sun 91, 94, 132, 197, 317–320
                                                  information creation and 191–194, 338
superdeterminism 245
                                                  irreversibility and 285
supernatural 21, 147
                                                  Maxwell’s Demon and 184
superposition. See principle of superposition
                                                thermonuclear reactions 312
supervenience 160, 185, 300
                                                thermostat 402
swerve 379
                                                                                             Index




                                                Thomson, William 223
syntax 318, 419–421
                                                Tibbles, the Cat 34–37
synthetic a priori 111, 122–129
                                                time. See arrow of time
Szilard, Leo 334
                                                  working backwards in 327–329
                                                top-down 180, 298
                                                tradition 128
                                                transcription 317
    452            Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
        transfer RNA 318                               wave function. See collapse of the wave
        translation 317                                   function
        transworld identity 26, 27                      Schrödinger’s equation for 377
        triads 128, 126–129                             visualization of 189, 225–229
        truth 18–53, 79–89, 103, 111–117, 147          wave-particle 377
        two-particle state 233, 236, 240–243, 245,     wave-particle duality 123, 194–197, 269
            266–267, 269                               way of talking 38
        two-slit experiment 99, 196, 225–226,          Weaver, Warren 334–337
            227–229                                    Weinberg, Steven 416
        two-stage model 63–77, 171, 172, 220, 385,     Weizsäcker, Carl von 211
            392                                        what it’s like to be 404–407
        two-step creation process 258–261              Wheeler, John 251–254, 252–255, 283
                                                       Whitehead, Alfred North 42, 162
        U                                              whole 44
        ultimate responsibility 75                     Wiener, Norbert 83–89, 99, 334
        uncertainty 157                                Wiggins, David 22, 24, 34
        uncertainty principle 201, 279, 390, 412–415   Wigner, Eugene 212, 258–261
        undetermined liberty 66, 171                   Wikipedia 101, 290
        Unger, Peter 40                                Williamson, Timothy 47
        uniformity of nature 132, 136                  Wilson cloud chamber 202, 258–261
        universals 119–129, 155                        Wittgenstein, Ludwig
        universe                                        on logical empiricism 112
         Einstein on 376                                on logical positivism 53
         heat death of 337, 355                         on material implication 144
        universe of discourse 22                        on meaning as use 20, 140, 318–321
        Urey, Harold 313                                on models of reality xiii, 320–323
        use, meaning as 20–53, 140, 145, 318–321        on science as true propositions 48
        V                                               Popper on 137
                                                       Woese, Carl 322, 328
        value 79–89                                    words and objects, connections in ERR 6, 331
          Ergo as 171                                  worlds
          information as basis for 3, 332, 341          biological 12
        van Inwagen, Peter 40, 46                       ideal 13
        verification 145                                many. See many worlds
        Vienna Circle 53, 112, 115, 158, 309            material 11
        visualization 4, 49, 189, 192, 241, 366         Popper’s three worlds 126
        vitalism 300                                    possible. See possible worlds
        von Neumann, John                               quantum. See quantum world
          Bell shifty split and 258–261
          decoherence and 249–252                      Y
          irreversibility and 285                      Yockey, H. 319
          measurement problem and 202
          on entropy and information 334–337           Z
Index
Index




          projection postulate and 201                 Zarathustra 100
          processes of. See processes, von Neumann     Zeh, H.D. 202, 251–263
                                                       Zermelo, Ernst 287, 293, 351
        W                                              Zermelo paradox 287, 293
        Wächtershäuser. Günter 328                     Zufall 261–267, 369, 389
        Watson, John B. 148                            Zurek, Wojciech 202, 251–255
                                                                         453


Image Credits
  Some images are from websites with Creative Commons licenses
or explicit permissions for non-profit and educational uses of
their material, such as all the content of informationphilosopher.
com and metaphysicist.com. We especially want to thank Drew
Berry (the Walter+Eliza Hall Insitute of Medical Research),
molecularmovies.com, and the North Dakota State University
Virtual Cell Animation Collection on YouTube.
Books by Bob Doyle
  Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy (2011)
  Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics Solved? (2016)
  Metaphysics: Problems, Puzzles and Paradoxes, Solved? (2016)
  My God, He Plays Dice! How Albert Einstein Invented Most
     of Quantum Mechanics (2017)
  Mind: The Scandal in Psychology (2017)
  Chance: The Scandal in Physics
  Life: The Scandal in Biology
  Value: The Scandal in Economics, Sociology, Politics, and Ethics
  PDFs of all of Bob’s books will be available for free on the I-Phi
website, both complete books and as individual chapter PDFs for
easy assignment to students.
Colophon
   This book was created on the Apple Mac Pro using the desk-
top publishing program Adobe InDesign CC 2015, with Myriad
Pro and Minion Pro fonts. The original illustrations were created in
Adobe Illustrator and Adobe Photoshop.
   The author developed the first desktop publishing program, Mac-
Publisher, for the Macintosh, in 1984, the year of the Mac, intend-
ing to write some books on philosophy and physics. After many
years of delay and further research, the books are finally in produc-
                                                                               Credits




tion, completing work, in his eighties, on ideas that first emerged in
his twenties.
   The index was edited by Heather Hedden, ASI.
454       About I-Phi Books
      Information Philosopher books are bridges from the information
      architecture of the printed page, from well before Gutenberg and
      his movable-type revolution, to the information architecture of the
      world-wide web, to a future of knowledge instantly available on
      demand anywhere it is needed in the world.

      Information wants to be free. Information can make you free.

      I-Phi printed books are still material, with their traditional costs
      of production and distribution. But they are physical pointers and
      travel guides to help you navigate the virtual world of information
      online, which of course still requires energy for its communication,
      and material devices for its storage and retrieval to displays.

      But the online information itself is, like the knowledge in our collec-
      tive minds, neither material nor energy, but pure information, pure
      ideas, the stuff of thought. It is as close as physical science comes to
      the notion of spirit, the ghost in the machine, the soul in the body.

                It is this spirit that information philosophy
                wants to set free, with the help of Google and
                Wikipedia, Facebook and YouTube.

      At a time when one in ten living persons have a
                  presence on the web, when the work
                  of past intellects has been captured by
                  Google Scholar, we have entered the
                  age of Information Immortality.

      When you Google one of the concepts of information
      philosophy, the search results page will retrieve links to
      the latest versions of Information Philosopher pages online, and
      of course links to related pages in the Wikipedia, in the Stanford
      Encyclopedia of Philosophy, and links to YouTube lectures.

      Thank you for purchasing this physical embodiment of our work.
      I-Phi Press hopes to put the means of intellectual production in the
      hands of the people.
