         366      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                   m inis        m
                                          De t e r

                                                            t i b i l i s m
                                                  Co    mpa                 ism
                                                                   rmin
                         ter  minism               Sof   t D e t e
                  De
             Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                    o m p atibi
                                                            S oft C
                                  ilism
                                                        d a l
                                                    Scan m
                      m p a t i b
        I nco                                                                            In
H a r d
                       g Th e ico                                       bilis
                  ndin                                        m p a t i
                E
               ionism
                             Sem
  Illus
                                                                 p atib ilism
                                                        In c o m
                                                    w
                        sm                 Narro
   Impo         ssibili
                                                                 p atib   ilism
                                                             o m
Chapter 29




                                                      t In c
                                                 Sof                                      y
                         del                                                      Leewa
                   an Mo
             Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                           a
                                          r c e I ncom nce)
                                      Sou          l S e que
                                        (Actu   a
                                                                             i m i t e d
                                                      e lw             ith L
                                                  o d
                                - S t      a ge M
                           Tw o
                             m inis         m
                    de t e r                               Ending The Scandal            367
               In
               Ending The Scandal
                            rianis
                                   m
                                             a
                                 Libert
                    The main goal of the Information Philosopher website has
               been to provide students everywhere with the resources they need
               to be more knowledgeable than their professors on some classical
                                                                                 t - C  a  usal
               problems of philosophy that remain unsolved today.      AgeFreen will is
               the most important of these problems.
                                            C       al
                                               auscan
                                    n   t -
                            Eve on things they learned from their teachers.
                    I hope also that   professors       find some new information they
               need to improve
                    Our goal is to break the great causal chain of sophisticated-C       butausa
                                                                                                   l
               unproductive arguments, sophistical and paradoxicalNdialogues,    on
               logical puzzles and language games
               as history of philosophy, butS
                                                      FA that are still worth teaching
          t i b i lis        m                      are hopelessly inadequate as philo-

    omp a      sophical principles for the free and creative young minds
                                                                           s a  litywe are
nc                                                             otC
               preparing for an open future in which theyfauthor
                                                             S
                                                                       a u
                                                                         their  own    lives.
                    We cannot solve the problem of free will with logical paradoxes,

                         m p a tibiliofsmclever determinisms designed to limit the
               despite centuries
                                                                                            a n ism
               I n  c o                                                        er   t a r i
      Broad power of the laws of Nature and of Nature’sSGod.
               freedom     of our  “finite”    minds  by  comparison  with  the  “infinite”
                                                                    oft Lib
                    And we cannot dis-solve
                                             i s mthe pseudo-problem of free will with               ia
                              r t a r i a  dress old concepts in new jargon, that change ibertar
                                           n
                            e
               language games      that
                       Lib from free will to moral responsibility,nthat               oft    L
          o d  e stsubject
               the
                                                                         r i  g    Schange
        M the debate from determinism to the impossibility          Da of alternative
               possibilities, and that change
                                               C       to momentous contest between
                                                  ogithe
                t i b  lism
               free iwill  and determinism to juggling words like compatibilism
                                                                                              Chapter 29
            p a
 Incom and              ces)
                      incompatibilism.
                                                                                n is          m
            e q u  e  n
                                                                        e r m i
                                                                    det
          S         Compatibilism     is a “quagmire of evasion,” said William James.
  t i v e
a
                                                  d In
               Peter van Inwagen’s reframing the problem as “incompatibil-
                                            i t e
                                     nd Lim
               ism” is a “tarpit of confusion,” I say, because it puts libertarians

               ism                a
               and hard determinists in the same category.

       r m i n      One way to look at the moral scandal that concerns me is to
  Dete         focus on the actualism of compatibilist and determinist philoso-
               phers. They believe that there is but one possible actual future.
                    This is not the message that academic philosophers should be
               delivering to students, especially because determinism cannot be
               proved, and current scientific evidence is to the contrary.
         368     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Aristotle made clear the essential difference between the
               actual and the possible. Something was actual for Aristotle when
               it happened, when it realized its end or purpose. Otherwise it had
               the power or potential to be otherwise. 1
                  The last thing we want to tell young people is that they have
               no potential, that their future is already determined. It’s not only
               poor philosophy and bad psychology, it’s terrible science.
                  Men are not machines, and minds are not computers.
                  As Martin Heisenberg has shown us, even the lowest organ-
               isms are autonomous and have the behavioral freedom to realize
               their goals, to go from the possible to the actual.
                     “A hallmark of biological organisms is their autonomy. In
                     evolutionary terms, their autonomy allowed them to invent
                     active locomotion (automobility = locomotion not caused from
                     the outside) and to explore space. For going multicellular, cells
                     had to give up behavioral autonomy and those new creatures
                     had to reinvent automobility via the nervous system and even-
                     tually the brain. Self-ness turned animals with brains into sub-
                     jects. In my view the Self is a decisive feature in the evolution of
                     freedom. This allows for strong ownership. Behavior has to be
                     our own to be well adaptive.” 2
                  How can determinist and compatibilist philosophers convince
               themselves that the causal laws of nature imply just one actual
               future, when causality is not provable and the laws only statistical?
               We must go back to David Hume to understand this.
Chapter 29




               Our Natural Belief in Free Will
                  David Hume’s skepticism showed the inability of logic to
               “prove” facts in the physical world. No number of regular succes-
               sions of event A followed by event B can prove that A causes B.
                  Hume the Skeptic thus denied causality. But Hume the Natu-
               ralist said that we have a natural belief in causality. Similarly, we
               have a natural belief in the uniformity of nature. The sun will rise
               tomorrow. The laws of nature are not changing, so the past is a
               reliable guide to the future. None of these beliefs is logically true.
               But they all are plausible and have significant practical value.
                 1       actual = entelechy (ἐν + τέλος + ἔχειν), possible = dynamis (δύναμις)
                 2       Personal communication (2011).
                                       Ending The Scandal             369


   Hume was an empiricist. He based his ideas on observed
experience. But he had a theoretical model for human nature. He
based it on Isaac Newton’s equations of motion that describe
the physical world. At that time, it appeared that Newton’s laws
were so perfect at explaining phenomena that they must be neces-
sary. Hume equated physical necessity with logical necessity, and
even with moral necessity, in which human volitions are caused by
motives, and motives are caused by prior events.
   The debates today as between free will and determinism were
then debates between “liberty” and “necessity.” Liberty was
thought to involve chance events or mental events (the “will”) not
caused by prior events. Hume denied the existence of chance and
any other uncaused events. Following Hobbes, he defined free-
dom as freedom from external coercion, e.g., being in chains or in
jail.
   Hume’s model of the mind as governed by physical laws “re-
duced” the mind, and indeed all living things, to material physical
systems. But as Aristotle first noted, biological systems are dif-
ferent. They have a purpose or goal. Aristotle called it telos.
   The simplest molecules that were precursors of life “learned”
to replicate themselves, at which point their elemental goal was to
maintain themselves (preserve their information, using negative
entropy from the sun) and replicate themselves. Chance errors in
the replication created different molecules, some of which were
better replicators, and the rest is biological history.                 Chapter 29
     Even very young children intuitively know Aristotle’s es-
sential difference between inanimate physical objects, which fol-
low natural laws, and living things, which can originate actions,
can behave differently in the same circumstances, and which can
make choices.
   To choose is to decide between alternative possibilities. That
these are real and not apparent is because chance, which Hume
and his contemporaries denied as absurd and atheistical, is the
source of novelty, creativity, and new information in the universe.
   Hume’s dream of a classical mechanical Newtonian Mind as his
explanation for human nature, following the same deterministic
         370     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               causal physical laws as freely falling apples and the orbiting plan-
               ets, is a philosophical failure. It fails for the same reason that Ein-
               stein’s dream of a deterministic and causal explanation for the
               merely statistical laws of quantum mechanics has failed. Nature
               does play dice.
                  And until the die is cast, until the mind decides, until the
               information about the decision is recorded, our choices are free.
                  Remember that the causal explanations that Hume and Einstein
               wanted are not provable logically or by sophisticated language
               claims. Causality is a natural belief, beyond logic and language.
                  But there is a competing and more vital natural belief, also un-
               provable, namely that we have free will and can take responsibility
               for our choices.
                  Without chances and possibilities, choices are not real. Without
               an initial chance stage, the choice stage would be pre-determined.
                  My two-stage model is not a monolithic “free will.” It is a pro-
               cess, first chance, then choice, first “free,” then “will.”
                  Our thoughts are free. Our actions are willed.
                  Most actions are “determined” by the “de-liberations” that we
               call self-determination. But these were not pre-determined from
               the “fixed past” just before our deliberations began.
                  Others of our actions are undetermined liberties. When our
               deliberations do not produce a single possible action, we can
               choose any of the equally attractive options remaining, and take
Chapter 29




               full responsibility for whichever one we finally choose. Closely
               related to the ancient liberum arbitrium, these undetermined
               liberties only become self-determined in the moment of choice.
                                                                           Undetermined
                                                           Decision          Liberties
                                  Generate        Evaluate
                Fixed Past       Possibilities   Alternatives
                                                                                Future
                                                                            De-liberated
                                                                         Self-Determination
                 Figure 29-1. The Two-Stage Cogito Model of Free Will.
                                       Ending The Scandal                371


Two-Step Processes
   Why two steps, two-stages, two parts? You will need to know a
bit more about information philosophy than there was room for in
the introduction to this book on free will. I hope those of you with a
serious interest in philosophy will become information philosophers
and help me with I-Phi.
   For now, it’s enough to know three important two-step processes.
   1) The cosmic creation process requires two steps.3 The first is a
microscopic quantum (hence indeterministic) event that forms an
information structure. The second is a macroscopic thermodynamic
event, in which the entropy and energy that would destroy a new
information structure, if it stayed around, is carried away to a dark
corner of the universe.
   2) Biological evolution is a two-step process. The first is a
microscopic change in the genetic code of an organism, its central
information structure. The change is usually the result of a quantum
event, like a cosmic-ray collision with the DNA. The second step is
the natural selection of some changes because they are reproduc-
tively successful and propagate.
   3) The third two-step process to create information is free will.
The Two-Stage Cogito Model of Free Will
   The first step is random thoughts about alternative possibilities
for action that are generated in the mind, generated in part because       Chapter 29
of quantum-level noise in the brain’s information structure as it
recalls past experiences to help with its deliberations.
   The second step is normally an adequately determined decision
following an adequately determined evaluation of the options. It
includes the ability to “think again,” to go back and generate more
options as needed. And we can always “flip a coin” when there is no
clear best option.
   In such cases, the final decision itself can be undetermined. The
brain has access to quantum level events. It can see a single photon
and smell a single molecule. So when it makes an undetermined
  3    See the next chapter.
         372         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               decision, it may access quantum level indeterminacy. But a random
               decision does not necessarily imply lack of responsibility. 4
                  The two-stage model for free will explains how we “can do
               otherwise in exactly the same circumstances.” 5 And it shows how
               our decisions are not pre-determined, not even determined by the
               fixed past and the laws of nature at the moment the generation of
               alternative possibilities begins.
                  If you agree that this two-stage model deserves to be considered
               in philosophy classes today, I believe we need to formulate some
               brief ways for you to frame the problem historically in the context of
               past proposed solutions. And then some very simple explanations
               of the proposed new solution.
               How You Can Make the Best Case for Free Will
                   If you have read a significant part of this book, then you are
               well-equipped to discuss the two-stage model in depth. But can you
               explain it in a few lines to your friends and even to scholars like
               philosophy professors who may have fixed views on the subject?
                  I suggest that one way to start is to situate the problem and the
               solution historically as follows, in three parts.
               Part 1 - Reconciling Free Will with Adequate Determinism
                  David Hume, in his “Of Liberty and Necessity,” section VII of
               the 1748 Enquiries concerning Human Understanding, famously
               reconciled freedom with determinism.
Chapter 29




                     “For what is meant by liberty, when applied to voluntary actions?
                     We cannot surely mean that actions have so little connexion with
                     motives, inclinations, and circumstances, that one does not follow
                     with a certain degree of uniformity from the other”
                     “By liberty, then, we can only mean a power of acting or not act-
                     ing, according to the determinations of the will” 6
                  R. E. Hobart in 1934 clarified the fact that a free will involves
               determination of the will by reasons and motives. It requires neither
               logical necessity nor strict physical determinism.
                 4       Dennett and Kane have shown this. See p. 356-357
                 5       See p. 199 for details.
                 6       Hume (1975) p. 95.
                                                  Ending The Scandal    373

   Hume, as moderated by Hobart, provided the second, adequately
determined stage of the Cogito model, which we now give the
traditional name of de-liberated self-determination.
Part 2 - Reconciling Free Will with Indeterminism
   William James, in 1884, provided the critical first stage, by
reconciling free will with objective chance.
   My own work has refined James’ explanation, to make it consis-
tent with quantum indeterminism.
   So you can say that Hume and Hobart provided half the answer
to the problem of free will. Their adequate determination reconciled
a compatibilist free will with the laws of classical physics.
   James and the others in Chapter 12 who proposed two-stage
models found the second half of the answer. In particular, I hope to
be remembered as the information philosopher who reconciled
libertarian free will with the probabilistic laws of quantum physics.
Part 3 - Will Compatibilists Accept This Improvement and
Call Themselves Comprehensive Compatibilists?
  Compatibilists were right all these centuries to reject the radical
idea that freedom means an extreme libertarianism that denies
reasonable causes for human actions. Can we convince them that
our two-stage model simply adds creative and free elements to their
current thinking on self-determination?

                 Determinism               Libertarianism                 Chapter 29


                              Comprehensive
                               Compatibilism

  Figure 29-2. A comprehensive compatibilist taxonomy.
  Since most modern compatibilists are agnostics on the truth of
determinism (or indeterminism), we hope they will accept a free
will model that is triply compatible - with Hume’s definition, with
James’ definition, and with Martin Heisenberg’s evolution of
human free will from the behavioral freedom of lower animals.
