         278        Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                   m inis        m
                                          De t e r

                                                            t i b i l i s m
                                                  Co    mpa                 ism
                                                                   rmin
                          ter minism               Sof   t D e t e
                  De
             Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                    o m p atibi
                                                            S oft C
          nco         m p a t i
                              e
                                b
                                r
                                  ilism
                                  i c h   ’ s
H a r d I
                      H o n d                bilism
                                                                                         In
                   Ted erm Seimn ismm
                               ico   p a t i

        s i o n ism Det
  Ill u
                                             ilism
Chapter 23




                                                             mpa    tib
                                                     I n c o
                                           Narr   ow
                 s s i b i lism
   Imp         o                                                          ilism
                                                           c o m p atib
                                                 Sof  t In
                                                                                          y
                           del                                                    Leewa
                     an Mo
             Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                           a
                                          r c e I ncom nce)
                                      Sou          l S e que
                                        (Actu   a
                                                                             i m i t e d
                                                      e lw             ith L
                                                  o d
                                 - S t     a ge M
                            Tw o                      This chapter on the web
                 informationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/honderich
                             m inis          m
                    de t e r                                       Ted Honderich       279
              In
              Ted Honderich’s r i a n ism
                            a
                     Libert
              Determinism
                                                                                  - Csal
                                                                                      au
                   Ted Honderich is the principal spokesman for strict
                                                                       Ag  e n  tphysical
              causality and “hard determinism.”
                   He has written more u
                                          - C a   sal (with excursions into quantum
                                                widely
                             Eve    n
              mechanics, neuroscience,  t        and consciousness), more deeply, and
              certainly more extensively than most of his colleagues on the
                                                                                     - C  a u sal
                                                                             Non
              problem of free will.
                   Unlike most of his determinist colleagues specializing in
              free will, Honderich has not              A
                                                   SFsuccumbed      to the easy path of

          t i b i lis        m
              compatibilism by simply declaring that the free will we have (and
    omp a                                                                  s a lity
nc
              should want, says Daniel Dennett) is completely                 consistent
                                                                       a u
              with determinism, namely a HumeanS               oft C or “freedom
                                                             “voluntarism”
              of action” in which our will is completely caused by prior events.
                   Norm     p
                         does a  ibilism go down the path of incompatibilism,nism
                                tHonderich
           d   nco for non-physical substances, dualist forms iofbe
             Ilooking                                                            r      a
                                                                                   tarior
   B r o a                                                               L    agency,
              gifts of God. He does not simply identify freedom   Soft with Epicurean
              chance, as have many iscientistssm with ideas of brain mechanisms ertaria


                                                                                           Chapter 23
                               rt
              amplifyingequantum  a r i a  nmechanical  indeterminism to help with theLib
                s  t  L  i b“origination” of actions and decisions. 1 ring So
                                                                                       ft
        o  d euncaused
    M                                                                Da
                   Honderich does not claim to have found a solution to the prob-
              lem of free will or determinism, C       tohe does claim to have confront-
                                                  ogibut
            a  t
              ed i b
                   the  sm
                     iliconsequences      of determinism.2 He is “dismayed” because the
          p
 Incom truth                s)
                       ofedeterminism
                       c                                                           n is
                                             requires that we give up “origination” with   m
            q u   e n
                                                                           e r
          e its promise of an open future, restricting - though not eliminatingm i
ative S - our “life hopes.”
                                                e d In                 det
                                            i t
                                     nd Lim
                   Unlike many of his hard determinist colleagues, who appear to

               ism                a
              welcome determinism and enjoy describing belief in free will as
       r m i n
  Dete
              an illusion, Honderich is unique in his passionate sense of real
              loss. We might have been the author of our own actions, he says,
              we could have done otherwise, and thus be held accountable and
              morally responsible in a way more acceptable to common sense.
                1     informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_will_mechanisms.html
                2     Honderich (1990)
         280     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Honderich describes the main life hope that is lost as a future
               we can make for ourselves.
                        “We have a kind of life-hope which is incompatible with a
                     belief in determinism. An open future, a future we can make for
                     ourselves, is one of which determinism isn’t true.
                        “Suppose you become convinced of the truth of our theory
                     of determinism. Becoming really convinced will not be easy,
                     for several reasons. But try now to imagine a day when you do
                     come to believe determinism fully. What would the upshot be?
                     It would almost certainly be dismay. Your response to deter-
                     minism in connection with the hope would be dismay. If you
                     really were persuaded of determinism, the hope would collapse.
                        “This is so because such a hope has a necessary part or condi-
                     tion on which the rest of it depends. This is the image of origi-
                     nation. There can be no such hope if all the future is just effects
                     of effects. It is for this reason, I think, that many people have
                     found determinism to be a black thing. John Stuart Mill
                     felt it as an incubus, and, to speak for myself, it has certainly got
                     me down in the past.” 3
                  Though he is its foremost champion, I find it most extraordi-
Chapter 23




               nary that Honderich characterizes determinism as a “black thing”
               and as what John Stuart Mill called an “incubus.” Determin-
               ism gives him “dismay.” he says.
                  In my readings of hundreds of philosophers and scientists on
               the problem of free will, I have found none with such deep heart-
               felt feelings and frank openness about the implications of their
               work for the state of humanity.
               The Failure of Compatibilism and
               Incompatibilism
                 In Honderich’s article for Kane’s Oxford Handbook of Free Will,
               he says “Determinism is True, Compatibilism and Incompatibilism
               are False.”
                 3       Honderich (2002) p. 94.
                                     Ted Honderich’s Determinism            281

   Honderich faults both the Compatibilists and Incompatibilists
on three counts.
   First, he says that moral responsibility is not all that is at
stake, there are personal feelings, reactive attitudes, problems of
knowledge, and rationalizing punishment with ideas of limited
responsibility.
   Second, these problems can not be resolved by logical “proofs”
nor by linguistic analyses of propositions designed to show “free”
and “determined” are logically compatible.
   And third, he faults their simplistic idea that one or the other of
them must be right.
   Furthermore, unlike some of his colleagues, Honderich does
not completely dismiss indeterminism and considers the sugges-
tion of “near-determinism.” He says,
      “Maybe it should have been called determinism-where-it-mat-
      ters. It allows that there is or may be some indeterminism but
      only at what is called the micro-level of our existence, the level
      of the small particles of our bodies.” 4
  Despite this openness to indeterminism, in his book
On Determinism and Freedom, Honderich has an extensive dis-




                                                                              Chapter 23
cussion of Quantum Theory in which he says
           “Does Quantum Theory as interpreted have some clause,
      hitherto unheard of, that its random events occur only in such
      places as to make us morally responsible in a certain sense? This
      objection of inconsistency, perhaps, is less effective with some
      uncommitted philosophers because they do not really take the
      philosophers of origination seriously. If it really were accepted
      as true that a random event could get in between the question
      and the intention, with great effect, then it would have to be
      accepted that one could get in between the intention and the
      lie, with as much effect. Any attempt to exclude the possibility is
      bound to be fatally ad hoc.” 5

  4       Honderich (2003) p. 5.
  5       Honderich (2005) p. 125.
         282     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Here Honderich puts his finger on the stumbling block that has
               prevented philosophers and scientists from accepting an ampli-
               fied quantum event as the source of indeterminism in a decision.
                  It is highly unlikely that individual quantum events could
               be synchronized and located precisely, near or inside the right
               neurons for example. The “master switch amplifier” concept of
               Arthur Holly Compton seems only to have been offered as a
               source of randomness centered in the second stage of the deci-
               sions themselves.
                  Robert Kane recognized this problem in his early work, when
               he thought he needed a random event precisely at the moment of
               his Self-Forming Actions (SFAs). Today he sees ever-present noise
               in the brain as providing the required indeterminism.
                  Kane described the problem,
                     “We do not know if something similar goes on in the brain of
                     cortically developed creatures like ourselves, but I suspect it
                     must if libertarian theories are to succeed. The main problem
                     is the one addressed by Eccles of locating the master switch
                     and the mechanisms of amplification. We have no substan-
                     tial empirical evidence on these matters (especially regarding
Chapter 23




                     the master switch), merely speculation, and libertarian theo-
                     ries may fail dismally at this juncture. But there is much to be
                     learned yet about the brain; and research exists...suggesting that
                     master switch plus amplifier processes play more roles in the
                     functioning of organisms than was previously supposed.” 6
                  Honderich is right that quantum events do not “occur only in
               such places as to make us morally responsible,” as various free will
               mechanisms have proposed.7 But the “inconsistency” is not with
               the quantum mechanics, just its misapplication by philosophers.
                  In my Cogito model, I depend on the fact that quantum noise
               is ever present. It just normally averages out in macroscopic situ-
               ations. Microscopic situations, like the storage and retrieval of
               information in the neurons of the mind/brain, are much more
               susceptible to noise. Information structures in computers, and in
                 6       Kane (1985) p. 168.
                 7       informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_will_mechanisms.html
                                     Ted Honderich’s Determinism                 283

modern digital media devices like CDs and DVDs, are also sus-
ceptible to random noise. Media devices, and perhaps the brain,
have elaborate error detection and suppression capabilities.
On Determinism
   Honderich has long defended what he calls the “truth” of
determinism. I agree that there must be “adequate determin-
ism” in our choices and actions for us to take moral responsi-
bility. I have tried to convince Honderich that all we lose with
my “adequate determinism” is the truly grand, but unsupport-
able, idea of pre-determinism, namely that every event and all
prior events form a causal chain back to the origin of the universe.
Indeed, in On Determinism and Freedom (p. 6), Honderich calls
for “the truth of a conceptually adequate determinism.” 8
   In some of his earliest thoughts, Honderich wrote in 1973, in
his essay “One Determinism,” that determinism may preclude
responsibility (as David Hume also had feared) ..
         “States of the brain are, in the first place, effects, the effects of
      other physical states. Many states of the brain, secondly, are cor-
      relates. A particular state accompanied my experience the other




                                                                                   Chapter 23
      moment of thinking about having walked a lot on Hampstead
      Heath, and a like state accompanies each like experience: each
      of my experiences of thinking of having walked a lot on Hamp-
      stead Heath. Given our present concern, it is traditional that
      the most important experiences are decidings and choosings.
      Some states of the brain, thirdly, are causes, both of other states
      of the brain and also of certain movements of one’s body. The
      latter are actions. Some are relatively simple while others, such
      as speech acts and bits of ritual, depend on settings of conven-
      tion and have complex histories. Simple or complex, however,
      all actions are movements, or of course stillnesses, caused by
      states of the brain. It follows from these three premisses, about
      states of the brain as effects, as correlates and as causes, that on
      every occasion when we act, we can only act as in fact we do.
      It follows too that we are not responsible for our actions, and,
      what is most fundamental, that we do not possess selves of a
      certain character.” 9
  8       Honderich (2005) p. 6.
  9       Honderich (1973) p. 187.
         284     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Most compatibilists and determinists since Hobbes and Hume
               never mention the fact that a causal chain of events going back
               before our birth would not provide the kind of liberty that com-
               mon sense expects But Hume, like Honderich, frankly admits (in
               a passage rarely quoted by compatibilist philosophers) that such a
               causal chain would be a serious objection to his theory.
                     “I pretend not to have obviated or removed all objections to
                  this theory, with regard to necessity and liberty. I can foresee
                  other objections, derived from topics which have not here been
                  treated of. It may be said, for instance, that, if voluntary actions
                  be subjected to the same laws of necessity with the operations
                  of matter, there is a continued chain of necessary causes, pre-
                  ordained and pre-determined, reaching from the original cause
                  of all to every single volition, of every human creature. No con-
                  tingency anywhere in the universe; no indifference; no liberty.
                  While we act, we are, at the same time, acted upon.” 10
                 To escape this objection, we might imagine that Hume wanted
               some kind of agent-causal freedom in voluntarist acts?
               The Consequences of Determinism
                  Honderich’s great work is the 750-page The Theory of Determin-
Chapter 23




               ism, Oxford, 1988, later broken into two volumes, of which one
               is The Consequences of Determinism. Honderich claims to have
               solved the “problem of the consequences of determinism.”
                  Note that this is not the problem of free will and determinism.
               Honderich believes determinism is true.
                  Rather than discuss the problem of free will directly, or even
               indirectly via the familiar though muddled terms determinism,
               compatibilism, incompatibilism, and libertarianism, Honderich
               introduces new concepts and still more new terminology.
                  In the style of Peter F. Strawson, Honderich’s interest is in
               our feelings and attitudes toward the truth of determinism, as
               what he calls our “life-hopes” are altered by belief in determinism.
                  One hope is that we should be able to originate the actions
               affecting our future life. The truth of determinism, which denies
                 10   Hume (1975) p. 99.
                             Ted Honderich’s Determinism                285

the freedom to originate actions, might give rise to a “sad” attitude
of “dismay.” In this respect, Honderich regards determinism as a
“black thing.” He calls dismay the “sad” attitude toward determin-
ism.
   But we can have another “tough” attitude, that of intransigence,
in that our hope involving belief in “voluntariness” is consistent
with determinism. This kind of voluntarism goes back to Thomas
Hobbes and freedom of action.11 With his term intransigence,
Honderich wants us to resist compromise with ideas like origina-
tion. But he seems to imply that moral responsibility can be rec-
onciled with determinism.
   Finally, Honderich argues that we can choose the attitude of
affirmation rather than intransigence or dismay.
   It might appear that Honderich’s terms dismay and intransi-
gence roughly correlate with the ideas of
     • incompatibilist libertarian free will (involving randomness),
which is denied by determinism, leading to his attitude of dismay
     • compatibilism which is reconciled to determinism, leading
to the attitude of intransigence, (irreconcilable with the “fiction”
of origination)




                                                                          Chapter 23
   But Honderich says he avoids the mistakes of Incompatibil-
ism and Compatibilism. His point of their mistakes is subtle. It
depends on his introduction of the two kinds of “life hopes,” the
one voluntariness alone, the other voluntariness plus origination.
He says:
   “Let us finish here by having clear the relation of affirmation to
   Compatibilism and Incompatibilism. Affirmation differs whol-
   ly from both in that it recognizes the existence of two attitudes
   where Compatibilism and Incompatibilism assert a single con-
   ception and a single connection with moral responsibility and
   the like. Affirmation does involve reliance on a single attitude,
   having to do only with voluntariness, which of course is relat-
   ed to the single conception of initiation which Compatibilists
   assign to us. Affirmation also has to do with the other attitude,
   pertaining also to origination, related to the single conception
  11   informationphilosopher.com/freedom/freedom_of_action.html
         286     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  which Incompatibilists assign to us. It is not much more like
                  Compatibilism than Incompatibilism.” 12
                  The mistake of Incompatibilism appears to be that it assumes
               that determinism destroys moral approval and disapproval. This,
               Honderich says, ignores the tough attitude of intransigence.
                  The mistake of Compatibilism, is to assert that nothing changes
               as a consequence of determinism, when clearly we have lost the
               life-hope of origination. This ignores the sad attitude of dismay.
                  Honderich recapitulates his lengthy argument.
                  “The argument about the consequences of determinism has
                  been a long one, and can usefully be brought into a succinct
                  form.
                  “1.2 All our life-hopes involve thoughts to the effect that we
                  somehow initiate our future actions. Some involve not only
                  beliefs as to voluntariness or willingness but also an idea, or
                  what is more an image, of our originating our future actions.
                  To think of life-hopes of this kind, and their manifest inconsis-
                  tency with determinism, and to accept the likely truth of deter-
                  minism, is to fall into dismay. We are deprived of the hopes.” 13
                  In my Cogito model, our life-hopes are thoughts. They present
Chapter 23




               themselves freely to us in the undetermined first stage of the two-
               stage model. This gives us Honderich’s “origination.”
                  But Honderich makes it clear, and I agree, that some determin-
               ism is needed in, is consistent with, our voluntary actions,
                  “1.3 We also have life-hopes involving only beliefs as to volun-
                  tariness — that we will act not from reluctant desires and inten-
                  tions, but from embraced desires and intentions, that we will act
                  in enabling circumstances rather than frustrating ones. These
                  circumstances have to do with at least the way of my world, the
                  absence of self-frustration, independence of others, and absence
                  of bodily constraint. Thinking of hopes of this kind, and noting
                  the clear consistency of a determinism with them, may issue in
                  intransigence. These life-hopes are not at all significantly threat-
                  ened by determinism.”
                 12   Honderich (1990b) p. 149.
                 13   Honderich (1990b) p. 169.
                              Ted Honderich’s Determinism              287

   In my view, all the determinism that Honderich needs is R. E.
Hobart’s determination (See p. 23).
   P. F. Strawson distinguished treating some persons as auton-
omous participants in our moral universe, from others who are
treated “objectively,” as ruled by deterministic forces. Honderich
feels dismay about the latter, intransigence about the former.
   “1.4 We have appreciative and also resentful feelings about
   others, owed to their actions deriving from good or bad feel-
   ings and judgements about us. Both sorts of personal feelings
   involve assumptions somehow to the effect that others could
   do otherwise than they do. It is natural in one way of thinking
   and feeling to take the assumptions to amount to this: others
   act with knowledge, without internal constraint, in character,
   and in line with personality, not out of abnormality, not be-
   cause of constraint by others. This second one of a set of fun-
   damentally like conceptions of voluntary action, wholly con-
   sistent with determinism, may lead us to make the response
   of intransigence with respect to personal feelings. However,
   we also have other personal feelings, having a certain person-
   directed character and including an assumption as to a power
   or control of their actions by others. The assumption is incon-




                                                                         Chapter 23
   sistent with determinism and may lead to dismay.” 14
  Honderich recognizes that in a deterministic universe our
knowledge claims are suspect. Information philosophy puts the
basis of knowledge on the sounder foundation of information,
in the universe outside us, and isomorphic information in our
brains. But that is the subject of another book.
  Honderich thinks (correctly) that origination is needed to
ground knowledge claims. (See the Free Will Axiom on page 231.)
      “1.5 We accept that our claims to knowledge derive in part
   from beliefs and assumptions to our mental acts and our ordi-
   nary actions, by which we come to have evidence and the like.
   We may take it that originated acts and actions are necessary,
   and, taking them as ruled out by a determinism, suffer a want of
   confidence in our beliefs, a dismay having to do with the pos-
   sibility of a further reality. Inevitably, however, we can have a
  14   Honderich (1990b) p. 169.
         288     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  different kind of confidence, owed only to an assumption as to
                  voluntariness, the possibility of our satisfying our desires for
                  information. Hence intransigence about knowledge. These are
                  facts which the Epicurean tradition of objection to determinism
                  has greatly misconstrued.” 15

               On Consciousness and Radical Externalism
                 Honderich’s study of Mind and Brain, originally the first two
               parts of Theory of Determinism, informs Honderich’s later works
               On Consciousness and Radical Externalism.
                 How do these works reveal Honderich’s perception of the prob-
               lem of the originator, the kind of free will that libertarians are
               looking for?
                 A careful reading of Mind and Brain tells us that Honderich is
               concerned about micro-indeterministic chance being the direct
               cause of action. He calls this the “Postulate of Neural Indetermi-
               nacy,” and generally opposes the idea.
                  “How could an unnecessitated or chance event be something
                  for which the person in question could be censured in the given
                  way?”
Chapter 23




                 (p. 184)
                 He finds
                  “strong and clear support for the proposition that neural se-
                  quences are somehow or in some way causal sequences.”
                 (p. 266)
                  Neurobiologists, and cell biologists before them, have long
               shown that the size of cellular structures is macroscopic enough
               for quantum micro-indeterminism to be irrelevant in the normal
               operations of a cell. We grant this, and it seems as if this is the
               basic evidence for Honderich’s claim of determinism and causality
               in the “Psychoneural Intimacy” of the mind/brain.
                  But there is another level of operations in the mind, the one
               computer scientists and cognitive scientists use to defend the
               “mind as computer” or “machine.” That is the famous analogy of
               the relationship of software to the hardware.
                 15    Honderich (1990b) p. 169-170.
                           Ted Honderich’s Determinism                  289

    The identity theory of mind says that mind and brain are one
thing. Philosophers of mind take a more nuanced view and say
that mind events “supervene” on brain events. There is a one-to-
one correspondence that sounds like Gottfried Leibniz and
Immanuel Kant’s ideas of a parallel noumenal or mental world
in “pre-established harmony” with the physical noumenal world.
    My Cogito model is a purely physical model. But like the cogni-
tive scientists, I see an important distinction between the software,
considered as “pure” information, and the hardware, considered
as embodied information structures.
    The macroscopic neurological brain is storing and retrieving
pure information to serve the mind’s consciousness of its sur-
roundings, to inform its actions and interactions with the world.
    Now we know that there is no such thing as an information
system that can communicate without noise in the system, both
quantum noise and the more common thermal noise. Such noise
is the informational equivalent of those chance microscopic events
in Honderich’s “Postulate of Neural Indeterminacy,” but now the
emphasis must be on the psyche side of Psychoneural intimacy. It
is indeterminacy of thought, not of action.




                                                                          Chapter 23
    Indeterminacy of thought, while not directly causing action,
can influence our choices for action, not by causing them, and
not by changing their probabilities, but simply by becoming
alternative possibilities for action by the adequately determined
will, which also includes determination of our muscular motions
to implement the action.
    We may occasionally exhibit spastic behaviors, but there is
absolutely no evidence, and no need, for actions that are affected
randomly by microscopic quantum uncertainty, despite the fears
of many philosophers of the consequences of admitting some
indeterminism.
    Determinists have been right about the Will, but wrong about
Freedom (or origination).
    Libertarians have been right about Freedom, but wrong about
the Will, which must be as adequately determined as the rest of
our physical selves.
         290     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Consciousness as Existence
                  What does this information in the mind/brain have to do with
               Honderich’s theory of “Consciousness as Existence” or more
               recently “Radical Externalism?” Consciousness is quintessentially
               ideas, including of course our feelings about those ideas, which
               as associationists from Hume’s time thought, are recollections of
               sense experiences.
                  Now small errors or “noise” in our recollections are the stuff of
               “new ideas,” such as we experience when dreaming or half-dream-
               ing, musing about possibilities.
                  Radical Externalism says that:
                     “Consciousness is perceptual, reflective or affective — in brief
                  it has to do with seeing, thinking and wanting. We are as good
                  as never engaged in only one of the sorts of things. There are
                  large problems here. One is the understanding of the mixing
                  and melding of the three parts, kinds, sides or whatever of con-
                  sciousness, of how one contributes to another, even in ordinary
                  seeing and acting.” 16
                  Honderich wants his “perceptual consciousness” to encompass
Chapter 23




               not merely the representation of the world in the mind but a com-
               mitment to the existence of the perceived world. In informational
               terms we say that there is at least a partial isomorphism, a “map-
               ping” of the information stored in our neural systems onto the
               information in the external world that I am seeing.
                     “You are seeing this page. What does that fact come to? What
                  is that state of affairs? The natural answer has a lot in it, about
                  the page as a physical thing, whatever one of those is, and about
                  your retinas and your visual cortex. It also has in it philosophy
                  and science about the relation between a neural process and
                  your consciousness.
                   “So there is more to your seeing the page than your conscious-
                  ness of it.“ 17
                 16   Freeman (2006) p. 6.
                 17   Freeman (2006) p. 3.
                                 Ted Honderich’s Determinism             291

   Honderich seems to agree with the partial isomorphism in his
description of reflective and affective consciousness, which can
have thoughts that correspond not to the real world, but to a mod-
ified world of the imagination, including states of affairs that the
agent has the power to originate, to bring about in an open future.
     “Now a few words about reflective consciousness, say think-
   ing of home, and affective consciousness, say wanting to be
   there or intending to get there.
      “Very briefly, what it seems to be to think of home now is
   for something to exist that has some of the properties of home.
   That is what a representation essentially is — something that
   shares some effects with what is represented.
      “As for wanting to be at home or intending to get there, and
   affective consciousness generally, one essential point is that this
   too is to be understood in terms of the characters of anyone’s
   perceptual and also reflective consciousness.” 18
   Can Honderich see that our affective consciousness is so much
more powerful if it can imagine, if it can freely create, ways of
wanting the world (for example, wanting to be home) that are not
already pre-determined in the one possible future of his intransi-




                                                                           Chapter 23
gence attitude toward the meagre “life-hope” he accepts in volun-
tarism with no origination?
   We can originate, we can create, in the abstract world of infor-
mation, thoughts in our minds about how we want the world to
be. These thoughts can then activate our reflective consciousness,
and stimulate our affective consciousness, helping our delibera-
tions and evaluations of those thoughts, before we act on one of
them.
   In his latest work for the second edition of the Oxford Hand-
book of Free Will, Honderich takes a stand opposing Peter F.
Strawson, who said that he did not understand the problem of
determinism and free will.19 Honderich says,
   “Determinism is not one of those theories filling up the world
   whose truth you cannot be sure about because you cannot be
   sure what the theory is, or what it really comes to. You know
  18   Freeman (2006) pp. 8-9.
  19   Strawson (1962) p. 1.
         292     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   what determinism is. It is even plainer in its essentials than the
                   lovely theory of evolution... So much for the essential content
                   of determinism. Come round as quickly to the question of the
                   truth of the theory—the truth of the proposition that every
                   event, each thing that happens, is a standard effect.” 20
                 But Honderich is unhappy with our current understanding of
               quantum mechanics, that some events are merely probable, not
               necessitated. I call it “soft” causality. It is not that the causative
               event does not exist, but that it itself was only probable. Honderich
               remarks...
                   “about probabilism. It is argued that interpretations of quan-
                   tum mechanics establish, about events of which we are sure
                   that they cause cancer, that these events are undetermined or
                   unnecessitated. So, unless we take causation to be probabilistic,
                   we will have to be agnostic about well-supported or even best
                   supported causal claims. A reply is that there is a less confus-
                   ing and maybe less confused response. If later unnecessitated
                   events are said to be explained by prior events only in some
                   unnecessitating way, then the prior events are not causes and
                   the later events not effects, whatever else is to be said of them in
                   terms of some kind of explanation.
Chapter 23




                   “Probabilism, it seems, despite the great interest, history, and
                   technical competence of work on probability, is the intrusion of
                   a specialism into a subject not explained by it and not in need
                   of it.”
                  Sadly, Honderich is no scientist, not even a philosopher of sci-
               ence. He says he must “navigate around” what he does “not under-
               stand and cannot judge.” But judge he does,
                  “It is my own judgment that modern physics at least does not
               give consistent support to a denial of general determinism.... No
               doubt a little intemperately, I have in the past spoken of the inter-
               pretations of quantum mechanics, and in particular those taken to
               show that the world is indeterministic, as a mess.” 21
                 20    Kane (2011) p. 442.
                 21    Kane (2011) p. 447.
                             Ted Honderich’s Determinism                     293

   Honderich, as always, is keeping up with events in physics. He
mentions Bell’s theorem, and the recent experimental tests (which
confirm quantum mechanics). He says he polled a number of his
colleague philosophers, and found only hesitation on whether the
experiments establish indeterminism.22
   But these philosophers (of science mostly) are still clinging
to the hope (shared originally by John Bell) that Einstein was
right, that quantum reality might be shown to be “local” and that
determinism would be restored.
     I have presented the latest evidence on nonlocality and
entanglement in several web pages.23 I hope that Honderich and
his colleagues will study them closely. I have edited a video presen-
tation by John Bell, shortly before his death in 1990, in which he
confirms that the experimental tests of his theorem show Einstein
to have been quite wrong about his idea of “local” reality. 24

   Honderich himself maintains a website on Determinism and
Freedom, with a selection of important pieces by various thinkers,
and a companion guide to the terminology.25 His website was an
inspiration for my own.




                                                                               Chapter 23




  22   Kane (2011) p. 456.
  23   See informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/Bells_Theorem/
  24   See youtube.com/watch?v=V8CCfOD1iu8 or search YouTube for John Bell
  25   http://www.ucl.ac.uk/~uctytho/dfwTerminology.html
