         338   My God, He Plays Dice!




                                 s te  i n
                             Ein Phi
                             a n d I -
Chapter 43
                                               I-Phi and Einstein 339


Albert Einstein and
Information Philosophy
On Information Philosophy
   Information is neither matter nor energy, although it needs
matter to be embodied and energy to be communicated. Why
should information become the new basis for understanding and
solving so many problems in philosophy and science?
   It is because everything in the universe that is distinguishable
from chaos and disorder is an information structure that was
created since the structureless, pure energy origin of the universe.
   As most all of us know, matter and energy are conserved. This
means that there is just the same total amount of matter and energy
today as there was at the universe origin. Einstein showed us that
matter can be converted into energy with his equation E=mc2, so
there is just one unchanging total of “stuff ” in the universe.
   But then what accounts for all the change that we see, the new
things under the sun? It is information, which is not conserved
and has been increasing since the beginning of time, despite the
second law of thermodynamics, with its increasing entropy, which
destroys order.
   What is changing is the arrangement of the existing matter in
what we call information structures. What is emerging is new           Chapter 43
information. What idealists and holists see is that emergence of
immaterial information embodied in material structures.
   Living things, you and I, are dynamic growing information
structures, forms through which matter and energy continuously
flow. And it is information processing that controls those flows!
   At the lowest levels, living information structures blindly
replicate their information. At higher levels, natural selection
adapts them to their environments. At the highest levels, they
develop behaviors, intentions, goals, and agency, introducing
purpose into the universe.
         340     My God, He Plays Dice!

                  Information is the modern spirit, the ghost in the machine,
               the mind in the body. It is the soul, and when we die, it is our
               information that perishes, unless the future preserves it. The
               matter remains.
                  Information can explain the fundamental metaphysical
               connection between materialism and idealism. Information
               philosophy replaces the determinism and metaphysical necessity
               of eliminative materialism and reductionist naturalism with
               metaphysical possibilities. Alternative possibilities can not exist
               without ontological chance. Determinism says there is but one
               possible future.
                  Many mathematical physicists like the idea of a completely
               deterministic universe. The Bohmians, Everett’s many worlders,
               John Bell, and the Decoherence theorists are all determinists. They
               believe that the “wave function of the universe” evolves determin-
               istically, and it does. But they deny the many “collapses of the wave
               function” which are indeterministic and are the creative source of
               all new information.
                  Einstein saw chance as a “weakness in the theory.” But the
               important thing is that he was the first person to see ontological
               “objectively real” chance in physics. Chance in classical physics
               had been regarded as epistemological, merely human ignorance.
                   Perhaps the most amazing thing about information philosophy
               is its discovery that abstract and immaterial information (the
               quantum wave field) can exert an influence over concrete matter,
Chapter 43




               perhaps explaining how mind can move body, how our thoughts
               can control our actions, deeply related to the way the quantum
               wave function controls the probabilities of locating quantum
               particles, as first seen, but never understood, by Einstein.
                  Einstein did not like probabilities but clearly saw that quantum
               physics is a statistical theory.
                  How abstract probability amplitudes Ψ control the statistics of
               experiments remains the one deep mystery of quantum mechanics.
                  Knowledge is information in minds that is a partial isomorphism
               (mapping) of the information structures in the external world.
               Information philosophy is a correspondence theory.
                                               I-Phi and Einstein 341

   Sadly, there is no isomorphism, no information in common,
between words and objects. This accounts for much of the failing
of analytic language philosophy in the past century. The arbitrary
and conventional connections between words and objects is the
source of confusion in Niels Bohr’s Copenhagen Interpretation
of quantum mechanics.
   Although language is a fine tool for human communication,
it is arbitrary, ambiguous, and ill-suited to represent the world
directly. Human languages do not picture reality. Information is
the true lingua franca of the universe.
   The extraordinarily sophisticated connections between words
and objects are “free creations of human minds,” mediated by
the brain’s experience recorder and reproducer (ERR). Words
stimulate wired neurons to start firing and to play back those
experiences that include related objects.
   Neurons that were wired together in our earliest experiences
fire together at later times, contextualizing our new experiences,
giving them meaning. And by replaying emotional reactions to
similar earlier experiences, it makes then “subjective experiences,”
giving us the feeling of “what it’s like to be me” and solving the
“hard problem” of consciousness.
   Without words and related experiences previously recorded
in our mental experience recorders, we could not comprehend
words. They would be mere noise, with no meaning.
   Far beyond words, a dynamic information model of an                 Chapter 43
information structure in the world is presented immediately to
the mind as a simulation of reality experienced for itself.
   This is why we are creating animations of mysterious quantum
phenomena to show you the two-slit experiment, entanglement,
and the interaction of radiation with microscopic matter that
leads to the macroscopic irreversibility underlying the second law
of thermodynamics.
   We will analyze all the quantum “mysteries” we hope to solve
in terms of information structures and the communication of
information between information structures. We will look to find
the information in each of the quantum mysteries
         342       My God, He Plays Dice!

               Where’s the Information in Entangled Particles?
                  The central mystery in entanglement for eighty years has been
               how Alice’s measurement of a property can be “transmitted,”
               presumably faster than the speed of light, to Bob at a remote space-
               like separation, so that Bob’s measurement of a related property can
               be perfectly correlated with Alice’s measurement.
                  The information needed is the electron spin or photon polarization
               direction (up or down) for each particle. The Copenhagen
               Interpretation says we cannot know those spin values, that they do
               not even exist until the measurements are made.
                  Einstein’s “objective reality” says that they do have values,
               independent of our measurements. When we prepare the
               experiment, we know that one particle is up and the other down,
               but we don’t know which is which.
                  Because we lack that knowledge, quantum mechanics assumes
               they are best described by a linear superposition of up-down and
               down-up. Objective reality, however, says they always will be found
               in one of those states, either up-down or down-up.
                  Now Einstein’s principles of conservation say that the initial
               properties are conserved as long as there is no external interaction
               with the two particles. The information is therefore carried along
               in each particle. Whichever particle starts out with spin up will be
               measured with spin up at any later time, the other will be found spin
               down.
Chapter 43




                  We have shown that the opposite spins can be regarded as “hidden
               constants” of the motion traveling locally from their creation,
               consistent with Einstein’s picture of an “objective reality.” When Alice
               exercises her “free choice” of a spin direction in which to measure,
               she adds new information to the universe, she “creates” properties
               that could not have been know at the start of the experiment.
                  To a quantum physicist of the Copenhagen school, who thinks the
               particles lack properties simply because we don’t know them, it will
               appear as if the particles are communicating the needed correlation
               information instantly over large distances. See chapter 29.
                  But the information moves locally, only as fast as the particles.
                                               I-Phi and Einstein 343

Where’s the Information in the Two-Slit Experiment?
   Is it in the particles themselves as we found for entanglement?
No. Here the Copenhagen physicist is closer to the truth. We know
nothing about the current path. We only know particles were fired
from a distance away from the two slits.
   Once a particle hits the screen, we know the beginning and
ending of the path, as we do for entanglement, but we do not know
which slit the particle went through if both slits are open.
   So where is the information that produces one interference pattern
when both slits are open, and two distinctly different patterns when
either slit 1 or slit 2 is open?
   In this case the information is in the wave function, and as
Einstein first knew, that information is only statistical information.
It gives us only probabilities of finding particles, which we will
confirm for very large numbers of particles. We know nothing about
an individual path.
   Nevertheless, Einstein’s “objective reality” says the particle has
a path. And his principles of conservation tell us that the particle
never splits in two, so it must travel through just one of the slits.
   We saw in chapter 33 that the wave patterns are different when
one slit is open or both slits are open.



                                                                         Chapter 43




  So the ulimate source of the information in the wave field is in the
boundary conditions, the distribution of local material, just the way
the gravitational field is determined by material nearby.
         344       My God, He Plays Dice!

                 How abstract probability amplitude wave function can influence
               the motions of the particles so that
                 they produce the statistics of many experiments remains the one
               mystery of quantum mechanics.
                 The mystery is not, as Richard Feynman thought, how the
               particle can go through both slits. It is somewhat deeper. How the
               wave function can influence particle motions. The information
               needed to generate interference patterns is in the wave function.
               Where’s the Information in Microscopic Irreversibility?
                  In 1874, Josef Los-
               chmidt criticized his
               younger          colleague
               Ludwig Boltzmann’s
               attempt to derive from
               basic classical dynamics
               the increasing entropy
               required by the second
               law of thermodynamics.
               Loschmidt said that the
               laws of classical dynam-
               ics are time reversible.
               Consequently, if we just turn the time around, the time evolution of
               the system should lead to decreasing entropy.
                  Boltzmann investigated the classical paths of particles in collision
               to develop his “transport equation.” He wondered if after a collision
Chapter 43




               a particle might lose some of the information from a particular
               collision after colliding with a few more particles. He called this
               “molecular disorder.”
                  Now Einstein has shown us how information about a path before
               a collision will be lost during the collision if the collision emits or
               absorbs a photon. The interaction of radiation with the particles is
               irreversible. Einstein says radiation interactions are not “invertible.”
                  In this case we cannot know the information, but we can say that
               information needed to reverse collisions has been lost.
                                                  I-Phi and Einstein 345

Where’s the Information in the Measurement Problem?
   Some define the problem of measurement simply as the logical
contradiction between two laws describing the motion of quantum
systems; the unitary, continuous, and deterministic time evolution
of the Schrödinger equation versus the non-unitary, discontinuous,
and indeterministic collapse of the wave function. John von
Neumann saw a problem with two distinct (indeed, opposing)
processes. See chapter 25.
   The mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics provides no
way to predict exactly when the wave function stops evolving in a
unitary fashion and collapses. If it could predict this perfectly, it would
no longer be quantum mechanics. Experimentally and practically,
however, we can say that this occurs when the microscopic system
interacts with a macroscopic measuring apparatus.
   It takes energy to record the information about the measurement
in the material of the apparatus. for example by moving a pointer,
marking a chart recorder, or storing data in computer memory.
   New information creation requires a local reduction in the
entropy. And in order for that new information to remain stable
for a observer to read it, the overall global entropy must increase by
a larger amount to satisfy the second law. Waste energy is carried
away from the measurement apparatus.
Where’s the Information in a Deterministic World?
  Pierre-Simon Laplace imagined a super-intelligence that could               Chapter 43
know the positions, velocities, and forces on all the particles in the
universe at one time, together with the deterministic laws of motion,
and thus know the universe for all times, past and future. The concept
has been criticized for the vast amount of information that would
be required, impractical if not impossible to collect instantaneously.
And where would the information be kept? If in some part of the
universe, there would be an infinite regress of information storage.
  Determinists, especially mathematical physicists and compatibilist
philosophers, are comfortable with this idea.
  A moment’s thought tells us that information is being created in
the universe at every moment. Which leads us to the question...
         346         My God, He Plays Dice!

               How Did All the Information in the Universe Get Created?
                  Information philosophy has solved this great problem, perhaps
               the greatest of all problems in physics and philosophy.
                  And our solution depends on Einstein’s expansion of the
               universe. If the universe were static, it would have come to thermal
               equilibrium, the “heat death”, ages ago.
                  Many scientists think the universe must have started in a state
               of very high information. Since information is destroyed by the
               entropy increase of the second law, they argue there must have been
               even more information at the beginning than we see today.
                  But the reverse is true. The early universe was far denser than
               today. Particles were jammed together at an extraordinarily high
               temperature which prevented even elementary particles like protons
               and neutrons from forming, let alone atoms (which did not become
               stable for the first 380,00 years) or the galaxies, stars, and planets
               (which had to wait over 400 million years for the gas to cool down
               enough for gravity to overcome the high pressure and temperature,
               and the radiation to cool to a black sky everywhere).
                  The expansion opened up space between the gas particles.
               As Boltzmann’s and Einstein’s statistical mechanics would have
               described it, there appeared many more phase-space cells for the
               fixed number of particles to arrange themselves in.
                  And the arrangement of particles is their information structure.
                  The early universe was at nearly maximum entropy and minimal
Chapter 43




               information. The expansion increased the maximum possible
               entropy, and it did it faster than the gas and radiation could approach
               a new equilibrium with that new maximum entropy. 1 The difference
               between the maximum and the actual entropy we call negative
               entropy, or potential information.
                  Now each new bit of information created has to go through
               the same two steps we have identified as necessary to create any
               information structure, from a quantum measurement to a nucleotide
               position in a strand of DNA.
                  Similar steps are the basis of our two-stage model of free will.
               First quantum chance allows alternative possibilities to exist Then a
               “free choice” , adequately determined to make us responsible for our
               actions, creates the new information in our decision.
                 1     See Layzer, 1991
                                               I-Phi and Einstein 347




   1. The Quantum Step. Whenever matter is rearranged to create
a new information structure, the quantum processes involve a
collapse of the wave function that introduces an element of chance.
Without chance and alternative possibilities, no new information is
possible. With those possibilities, things could have been otherwise.
   2) The Thermodynamic Step. A new information structure reduces
the local entropy. It cannot be stable unless it transfers away enough   Chapter 43
positive entropy to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics, which
says that the total entropy (disorder) must always increase.
   Information philosophy tells a story of cosmic and biologi-
cal evolution that is but one creation process all the way from the
original cosmic material to life on earth to the immaterial minds
that have now discovered the cosmic creation process itself!
   These same two steps are involved in our minds whenever we
freely create a new idea! Most of our ideas are simply inherited as
the traditional knowledge of our culture. This book emphasizes how
many of our ideas about quantum physics we owe to Albert Einstein.
But many new thoughts are the work of our creative imaginations.
And in that sense, we are all co-creators of our universe.
