         188   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                   i o n o f
                         p re t at         n i c s
                       r
                Inte m Mech              a
Chapter 17




                 u a nt u
               Q




                                                           This chapter on the web
                                informationphilosopher.com/quantum/interpretation
                                                Interpretation         189


Information Interpretation of
Quantum Mechanics
   Our information interpretation is simply “standard quantum
physics” plus information being recorded irreversibly. Unlike
the Copenhagen Interpretation, we offer a visualization of what
is going on in quantum reality, with animations (on-line) of the
wave function evolution and the appearance of the particle, when
the wave function shrinks to its minimum possible size h3.
  The information interpretation of quantum mechanics is based
on three simple premises:
  1) Quantum systems evolve in two ways:
  • The first is the wave function deterministically exploring all
the possibilities for interaction,




                                                                         Chapter 17
  • The second is the particle randomly choosing one of those
possibilities to become actual.
   2) No knowledge can be gained by a “conscious observer”
unless new information has already been irreversibly recorded
in the universe. New information can be created and recorded in
three places:
  • In the target quantum system,
  • In the combined target system and measuring apparatus,
  • It can then become knowledge in the observer’s mind.
   3) The measuring apparatus is quantal, not deterministic or
“classical.” It need only be statistically determined and capable of
recording the irreversible information about an interaction. The
human mind is also only statistically or adequately determined.
  • There is only one world.
  • It is a quantum world, which only appears to be classical.
  • The world only appears to be determined.
  Ontologically, the quantum world is indeterministic, but in
our everyday common experience it appears to be causal and
         190     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               deterministic, the so-called “classical” world. Information phys-
               ics claims there is only one world, the quantum world, and the
               so-called “quantum to classical transition” occurs for any macro-
               scopic object of mass m that contains a large enough number of
               atoms. For large enough systems, independent quantum events
               are “averaged over.” The uncertainty in position x and velocity v
               of the large object becomes less than the quantum indeterminacy
                 Δv Δx ≥ h / m goes to zero as h / m goes to zero.
                  The classical laws of motion, with their apparent determin-
               ism and strict causality, emerge when objects are large enough so
               that microscopic events can be ignored, but this determinism is
               fundamentally statistical and physical causes are only probabilis-
               tic, however near they seem to certainty.
                  Information philosophy interprets the wave function ψ as a
               “possibilities” function. With this simple change in terminology,
Chapter 17




               the mysterious process of a wave function “collapsing” becomes
               a much more intuitive discussion of ψ evolving to explore all the
               possibilities (with mathematically calculable probabilities), fol-
               lowed by a single actualization, at which time the probabilities for
               all non-actualized possibilities go to zero (they “collapse”) instan-
               taneously.
                  Information physics is standard quantum physics. It accepts
               the Schrödinger equation of motion, the principle of superposi-
               tion, the axiom of measurement (now including the actual infor-
               mation “bits” measured), and - most important - the projection
               postulate of standard quantum mechanics (the “collapse” that so
               many unorthodox interpretations deny).
                  But unlike some interpretations, the conscious observer of
               the Copenhagen Interpretation is not required for a projection,
               for the wave-function to “collapse”, for one of the possibilities to
               become an actuality. What the collapse does require is an interac-
               tion between systems that creates irreversible and observable, but
               not necessarily observed, information.
                 Among the founders of quantum mechanics, almost every-
               one agreed that irreversibility was a key requirement for a
                                               Interpretation         191

measurement. Irreversibility introduces thermodynamics into a
proper formulation of quantum mechanics, and this is what the
information interpretation requires.
   Information is not a conserved quantity like energy and mass,
despite the view of many mathematical physicists, who generally
accept determinism and think information is a constant. The uni-
verse began in a state of equilibrium with minimal information,
and information is being created every day, despite the second law
of thermodynamics. Classical interactions between large macro-
scopic bodies do not generate new information. Newton’s laws of
motion imply that the information in any configuration of bodies,
their motions, and the force laws, is enough to know all past and
future configurations. Classical mechanics conserves information.
  In the absence of interactions, an isolated quantum system
evolves according to the unitary Schrödinger equation of motion.




                                                                        Chapter 17
Just like classical systems, the deterministic Schrödinger equation
conserves information.
  Unlike classical systems however, when there is an interaction
between quantum systems, the two systems become entangled
and there may be a change of state in either or both systems. This
change of state may create new information.
   If that information is instantly destroyed, as in most interac-
tions, it may never be observed macroscopically. If, on the other
hand, the information is stabilized for some length of time, it may
be seen by an observer and considered to be a “measurement.” But
it need not be seen by anyone to become new information in the
universe. The universe is its own observer!
  Compare Schrödinger’s Cat as its own observer.1
   For the information (negative entropy) to be stabilized, the
second law of thermodynamics requires that an amount of posi-
tive entropy greater than the negative entropy must be transferred
away from the new information structure.
   Exactly how the universe allows pockets of negative entropy
to form as “information structures” we describe as the “cosmic
creation process.” This core two-step process has been going on
  1    see chapter 23
         192       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               since the origin of the universe. It continues today as we add infor-
               mation to the Sum of human knowledge.
                   Note that despite the Heisenberg principle, quantum mechani-
               cal measurements are not always uncertain. When a system is mea-
               sured (prepared) in an eigenstate, a subsequent measurement (Pau-
               li’s measurement of the first kind) will find it in the same state with
               perfect certainty.
                  What are the normal possibilities for new quantum states? The
               transformation theory of Paul Dirac and Pascual Jordan lets us
               represent ψ in a set of basis functions for which the combination of
               quantum systems (one may be a measurement apparatus) has eigen-
               values (the axiom of measurement). We represent ψ as in a linear
               combination (the principle of superposition) of those “possible”
               eigenfunctions. Quantum mechanics lets us calculate the probabili-
               ties of each of those “possibilities.”
Chapter 17




                  Interaction with the measurement apparatus (or indeed interac-
               tion with any other system) may select out (the axiom of measure-
               ment) one of those possibilities as an actuality. But for this event
               to be an “observable” (a John Bell “beable”), information must be
               created and positive entropy must be transferred away from the new
               information structure, in accordance with our two-step informa-
               tion creation process.
                  All interpretations of quantum mechanics predict the same
               experimental results. The information interpretation is no excep-
               tion, because the experimental data from quantum experiments is
               the most accurate in the history of science.
                  Where interpretations differ is in the picture (the visualization)
               they provide of what is “really” going on in the microscopic world
               - so-called “quantum reality.” Schrödinger called it Anschaulichkeit.
               He and Einstein were right that we should be able to picture quan-
               tum reality.
                  However, the Copenhagen interpretation of Niels Bohr and
               Werner Heisenberg discourages attempts to visualize the nature
               of the “quantum world,” because they say that all our experience
               is derived from the “classical world” and should be described in
                                                        Interpretation             193

ordinary language. This is why Bohr and Heisenberg insisted on
some kind of “cut” between the quantum event and the mind of an
observer.
  The information interpretation encourages visualization. (See
our on-line animation of the two-slit experiment2, our EPR experi-
ment visualizations3, and Dirac’s three polarizers4 to visualize the
superposition of states and the projection or “collapse” of a wave
function.)
   Bohr was of course right that classical physics plays an essential
role. His Correspondence Principle allowed him to recover some
important physical constants by assuming that the discontinuous
quantum jumps for low quantum numbers (low “orbits” in his old
quantum theory model) converged in the limit of large quantum
numbers to the continuous radiation emission and absorption of
classical electromagnetic theory.
   In addition, we know that in macroscopic bodies with enormous




                                                                                     Chapter 17
numbers of quantum particles, quantum effects are averaged over,
so that the uncertainty in position and momentum of a large body
still obeys Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle, but the uncer-
tainty is for all practical purposes unmeasurable and the body can
be treated classically.
   We can say that the quantum description of matter also converges
to a classical description in the limit of large numbers of quantum
particles. We call this “adequate” or statistical determinism. It is the
apparent determinism we find behind Newton’s laws of motion for
macroscopic objects. The statistics of averaging over many indepen-
dent quantum events then produces the “quantum to classical tran-
sition” for the same reason as the “law of large numbers” in prob-
ability theory.
   Both Bohr and Heisenberg suggested that just as relativistic
effects can be ignored when the velocity is small compared to the
velocity of light (v / c → 0), so quantum effects might be ignorable
when Planck’s quantum of action h → 0. But this is quite wrong,
  2     .informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/two-slit_experiment/
  3     informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/EPR/
  4     www.informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/dirac_3-polarizers/
         194       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               because h is a constant that never goes to zero. In the information
               interpretation, it is always a quantum world. As we saw, the con-
               ditions needed for ignoring quantum indeterminacy are when the
               mass of the macroscopic “classical” object is large.
                  Note that the macromolecules of biology are large enough to
               stabilize their information structures. DNA has been replicating
               its essential information for billions of years, resisting equilibrium
               despite the second law of thermodynamics The creation of irre-
               versible new information also marks the transition between the
               quantum world and the “adequately deterministic” classical world,
               because the information structure itself must be large enough (and
               stable enough) to be seen. The typical measurement apparatus is
               macroscopic, so the quantum of action h becomes small compared
               to the mass m and h / m approaches zero.
                  Decoherence theorists say that the measurement problem is our
Chapter 17




               failure to see quantum superpositions in the macroscopic world.
               The information interpretation thus explains why quantum super-
               positions like Schrödinger’s Cat are not seen in the macroscopic
               world. Stable new information structures in the dying cat reduce
               the quantum possibilities (and their potential interference effects)
               to a classical actuality. Upon opening the box and finding a dead cat,
               an autopsy will reveal that the time of death was observed/recorded.
               The cat is its own observer.
               The “Possibilities Function”
                  The central element in quantum physics is the “wave function” ψ,
               with its mysterious wave-particle dual nature (sometimes a wave,
               sometimes a particle, etc.). We believe that teaching and under-
               standing quantum mechanics would be much simpler if we called ψ
               the “possibilities function.” It only looks like a wave in simple cases
               of low-dimensional coordinate space. But it always tells us the pos-
               sibilities - the possible values of any observable, for example.
                  Given the “possibilities function” ψ, quantum mechanics allows
               us to calculate the “probabilities” for each of the “possibilities.” The
               calculation depends on the free choice of the experimenter as to
               which “observables” to look for. If the measurement apparatus can
                                                       Interpretation   195

register n discrete values, ψ can be expanded in terms of a set of
basis functions (eigenfunctions) appropriate for the chosen observ-
able, say φn. The expansion is
  ψ = ∑ cn φn
  When the absolute squares of the coefficients cn are appropriately
normalized to add up to 1, the probability Pn of observing an eigen-
value n is
  Pn = | cn |2 = | < ψ | φn > | 2
   These probabilities are confirmed statistically by repeated iden-
tical experiments that collect large numbers of results. Quantum
mechanics is the most accurate physical theory in science, with
measurements accurate to fifteen decimal places.
   In each individual experiment, generally just one of the possi-
bilities becomes an actuality (although some experiments leave the




                                                                          Chapter 17
quantum system in a new superposition of multiple possibilities).
  In our information interpretation, a possibility is realized or
actualized at the moment when information is created about the
new state of the system. This new information requires that positive
entropy be carried away from the local increase in negative entropy.
   Note that an “observer” will not be able to make a “measure-
ment” unless new information exists to be “observed.” Information
must be (and is in all modern experimental systems) created and
recorded before any observer looks at the results. Measurements do
not depend directly on the mind of the observer, only indirectly
when the observer sets up the experimental apparatus and decides
(chooses freely) what the apparatus will measure.
  This is called the “free choice” of the experimenter.5
   An information approach can help philosophers to think more
clearly about quantum physics. Instead of getting trapped in talk
about mysterious “collapse of the wave function,” “reduction of the
wave packet,” or the “projection postulate” (all important issues),
the information interpretation proposes we simply say that one of
the “possibilities” has become “actual.”
  5     informationphilosopher.com/freedom/free_choice.html
         196         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   It is intuitively obvious that when one possibility becomes actual,
               all the others are annihilated, consigned to “nothingness,” as Jean-
               Paul Sartre put it. And because the other possibilities may have
               been extremely “distant” from the point of actualization, their
               instantaneous disappearances looked to Einstein to violate his new
               principle of relativity, but they do not.
                  Quantum theory lets us put quantitative values on the “proba-
               bilities” for each of the “possibilities.” But this means that quantum
               theory is fundamentally statistical, meaning indeterministic and
               “random.” It is not a question of our being ignorant about what is
               going on (an epistemological problem). What’s happening is onto-
               logical chance, as Einstein first showed, but as he forever disliked.
                  We can describe the “possibilities function” ψ as moving through
               space (at the speed of light, or even faster, as Einstein feared?),
               exploring all the possibilities for wherever the particle might be
Chapter 17




               found. This too may be seen as a special kind of information. In
               the famous “two-slit experiment6,” the “possibilities function” trav-
               els everywhere, meaning that ψ passes through both slits, interfer-
               ing with itself and thus changing the possibilities where the par-
               ticle might be found. Metaphorically, ψ “knows” when both slits are
               open, even if our intuitive classical view imagines that the particle
               must go through only one. The slits being open changes the prob-
               abilities associated with each of the possibilities.
               Possibilities and Information Theory
                 It is of the deepest philosophical significance that information
               theory is based on the mathematics of probability. If all outcomes
               were certain, there would be no “surprises” in the universe. Infor-
               mation would be conserved and a universal constant, as some math-
               ematicians mistakenly believe. Information philosophy requires
               the ontological uncertainty and probabilistic outcomes of modern
               quantum physics to produce new information.

                 6     informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/two-slit_experiment/
                                                 Interpretation           197

   In Claude Shannon’s theory of the communication of informa-
tion, there must be multiple possible messages in order for infor-
mation to be communicated. If there is only one possible message,
there is no uncertainty, and no information can be communicated.
   In a universe describable by the classical Newtonian laws of
motion, all the information needed to produce the next moment
is contained in the positions, motions, and forces on the material
particles.
   In a quantum world describable by the unitary evolution of the
deterministic Schrödinger equation, nothing new ever happens,
there is no new “outcome.” Outcomes are added to standard quan-
tum mechanics by the addition of the “projection postulate” or “col-
lapse of the wave function,” when the quantum system interacts
with another system.
   Information is constant in a deterministic universe. There is




                                                                            Chapter 17
“nothing new under the sun.” The creation of new information is
not possible without the random chance and uncertainty of quan-
tum mechanics, plus the extraordinary temporal stability of quan-
tum mechanical structures needed to store information once it is
created.
   Without the extraordinary stability of quantized information
structures over cosmological time scales, life and the universe we
know would not be possible. That stability is the consequence of an
underlying digital nature. Quantum mechanics reveals the architec-
ture of the universe to be discrete rather than continuous, to be digi-
tal rather than analog. Digital information transfers are essentially
perfect, whereas analog transfers are “lossy.”
   It is Bohr’s “correspondence principle” of quantum mechanics for
large quantum numbers and the “law of large numbers” of statistics
which ensure that macroscopic objects can normally average out
microscopic uncertainties and probabilities to provide the statistical
or “adequate” determinism that shows up in all our classical “laws
of nature.”
         198       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  There is no separate classical world and no need for a quantum-to-
               classical transition. The quantum world becomes statistically deter-
               ministic when the mass of an object is such that h / m approaches
               zero. We conclude, contrary to the views of Bohr and Heisenberg,
               that there is no need for a separate classical world. The classical laws
               of nature emerge statistically from quantum laws. Quantum laws,
               which are therefore universally applicable, converge in these two
               limits of large numbers to classical laws. There is no “transition”
               from the quantum world to a separate classical world. There is just
               one world, where quantum physics applies universally, but its mys-
               terious properties, like interference, entanglement, and nonlocality,
               are normally invisible, averaged over, in the macroscopic world.
                  The problem for an informational interpretation of quantum
               mechanics is to explain exactly how these two convergences (large
               numbers of particles and large quantum numbers) allow continuous
Chapter 17




               and apparently deterministic macroscopic information structures
               to emerge from the indeterministic and discontinuous microscopic
               quantum world.
                  We show how the determinism in the macroscopic world is only
               a statistical or adequate determinism, the result of “averaging over”
               the large number of independent quantum events happening in
               a macroscopic object. And even more important, we must show
               how the occasional magnification or amplification of microscopic
               quantum events leads to new macroscopic information that makes
               human beings the “authors of their lives”, that makes them “co-cre-
               ators of our universe,” and that guarantees a genuinely open future
               with alternative possibilities, not in inaccessible “parallel universes”
               but in the one universe that we have.
               Other Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
                 Standard “orthodox” interpretations of quantum mechanics
               include the projection postulate, the “collapse of the wave function.”
                  Today there appear to be about as many unorthodox interpreta-
               tions that deny the collapse, as there are more standard views. We
               characterize each interpretation as deterministic or not, local or
               non-local reality, if they assume hidden variables, need a conscious
               observer, and accept particles. Their proponents are in parentheses..
                                               Interpretation          199

No-Collapse Interpretations
  Statistical Ensemble - indeterministic, non-local, no observer -
(Einstein-Born- Ballentine)
  Pilot-Wave Theory - deterministic, non-local, hidden variables,
no observer, particles - (de Broglie-Bohm, 1952)
   Many-Worlds - deterministic, local, hidden variables, no observer
- (Everett-DeWitt, 1957)
  Time-Symmetric Theory - (Aharanov, 1964)
  Decoherence - deterministic, local, no particles - (Zeh-Zurek,
1970)
  Modal Interpretation - (van Frassen, 1972)
   Consistent Histories - local - (Griffith-Omnès-Gell-Mann-Har-
tle, 1984)




                                                                         Chapter 17
Collapse Interpretations
  Copenhagen Interpretation - indeterministic, non-local,
observer - (Bohr-Heisenberg-Born-Jordan, 1927)
  Conscious Observer - indeterministic, non-local, observer -
(Von Neumann-Wigner)
  Objective Collapse - indeterministic, non-local, no observer -
(Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber, 1986; Penrose, 1989)
  Transactional Interpretation - indeterministic, non-local, no
observer, no particles - (Cramer, 1986)
  Relational Interpretation - local, observer - (Rovelli, 1994)
  Pondicherry Interpretation - indeterministic, non-local, no
observer - (Mohrhoff, 2005)
   Information Interpretation - Our interpretation is statistical,
indeterministic, non-local, and no observer is needed. It interprets
the “collapse” of the “possibilities” function according to Dirac’s
“projection postulate.”7 New is the requirement for the physical
recording of information before any “observation” can be made.

  7    See chapter 20.
