        2   My God, He Plays Dice!
Chapter 1




                              c t i o n
                  Int    rodu
                                                                Introduction              3


Introduction




                                                                                          Chapter 1
   This book is the story of how Albert Einstein analyzed what
goes on when light interacts with matter and how he discovered
ontological chance in the process. We can show that Einstein’s
chance explains the metaphysical possibilities underlying the
creation of all of the information structures in the universe.
   But the story begins with a deck of cards, a pair of dice, and the
multiple flips of a coin.
    Around 1700, Abraham de Moivre, a French Huguenot,
emigrated to England to escape religious persecution. A brilliant
mathematician, he worked with Isaac Newton and other great
English scientists, but he could never get an academic post, despite
their excellent recommendations. To support himself, de Moivre
wrote a handbook for gamblers called The Doctrine of Chances.
   This was not the first book that calculated the odds for different
hands of cards or rolls of the dice. But when de Moivre considered
the flipping of a fair coin (with 50-50 odds of coming up heads and
tails) he showed that as the number of flips gets large, the discrete
binomial distribution of outcomes approaches a continuous curve
we call the Gaussian distribution (after the great mathematician
Carl Friedrich Gauss), the “normal” distribution, or just the
“bell curve,” from its familiar shape.




   Figure 1-1. De Moivre’s discovery of the continuous bell curve as a limit to a large
number of discrete, discontinuous events. Each discrete event is the probability of
m heads and n-m tails in n coin tosses. The height is the coefficient in the binomial
expansion of (p + q)n where p = q = ½.
        4       My God, He Plays Dice!

              In mathematics, we can say that a finite number of discrete points
            approaches a continuum as we let the number approach infinity.
Chapter 1




            This is the “law of large numbers” and the “central limit theorem.”
               But in physics, the continuous appearance of material things is
            only because the discrete atoms that make it up are too small to see.
            The analytic perfection of the Gaussian curve cannot be realized by
            any finite number of events.




              Figure 1-2. The appearance of a continuous curve and actual finite events.

            Is the Nature of Reality Continuous or Discrete?
               Is it possible that the physical world is made up of nothing but
            discrete discontinuous particles? Are continuous fields with well-
            defined values for matter and energy at all places and times simply
            theoretical constructs, averages over large numbers of particles?
               Space and time themselves have well-defined values everywhere,
            but are these just the abstract information of the ideal coordinate
            system that allows us to keep track of the positions and motions of
            particles? Space and time are physical, but they are not material.
               We use material things, rulers and clocks, to measure space and
            time. We use the abstract mathematics of real numbers and assume
            there are an infinite number of real points on any line segment and
            an infinite number of moments in any time interval. But are these
            continuous functions of space and time nothing but immaterial
            ideas with no material substance?
               The two great physical theories at the end of the nineteenth
            century, Isaac Newton’s classical mechanics and James Clerk
            Maxwell’s electrodynamics, are continuous field theories.
               Solutions of their field equations determine precisely the exact
            forces on any material particle, providing complete information
                                                            Introduction      5

about their past and future motions and positions. Field theories
are generally regarded as deterministic and certain.




                                                                              Chapter 1
   Although the dynamical laws are “free inventions of the human
mind,” as Einstein always said, 1 and although they ultimately
depend on experimental evidence, which is always statistical, the
field theories have been considered superior to merely statistical
laws. Dynamical laws are thought to be absolute, based on principles.
   We will find that the continuous, deterministic, and analytical
laws of classical dynamics and electromagnetism, expressible as
differential equations, are idealizations that “go beyond experience.”
   These continuous laws are to the discontinuous and discrete
particles of matter and electricity (whose motions they describe
perfectly) as the analytical normal distribution above is to the finite
numbers of heads and tails. A continuum is approached in the limit
of large numbers of particles, when the random fluctuations of
individual events can be averaged over.
   Experiments that support physical laws are always finite in
number. Experimental evidence is always statistical. It always
contains errors distributed randomly around the most probable
result. And the distribution of those errors is often normal.




  Figure 1-3. Random errors are normally distributed around the mean value.

  1     EInstein, 1934, p.234
        6       My God, He Plays Dice!

            The Absolute Principles of Physics
               There are of course absolute principles in physics, such as the
Chapter 1




            conservation laws for mass/energy, momentum, angular momentum,
            and electron spin. The constant velocity of light is another.
               The great mathematician Emmy Noether proposed a theorem
            that conservation principles are the consequence of deep symmetry
            principles of nature. She said for any property of a physical system
            that is symmetric, there is a corresponding conservation law.
               Noether’s theorem allows physicists to gain insights into any
            general theory in physics, by analyzing the various transformations
            that would make the form of the laws involved invariant.
               For example, if a physical system is symmetric under rotations,
            its angular momentum is conserved. If it is symmetric in space, its
            momentum is conserved. If it is symmetric in time, its energy is
            conserved. Now locally there is time symmetry, but cosmically the
            expansion of the universe gives us an arrow of time connected to the
            increase of entropy and the second law of thermodynamics.
               The conservation of energy was the first law of thermodynamics.
               The famous second law says entropy rises to a maximum at thermal
            equilibrium. It was thought by most scientists to be an absolute law,
            but we shall see in chapter 3 that Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann
            considered it a statistical law. Boltzmann thought it possible that
            a system that had reached equilibrium might spontaneously back
            away, if only temporarily, from the maximum. Assuming that the
            universe had an infinite time to reach equilibrium, he thought it
            might be that the non-equilibrium state we find ourselves in might
            be a giant fluctuation. Given his assumption of infinite time, even
            such an extremely improbable situation is at least possible.
               In his early work on statistical mechanics, Einstein showed that
            small fluctuations in the motions of gas particles are constantly leading
            to departures from equilibrium. Somewhat like the departures from
            the smooth analytic bell curve for any finite number of events, the
            entropy does not rise smoothly to a maximum and then stay there
            indefinitely. The second law is not continuous and absolute.
                                                   Introduction           7


 The second law of thermodynamics is unique among the laws
of physics because of its irreversible behavior. Heat flows from




                                                                          Chapter 1
hot into cold places until they come to the same equilibrium
temperature. The one-direction nature of macroscopic
thermodynamics (with its gross “phenomenological” variables
temperature, energy, entropy) is in fundamental conflict with the
assumption that microscopic collisions between molecules, whether
fast-moving or slow, are governed by dynamical, deterministic laws
that are time-reversible. But is this correct?
   The microscopic second law suggests the “arrow of time” does
not apply to the time-reversible dynamical laws. At the atomic and
molecular level, there appears to be no arrow of time, but we will see
that Einstein’s work shows particle collisions are not reversible
   The first statistical “laws” grew out of examples in which there are
very large numbers of entities. Large numbers make it impractical
to know much about the individuals, but we can say a lot about
averages and the probable distribution of values around the averages.
Probability, Entropy, and Information
   Many scientists and philosophers of science say that the concept
of entropy is confusing and difficult to understand, let alone
explain. Nevertheless, with the help of our diagrams demonstrating
probability as the number of ways things have happened or been
arranged, divided by the total number of ways they might have
happened or been arranged, we can offer a brief and visual picture
of entropy and its important connection to information.
   We begin with Ludwig Boltzmann’s definition of the entropy
S in terms of the number of ways W that gas particles can be
distributed among the cells of “phase space,” the product of ordinary
coordinate space and a momentum space.
  S = k log W
  Let’s greatly simplify our space by imagining just two cubicle
bins separated by a movable piston. Classical thermodynamics was
developed studying steam engines with such pistons.
  Now let’s imagine that a thousand molecules are dropped
randomly into the two bins. In this very artificial case, imag-
ine that they all land up on the left side of the piston. Assuming
        8       My God, He Plays Dice!

            the probabilities of falling into the left or right bin are equal, this
            is again the binomial expansion with (p + q)1000 with p = q = ½.
Chapter 1




            All molecules on the left would have probability (1/2)1000. This is of
            course absurdly improbable if each events were random, but steam
            engines do this all the time, and calculating the improbability gives
            us a measure of the machine’s available energy.
              Figure 1-4. An ideal piston with gas on the left and a perfect vacuum on the right.
              To see how this very improbable situation corresponds to very low
            entropy, how low entropy corresponds to maximum information,




            and how low entropy means energy available to do work, let’s con-
            sider the number of yes/no questions needed to figure out the chess-
            board square where a single pawn is located.

               1) Is it in the top half? No.
                 Of the remaining half,
               2) is it in the left half? No.
                 Of the remaining half,
               3) Is it in the right half? No.
                 Of the remaining half,
               4) Is it in the top half? Yes.
                 Of the remaining half,
               5) Is it in the left half? Yes.
                 Of the remaining half,
               6) Is it in the top half? Yes.

               In Claude Shannon’s 1948 theory of the communication of
            information, the answer to a yes/no question communicates one bit
            (a binary digit can be 1 or 0) of information. So, as we see, it takes
                                                                    Introduction   9

6 bits of information to communicate the particular location of the
pawn on one of the 64 possible squares on the chessboard.




                                                                                   Chapter 1
   Shannon and his mentor, the great mathematical physicist John
von Neumann, noticed that the information I is the logarithm of
the number of possible ways W to position the pawn. Two raised to
the 6th power is 64 and the base 2 logarithm of 64 is 6. Thus
  I = log2 W and 6 = log2 64
   The parallel with Boltzmann’s entropy formula is obvious. His
formula needs a constant with the physical dimensions of energy
divided by temperature (ergs/degree). But Shannon’s information
has no physical content and does not need Boltzmann’s constant k.
Information is just a dimensionless number.
   For Shannon, entropy is the number of messages that can be
sent through a communications channel in the presence of noise.
For Boltzmann, entropy was proportional to the number of ways
individual gas particles can be distributed between cells in phase
space, assuming that all cells are equally probable.
   So let’s see the similarity in the case of our piston. How many
ways can all the 1000 gas particles be found randomly on the left side
of the piston, compared to all the other ways, for example only 999
on the left, 1 on the right, 998 on the left, 2 on the right, etc.
   Out of 21000 ways of distributing them between two bins, there
is only one way all the particles can be on the left.  2 The logarithm
of 1 is zero (20 = 1). This is the minimum possible entropy and the
maximum of available energy to do work pushing on the piston.
   Boltzmann calculated the likelihood of random collisions
resulting in the unmixing of gases, so that noticeably fewer are in
                                                                 10
the left half of a 1/10 liter container, as of the order of 1010 years. 3
Our universe is only of the order of 1010 years old.
   It seems most unlikely that such chance can lead to the many
interesting information structures in the universe. But chance will
play a major role in Einstein’s description of what he called “objective
reality,” as we shall see.
  2     1000! (factorial) is 1000 x 999 x 998 ... x 2 x 1. (really big)
  3     Boltzmann, 2011, p.444
