         84   My God, He Plays Dice!
Chapter 12




                                 i b i l i t y
                           e r s
                      Irrev




                                                         This chapter on the web
                                informationphilosopher.com/problems/reversibility
                                                Irreversibility      85


Microscopic Irreversibility
   In the 1870’s, Ludwig Boltzmann developed his transport
equation and his dynamical H-theorem to show exactly how gases
with large numbers of particles have macroscopic irreversibility.
   We see this fact every day when things mix but never unmix.
Imagine putting 50 white and 50 black balls into a box and shaking
them, now pour out 50 each into two smaller boxes and consider




                                                                      Chapter 12
the possibility that one contains all black, the other all white.
   In 1876, Josef Loschmidt criticized his younger colleague
Boltzmann’s attempt to derive from classical dynamics the increas-
ing entropy required by the second law of thermodynamics. Los-
chmidt's criticism was based on the simple idea that the laws of
classical dynamics are time reversible. Consequently, if we just
turn the time around, the time evolution of the system should lead
to decreasing entropy.
   But we cannot turn time around. This is the intimate connection
between time and the increasing entropy of the second law of
thermodynamics that Arthur Stanley Eddington later called
the Arrow of Time.1
   We saw in chapter 4 that Max Planck hoped for many years to
show that the second law of thermodynamics and its irreversible
increase in entropy are universal and absolute laws. Planck hoped
some irreversibility might emerge from a study of the interaction
of matter and radiation. We now know his intuition was correct
about that interaction, but wrong about the absolute nature of the
second law. Irreversibility is a statistical phenomenon.
   Microscopic time reversibility remains one of the foundational
assumptions of classical mechanics. This is because the classical
differential equations (Newton’s laws) that describe the motion
are time reversible. So are Maxwell’s laws of electromagnetism.
   Our first problem in the preface, known since the nineteenth
century, is how can we reconcile macroscopic irreversibility
with microscopic reversibility? The short answer is quantum
mechanics. The laws of classical mechanics are adequate only for
statistical averages over a large number of quantum particles.

  1    See Doyle, 2016a, chapter 23.
         86     My God, He Plays Dice!

                 A careful quantum analysis shows that microscopic reversibility
              fails in the case of two particles in collision - provided the quantum
              mechanical interaction with radiation is taken into account.
              Planck was looking in the right place.
                 As we saw in the last chapter, Einstein found that when a light
              quantum is emitted (or absorbed) there is a transfer of momentum
              hν/c to the particle. Since the direction of emission is random, the
              gas particle suffers a random and irreversible change in direction,
Chapter 12




              because the outgoing radiation is irreversible. Einstein’s discovery
              of ontological chance, despite the fact that he did not like it, is the
              basis for understanding microscopic irreversibility.
                 Some scientists still believe that microscopic time reversibility
              is true because the deterministic linear Schrödinger equa-
              tion itself is time reversible. But the Schrödinger equation only
              describes the deterministic time evolution of the probabilities of
              various quantum events. It does not determine individual events.
              As Einstein knew, quantum mechanics is statistical. Max Born
              put this distinction concisely
                    The motion of the particle follows the laws of probability, but
                    the probability itself propagates in accord with causal laws. 2
                  When a quantum event occurs, if there is a record of the event
              (if new information enters the universe), the previous probabilities
              of multiple possible events collapse to the occurrence of just one
              actual event. This is the collapse of the wave function that John
              von Neumann called process 1.3
                  An irreversible event that leaves a record (stable new
              information) may become a measurement, if and when the new
              information is observed. Measurements are fundamentally and
              irreducibly irreversible, as many quantum physicists believed.
                  When particles collide, even structureless particles should
              not be treated as individual particles with single-particle wave
              functions, but as a single system with a two- or multiple-particle
              wave function, because particles are now entangled.4
                  Treating two atoms in collision as a temporary molecule means
              we must use molecular, rather than atomic, wave functions. The
                2       “Quantum mechanics of collision processes,” Zeit. Phys., 38, 804 (1927)
                3       See chapter 23.
                4       See chapter 27.
                                                  Irreversibility       87

quantum description of the molecule now transforms the six
independent degrees of freedom for two atoms into three for the
molecule's center of mass and three more that describe vibrational
and rotational quantum states.
   The possibility of quantum transitions between closely spaced
vibrational and rotational energy levels in the "quasi-molecule'
introduces indeterminacy in the future paths of the separate atoms.
The classical path information needed to ensure the deterministic




                                                                         Chapter 12
dynamical behavior has been partially erased. The memory of the
past needed to predict the future has been lost.
   Quantum transitions, especially the random emission of
radiation. erases information about the particle’s past motions.
   Even assuming the practical impossibility of a perfect classical
time reversal, in which we simply turn the two particles around,
quantum physics requires two measurements to locate the two
particles, followed by two state preparations to send them in the
opposite direction.
   Heisenberg indeterminacy puts calculable limits on the
accuracy with which perfect reversed paths could be achieved.
   Let us assume this impossible task can be completed, and it
sends the two particles into the reverse collision paths. But on
the return path, there is still only a finite probability that a "sum
over histories" calculation will produce the same (or reversed)
quantum transitions between vibrational and rotational states that
occurred in the first collision. Reversibility is not impossible, but
extremely improbable,
   Thus a quantum description of a two-particle collision
establishes the microscopic irreversibility that Boltzmann
sometimes described as his assumption of "molecular disorder."
In his second (1877) statistical derivation of the H-theorem,
Boltzmann used a statistical approach and the molecular disorder
assumption to get away from the time-reversibility assumptions of
classical dynamics.
The Origin of Microscopic Irreversibility
   The path information required for microscopic reversibility
of particle paths is destroyed or erased by local interactions with
radiation and other particles in the environment. This is the origin
of microscopic irreversibility.
         88       My God, He Plays Dice!

                 Photon emission and absorption during molecular collisions
              is shown to destroy nonlocal molecular correlations, justify-
              ing Boltzmann’s assumption of “molecular chaos” (molekular
              ungeordnete) as well as Maxwell’s earlier assumption that molecular
              velocities are not correlated. These molecular correlations were
              retained in Willard Gibbs’ formulation of entropy. But the
              microscopic information implicit in classical particle paths (which
              would be needed to implement Loschmidt’s deterministic motion
Chapter 12




              reversal) is actually erased. Boltzmann’s physical insight was correct
              that his increased entropy is irreversible, not just macroscopically
              but microscopically.
                 It has been argued that photon interactions can be ignored because
              radiation is isotropic and thus there is no net momentum transfer
              to the particles. The radiation distribution, like the distribution of
              particles, is indeed statistically isotropic, but, as Einstein showed
              in 1916, each discrete quantum of angular momentum exchanged
              during individual photon collisions alters the classical paths
              sufficiently to destroy molecular velocity correlations.
                 Reversibility is closely related to the maintenance of path
              information forward in time that is required to assert that physics
              is deterministic. Indeterministic interactions between matter and
              radiation erase that information. The elementary process of the
              emission of radiation is not time reversible, as first noted by Einstein
              in 1909. He argued that the elementary process of light radiation
              does not have reversibility (“Umkehrbarkeit”). The reverse process
              (“umgekehrte Prozess”) does not exist as an elementary process.
                 Macroscopic physics is only statistically determined. Macroscopic
              processes are adequately determined when the mass m of an object
              is large compared to the Planck quantum of action h (when there
              are large numbers of quantum particles).
                 But the information-destroying elementary processes of emission
              and absorption of radiation ensure that macroscopic processes are
              not individually reversible.
                                                   Irreversibility         89

   When interactions with a thermal radiation field and
rearrangement collisions are taken into account, a quantum-
mechanical treatment of collisions between material particles shows
that a hypothetical reversal of all the velocities following a collision
would only extremely rarely follow the original path backwards.
   A rearrangement collision is one in which the internal energy of
one or both of the colliding particles changes because of a quantum
jump between its internal energy levels. These internal energy levels




                                                                            Chapter 12
and jumps between them were first seen by Einstein in his 1907
work on specific heats (chapter 8).
   Although the deterministic Schrödinger equation of motion
for an isolated two-particle material system is time reversible
(for conservative systems), the quantum mechanics of radiation
interactions during collisions does not preserve particle path
information, as does classical dynamics. Particle interactions with
photons in the thermal radiation field and rearrangement collisions
that change the internal states of the colliding particles are shown
to be microscopically irreversible for all practical purposes. These
quantum processes are involved in the irreversible “measurements”
that von Neumann showed increase the entropy.
         90         My God, He Plays Dice!

                 Consider a collision between two atoms that results in the
              emission of a photon.
                 At some time t after the collision, let’s assume we can reverse the
              separating atoms, sending them back toward the reverse collision. If
              there had been no photon emission, the most likely path is an exact
              traversal of the original path back before the collision.
                 But since a photon was emitted, traversing the original path
              requires us to calculate the probability that at precisely the moment
Chapter 12




              of a reversed collision a photon of exactly the same frequency is
              absorbed by the quasi-molecule, corresponding to a quantum jump
              back to the original rotational-vibrational state, with the photon
              absorption direction exactly opposite to the original emission,
              allowing the colliding atoms to reverse their original paths. While
              this is not impossible, it is extraordinarily improbable.
                 The uncertainty principle would prevent an experimenter from
              preparing the two material particles with the precise positions and
              reverse momenta needed to follow the exact return paths to the
              collision point. Moreover, the Schrödinger equation of motion for
              the two particles would only provide a probability that the particles
              would again collide.
                 As to the photon, let us assume with Einstein that a light quantum
              is “directed” and so could be somehow aimed perfectly at the
              collision point. Even so, there is only a probability, not a certainty,
              that the photon would be absorbed.
                 We conclude that collisions of particles that involve radiation are
              not microscopically reversible.
              Detailed Balancing
                 It is mistakenly believed that the detailed balancing of forward
              and reverse chemical reactions in thermal equilibrium, including
              the Onsager reciprocal relations, for example, depend somehow on
              the principle of microscopic reversibility.
                 Einstein’s work is sometimes cited as proof of detailed balancing
              and microscopic reversibility. The Wikipedia article is an example. 5
              In fact, Einstein started with Boltzmann’s assumption of detailed
              balancing, along with the assumption that the probability of states
              with energy E is reduced by the exponential “Boltzmann factor,”
              f(E) ~ e-E/kT, to derive the transition probabilities for emission and
                5     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/detailed_balance
                                                           Irreversibility             91

absorption of radiation. Einstein then derived Planck’s radiation law
and Bohr’s “quantum postulate” that Em - En = hν. But Einstein denied
symmetry in the elementary processes of emission and absorption.
   As early as 1909, he noted that the elementary process is not
“invertible.” There are outgoing spherical waves of radiation, but
incoming spherical waves are never seen.
    “In the kinetic theory of molecules, for every process in which
    only a few elementary particles participate (e.g., molecular




                                                                                        Chapter 12
    collisions), the inverse process also exists. But that is not the
    case for the elementary processes of radiation. According to our
    prevailing theory, an oscillating ion generates a spherical wave
    that propagates outwards. The inverse process does not exist as an
    elementary process. A converging spherical wave is mathemati-
    cally possible, to be sure; but to approach its realization requires
    a vast number of emitting entities. The elementary process of
    emission is not invertible.” 6
   The elementary process of the emission and absorption of
radiation is asymmetric, because the process is “directed.” The
apparent isotropy of the emission of radiation, when averaged over
a large number of light quanta, is only what Einstein called “pseudo-
isotropy” (Pseudoisotropie), a consequence of time averages over
large numbers of events. Einstein often substituted time averages
for space averages, or averages over the possible states of a system in
statistical mechanics.
   Detailed balancing is thus a consequence of averaging over
extremely large numbers of particles in equilibrium. This is the same
limit that produces the so-called “quantum-to-classical” transition.
And it is the same condition that gives us the “adequate” statistical
determinism in the macroscopic, everyday world.
   Neither detailed balancing nor the adequate determinism that we
see in classical Newtonian experiments does anything to deny that,
at the microscopic quantum level, events are completely statistical,
involving ontological chance. The interaction of radiation with
matter has “a ‘chance’-dependent value and a ‘chance’-dependent
sign” (emission or absorption), said Einstein in 1917.7
   Reversibility is remotely possible, but extraordinarily improbable.

  6       “On the Development of Our Views Concerning the Nature and Constitution of
Radiation,” 1909, CPAE, vol.2, p.387
  7       “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” CPAE, vol.6, p.213
