        46   My God, He Plays Dice!
Chapter 6




                            a nt u m
                        Q u
                  Lightpothesis
                     Hy
                                       Light Quantum Hypothesis                      47


Light Quantum Hypothesis
   In his “miracle year” of 1905, Einstein wrote four extraordinary
papers, one of which won him the 1921 Nobel prize in physics.
Surprisingly, the prize was not for his third paper, on the theory




                                                                                      Chapter 6
of relativity. Special relativity was accepted widely, but it remained
controversial for some conservative physicists on the Nobel
committee. Nor was it for the second paper, in which Einstein
showed how to prove the existence of material particles. Nor even
the fourth, in which the famous equation E = mc2 first appeared.
   Einstein’s Nobel Prize was for the first paper of 1905. In it he
hypothesized the existence of light particles. The prize was not for
this hypothesis he called “very revolutionary.” The prize was for
his explanation for the photoelectric effect (as quanta of light!).
   The idea that light consists of discrete “quanta,” which today we
call photons, was indeed so revolutionary that it was not accepted
by most physicists for nearly two decades, and then reluctantly,
because it leaves us with the mysterious dual aspect of light as
sometimes a particle, and sometimes a wave.
   A close reading of Einstein’s work will give us the tools to
resolve this quantum mystery and several others. But we begin
with trying to see today what Einstein already saw clearly in 1905.
   We must keep in mind that the model of a physical theory for
Einstein was a “field theory.” A field is a continuous function of four-
dimensional space-time variables such as Newton’s gravitational
field and Maxwell’s electrodynamics.
   For Einstein, the theories and principles of physics are fictions
and “free creations of the human mind.” Although they must
be tested by experiment, one cannot derive the basic laws from
experience, he said. And this is particularly true of field theories,
like his dream of a “unified field theory.” They are thought to have
continuous values at every point in otherwise empty space and
time. Listen to Einstein’s concern in his first sentence of 1905...
    There exists a profound formal distinction between the
    theoretical concepts which physicists have formed regarding
    gases and other ponderable bodies and the Maxwellian theory
    of electromagnetic processes in so-called empty space. 1
   1      “The Production and Transformation of Light from a Heuristic Viewpoint,”
Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Doc. 14. p.86
        48         My God, He Plays Dice!

                   According to the Maxwellian theory, energy is to be considered
                   a continuous spatial function in the case of all purely
                   electromagnetic phenomena including light, while the energy of
                   a ponderable object should, according to the present conceptions
                   of physicists, be represented as a sum carried over the atoms and
Chapter 6




                   electrons... 2
                Here Einstein first raises the deep question that we hope to show
             he struggled with his entire life. Is nature continuous or discrete?
                Is it possible that the physical world is made up of nothing but
             discrete discontinuous particles? Are continuous fields with well-
             defined values for matter and energy at all places and times simply
             fictional constructs, averages over large numbers of particles?
                   The energy of a ponderable body cannot be subdivided into
                   arbitrarily many or arbitrarily small parts, while the energy of a
                   beam of light from a point source (according to the Maxwellian
                   theory of light or, more generally, according to any wave theory)
                   is continuously spread over an ever increasing volume.
                    It should be kept in mind, however, that the optical observations
                   refer to time averages rather than instantaneous values. In spite
                   of the complete experimental confirmation of the theory as
                   applied to diffraction, reflection, refraction, dispersion, etc., it
                   is still conceivable that the theory of light which operates with
                   continuous spatial functions may lead to contradictions with
                   experience when it is applied to the phenomena of emission and
                   transformation of light. 3
                One should keep in mind, Einstein says, that our observations
             apply to averages (over a finite number of particles) and that a
             continuum theory leads to contradictions with emission and
             absorption processes. In particular, the continuum has an infinite
             number of “degrees of freedom,” while matter and energy quanta
             are finite. We saw in chapter 3 that Ludwig Boltzmann had made
             this point,
                   “An actual continuum must consist of an infinite number
                   of parts; but an infinite number is undefinable... Thus the
                   mechanical foundations of the partial differential equations,
                   when based on the coming and going of smaller particles, with
                   restricted average values, gain greatly in plausibility.” 4
               2       CPAE, Doc. 14. p.86
               3       CPAE, Doc. 14. p.86-87
               4       Lectures on Gas Theory, §1, p.27
                                 Light Quantum Hypothesis                  49


The Photoelectric Effect
   Continuing his investigations into a single theory that would
describe both matter and radiation, Einstein proposed his “very
revolutionary” hypothesis to explain a new experiment that showed
a direct connection between radiation and electrons.




                                                                            Chapter 6
   Before Einstein, it was thought that the oscillations of electrons in
a metal are responsible for the emission of electromagnetic waves,
but Einstein argued that it is the absorption of light that is causing
the ejection of electrons from various metal surfaces.
   It is called the photoelectric effect.
   Heinrich Hertz had shown in 1889 that high-voltage spark gaps
emit electromagnetic waves that are light waves obeying Maxwell’s
equations. He also noticed that ultraviolet light shining on his spark
gaps helped them to spark. In 1902, the Hungarian physicist Philipp
Lenard confirmed that light waves of sufficiently high frequency ν
shining on a metal surface cause it to eject electrons.
   To Lenard’s surprise, below a certain frequency, no electrons
are ejected no matter how strong he made the intensity of the
light. Assuming that the energy in the light wave was simply being
converted into the energy of moving electrons, this made no sense.
   Furthermore, when Lenard increased the frequency of the
incident light (above a critical frequency νc) the ejected electrons
appeared to move faster for higher light frequencies.
   These strange behaviors gave Einstein very strong reasons for
imagining that light must be concentrated in a physically localized
bundle of energy. He wrote:
    The usual conception, that the energy of light is continuously
    distributed over the space through which it propagates,
                                   encounters very serious
                                   difficulties when one attempts
                                   to explain the photoelectric
                                   phenomena, as has been pointed
                                   out in Herr Lenard’s pioneering
                                   paper.
                                  According to the concept that the
                                  incident light consists of energy
                                  quanta of magnitude Rβν/N [hν],
        50         My God, He Plays Dice!

                   however, one can conceive of the ejection of electrons by light in
                   the following way. Energy quanta penetrate into the surface layer
                   of the body, and their energy is transformed, at least in part,
                   into kinetic energy of electrons. The simplest way to imagine
                   this is that a light quantum delivers its entire energy to a single
Chapter 6




                   electron; we shall assume that this is what happens...
                   An electron to which kinetic energy has been imparted in the
                   interior of the body will have lost some of this energy by the
                   time it reaches the surface. Furthermore, we shall assume that in
                   leaving the body each electron must perform an amount of work
                   P characteristic of the substance...
                   If each energy quantum of the incident light, independently of
                   everything else, delivers its energy to electrons, then the velocity
                   distribution of the ejected electrons will be independent of the
                   intensity of the incident light; on the other hand the number of
                   electrons leaving the body will, if other conditions are kept con-
                   stant, be proportional to the intensity of the incident light... 5
                Einstein shows here that the whole energy of an incident light
             quantum is absorbed by a single electron.
                Some of the energy absorbed by the electron becomes P, the work
             needed to escape from the metal. The rest is the kinetic energy E =
             ½ mv2 of the electron. Einstein’s “photoelectric equation” thus is
                E = hν - P.
                Einstein’s equation predicted a linear relationship between the
             frequency of Einstein’s light quantum hν, and the energy E of the
             ejected electron. It was more than ten years later that R. A. Millikan
             confirmed Einstein’s photoelectric equation. Millikan nevertheless
             denied that his experiment proved Einstein’s radical but clairvoyant
             ideas about light quanta! He said in 1916
                   Einstein’s photoelectric equation... cannot in my judgment be
                   looked upon at present as resting upon any sort of a satisfactory
                   theoretical foundation. 6

               5       CPAE, vol.2, Doc. 14, p.99.
               6       A Direct Photoelectric Determination of Planck’s “h”. Physical Review, 7(3), 355.
                                          Light Quantum Hypothesis      51




                                                                         Chapter 6
  Figure 6-7. The Photoelectric Effect.

The Entropies of Radiation and Matter
   Einstein clearly recognized the well-established difference
between matter and energy, but he hoped to find some kind of
symmetry between them in a general theory that describes them
both.
   Within the 1905 year, he writes the most famous equation in
physics that connects the two, E = mc2. But Einstein discovers
a symmetry by calculating the entropy of matter and radiation,
using the methods he developed in his three papers on statistical
mechanics. 7
   Einstein begins by asking for the probability W that a particular
movable point (an abstract property of a molecule) would be
randomly found in a small volume v in a large container with volume
v0. He then asks “how great is the probability that at a randomly
chosen instant of time all n independently movable points in a given
volume v0 will be contained (by chance) in volume v?”
   The probability of independent events is the product of the
individual probabilities, so W = [v/ v0]n. Einstein then uses
“Boltzmann’s Principle, that the entropy S = k log W.
   S - S0 = k log [v/ v0]n = k n log [v/ v0]
   Einstein derived a similar expression for the entropy of radiation
with energy E and frequency ν as
  7     See chapter 5.
        52         My God, He Plays Dice!

               S - S0 = k (E/hν) log [v/ v0]
               If we compare the two expressions, it appears that E/hν is the
             number of independent light particles. Einstein concluded
                   Monochromatic radiation of low density (within the range of
                   validity of Wien’s radiation formula) behaves thermodynamically
Chapter 6




                   as if it consisted of mutually independent energy quanta of
                   magnitude hν [Einstein wrote Rβν/N]. 8
               Einstein showed that thermodynamically, radiation behaves like
             gas particles. It seems reasonable, he said,
                   “to investigate whether the laws of generation and conversion of
                   light are also so constituted as if light consisted of such energy
                   quanta. Light can not be spread out continuously in all directions
                   if individual energy quanta can be absorbed as a unit that ejects
                   a photoelectron in the photoelectric effect.”

             Nonlocality
                How can energy spread out continuously over a large volume yet
             later be absorbed in its entirety at one place, without contradicting
             his principle of relativity? Einstein clearly describes here what is
             today known as nonlocality, but he does not describe it explicitly
             until 1927, and then only in comments at the fifth Solvay conference.
             He does not publish his concerns until the EPR paper in 1935!
                If the energy travels as a spherical light wave radiated into space
             in all directions, how can it instantaneously collect itself together
             to be absorbed into a single electron. Einstein already in 1905 sees
             something nonlocal about the photon. What is it that Einstein sees?
                It is events at two points in a spacelike separation occurring
             “simultaneously,” a concept that his new special theory of relativity
             says is impossible in any absolute sense.
                 He also sees that there is both a wave aspect and a particle aspect
             to electromagnetic radiation. He strongly contrasts the finite number
             of variables that describe discrete matter with the assumption of
             continuous radiation.
                   While we consider the state of a body to be completely determined
                   by the positions and velocities of a very large, yet finite, number of
               8       CPAE, vol2. Doc.14, p.97.
                                   Light Quantum Hypothesis             53

   atoms and electrons, we make use of continuous spatial functions
   to describe the electromagnetic state of a given volume, and a
   finite number of parameters cannot be regarded as sufficient for
   the complete determination of such a state.
   The wave theory of light, which operates with continuous spatial




                                                                         Chapter 6
   functions, has worked well in the representation of purely optical
   phenomena and will probably never be replaced by another
   theory.
   It seems to me that the observations associated with blackbody
   radiation, fluorescence, the production of cathode rays by
   ultraviolet light, and other related phenomena connected
   with the emission or transformation of light are more
   readily understood if one assumes that the energy of light is
   discontinuously distributed in space.
   In accordance with the assumption to be considered here, the
   energy of a light ray spreading out from a point source is not
   continuously distributed over an increasing space but consists of
   a finite number of energy quanta which are localized at points
   in space, which move without dividing, and which can only be
   produced and absorbed as complete units.
   We therefore arrive at the conclusion: the greater the energy
   density and the wavelength of a radiation, the more useful do
   the theoretical principles we have employed turn out to be; for
   small wavelengths and small radiation densities, however, these
   principles fail us completely. 9
 As late as the Spring of 1926, perhaps following Niels Bohr,
Werner Heisenberg could not believe in the reality of light quanta.
   Whether or not I should believe in light quanta, I cannot say at
   this stage. Radiation quite obviously involves the discontinuous
   elements to which you refer as light quanta. On the other hand,
   there is a continuous element, which appears, for instance,
   in interference phenomena, and which is much more simply
   described by the wave theory of light. But you are of course quite
   right to ask whether quantum mechanics has anything new to
   say on these terribly difficult problems. I believe that we may at
   least hope that it will one day. 10
  9    CPAE, vol.2, Document 14,
  10   Physics and Beyond, p. 67
