         108   My God, He Plays Dice!
Chapter 17




                               a t
                            M nics r i x
                             e c h a
                           M
                                               Matrix Mechanics 109


Matrix Mechanics
    What the matrix mechanics of Werner Heisenberg, Max
Born, and Pascual Jordan did was to find another way to
determine the “quantum conditions” that had been hypothesized
by Niels Bohr, who was following J.W.Nicholson’s suggestion
that the angular momentum is quantized. These conditions
correctly predicted values for Bohr’s “stationary states” and
“quantum jumps” between energy levels.
    But they were really just guesses in Bohr’s “old quantum theory,”
validated by perfect agreement with the values of the hydrogen




                                                                        Chapter 17
atom’s spectral lines, especially the Balmer series of lines whose
1880’s formula for term differences first revealed the existence of
integer quantum numbers for the energy levels,
    1/λ = RH (1/m2 - 1/n2).
    Heisenberg, Born, and Jordan recovered the same quantization
of angular momentum that Bohr had used, but we shall see that
it showed up for them as a product of non-commuting matrices.
    Most important, they discovered a way to calculate the energy
levels in Bohr’s atomic model as well as determine Albert
Einstein’s 1916 transition probabilities between levels in a
hydrogen atom. They could explain the different intensities in the
resulting spectral lines.
    Before matrix mechanics, the energy levels were empirically
“read off ” the term diagrams of spectral lines. Matrix mechanics is
a new mathematical theory of quantum mechanics. The accuracy
of the old quantum theory came from the sharply defined spectral
lines, with wavelengths measurable to six significant figures.
    The new quantum theory did not try to interpret or visualize
what is going on in transitions. Indeed, it strongly discouraged
any visualizations. It even denied the existence of electron orbits,
a central concept in the Rutherford-Bohr-Sommerfeld atom.
    Heisenberg had worked with Hendrik A. Kramers at Bohr’s
Institute for Physics in Copenhagen to analyze electronic orbits as
Fourier series. Kramers had hoped to identify the higher harmonic
         110     My God, He Plays Dice!

               frequencies in the series expansion of orbital frequencies with
               those of electronic transitions, but Kramer’s predictions only
               worked for large quantum numbers where Bohr’s correspondence
               principle applies.
                  Kramers’ work began with estimates of what were called
               “dispersion laws” by Rudolf Ladenberg. The work culminated
               in the Kramers-Heisenberg dispersion formula in 1925. Based on
               Bohr’s correspondence principle, these led to accurate estimates
               of the intensities of spectral lines in the hydrogen atom for high
               quantum numbers. But the assumed orbital frequencies for low
               quantum numbers did not agree with observations.
Chapter 17




                  Until Heisenberg in 1925, most of the work in the “old quan-
               tum theory” focused on models of elementary particles. For
               example, electrons were visualized as going around Ernest
               Rutherford’s nucleus in orbits, like planets circling the sun.
               Arnold Sommerfeld extended the Bohr analogy to include
               Keplerian elliptical orbits with differing angular momentum.
                  Heisenberg’s great breakthrough was to declare that his theory
               is based entirely on “observable” quantities like the intensities and
               frequencies of the visible spectral lines.
                   The attempts by Kramers to predict observed spectral lines as
               higher harmonics in a Fourier analysis of the assumed electronic
               orbit frequencies ended in failure. But the methods he had
               developed with Heisenberg’s help were adapted by Heisenberg
               to a Fourier analysis of the observed spectral line frequencies.
               Heisenberg assumed they originate in virtual oscillators like the
               simple harmonic motion of a vibrating string pinned at the ends
               or the more complex anharmonic oscillator.
                  As Kramers had done, Heisenberg identified line intensities with
               the square of the amplitude of vibrations, which was the classical
               expression for an oscillating electron. But now Heisenberg’s major
               insight was to calculate values for the position and momentum
               of the particle using two states rather than one, the initial and
               final stationary states or energy levels, which we suggested in the
               chapter on the Bohr atom could simply be “read off ” the empirical
               term diagrams.
                  Heisenberg’s requirement for two states led to an arrangement
               of transitions in a two-dimensional square array. One dimension
                                                    Matrix Mechanics 111

was the initial states, the other the final. The array element for i=3
and f=2 represents the transition from level 3 to level 2 with the
emission of a light quantum.
    When his mentor Max Born looked at Heisenberg’s draft
paper in July of 1925, he recognized the square arrays as matrices,
a powerful mathematical tool with some unusual properties that
played a decisive role in the new quantum mechanics.
   Born and his assistant Pascual Jordan submitted a paper within
weeks about the strange “non-commuting” of some dynamical
variables in quantum mechanics. Normally the order of multiplication
makes no difference, ab = ba. But the matrices for the position and




                                                                          Chapter 17
momentum operators x and p exhibit what was to become the new
“quantum condition,” a defining characteristic of the new quantum
mechanics.
   As Born describes the array,
      If we start from the frequencies,
                  νnm = En/h - Em/h,
      it is a natural suggestion that we arrange them in a square array
         ν11 =        ν12          ν13     ...
         ν21          ν22 =        ν23     ...
         ν31          ν23          ν33 =   ...
         ...          ...          ...     ...
      We can proceed to define the product of two such arrays.The
      multiplication rule, which Heisenberg deduced solely from ex-
      perimental facts, runs:
                  (anm)(bnm) = (Σk ankbkm).1
       The central idea of matrix mechanics is that every physical
      magnitude has such a matrix, including the co-ordinate position
      and the momentum. However, the product of momentum and
      position is no longer commutative as in classical mechanics,
      where the order of multiplication does not matter.
             pkqk = qkpk.
  Instead, Heisenberg found that
             pkqk - qkpk.= h/2πi.


  1       Born Atomic Physics, p.116
         112       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  It is this purely mathematical non-commutation property that is
               the “quantum condition” for the new quantum mechanics, especially
               for Paul Dirac, see chapter 19.
                  But notice that Heisenberg’s product of momentum and position
               has the dimensions of angular momentum. So we are back to
               Planck’s original fortuitive but most insightful guess, and can now
               add to the answer to our opening question “what is quantized?”
               This Heisenberg-Born-Jordan discovery that the product of non-
               commuting quantities p and q leads directly to Planck’s constant
               h, his “quantum” of action, gives us a great insight into what is going
               on in quantum reality.
Chapter 17




                  It is always angular momentum or spin that is quantized, just
               as Nicholson had suggested to Bohr, including the dimension-
               less isospin of the neutrons and protons and other sub-elementary
               particles, which obey the same mathematics as spin and orbital
               angular momentum for electrons.
                  And it is the possible projections of the spin or angular
               momentum onto any preferred directions, such as an external field,
               that determines possible quantum states. The field is the average over
               all the dipole and quadrupole moments of other nearby spinning
               particles.
               Heisenberg on Einstein’s Light Quanta
                  Although his matrix mechanics confirmed discrete states and
               “quantum jumps” of electrons between the energy levels, with
               emission or absorption of radiation, Heisenberg did not yet accept
               today’s standard textbook view that the radiation is also discrete and
               in the form of Einstein’s spatially localized light quanta, which had
               been renamed “photons” by American chemist Gilbert Lewis in
               late 1926.
                  Heisenberg must have known that Einstein had introduced
               probability and causality into physics in his 1916 work on the
               emission and absorption of light quanta, with his explanation of
               transition probabilities and prediction of stimulated emission.
                  But Heisenberg gives little credit to Einstein. In his letters to
               Einstein, he says that Einstein’s work is relevant to his, but does
               not follow through on exactly how it is relevant. And as late as the
                                                       Matrix Mechanics 113

Spring of 1926, perhaps following Niels Bohr, he is not convinced
of the reality of light quanta. “Whether or not I should believe in
light quanta, I cannot say at this stage,” he said. After Heisenberg’s
1926 talk on matrix mechanics at the University of Berlin, Einstein
invited him to take a walk and discuss some basic questions.
   We only have Heisenberg’s version of this conversation, but it is
worth quoting at length to show how little the founders appreciated
Einstein’s work over the previous two decades on the fundamental
concepts of quantum mechanics.:
    I apparently managed to arouse Einstein’s interest, for he invited me to
   walk home with him so that we might discuss the new ideas at greater




                                                                                 Chapter 17
   length. On the way, he asked about my studies and previous research.
   As soon as we were indoors, he opened the conversation with a
   question that bore on the philosophical background of my recent work.
   “What you have told us sounds extremely strange. You assume the
   existence of electrons inside the atom, and you are probably quite right
   to do so. But you refuse to consider their orbits, even though we can
   observe electron tracks in a cloud chamber. I should very much like to
   hear more about your reasons for making such strange assumptions.”
    “We cannot observe electron orbits inside the atom,” I must have
   replied, “but the radiation which an atom emits during discharges
   enables us to deduce the frequencies and corresponding amplitudes
   of its electrons. After all, even in the older physics wave numbers and
   amplitudes could be considered substitutes for electron orbits. Now,
   since a good theory must be based on directly observable magnitudes,
   I thought it more fitting to restrict myself to these, treating them, as it
   were, as representatives of the electron orbits.”
    “But you don’t seriously believe,” Einstein protested, “that none but
   observable magnitudes must go into a physical theory?”
    “Isn’t that precisely what you have done with relativity?” I asked in
   some surprise. “After all, you did stress the fact that it is impermissible
   to speak of absolute time, simply because absolute time cannot be
   observed; that only clock readings, be it in the moving reference system
   or the system at rest, are relevant to the determination of time.”
    “Possibly I did use this kind of reasoning,” Einstein admitted, “but it
   is nonsense all the same. Perhaps I could put it more diplomatically
   by saying that it may be heuristically useful to keep in mind what
   one has actually observed. But on principle, it is quite wrong to try
   founding a theory on observable magnitudes alone. In reality the very
   opposite happens. It is the theory which decides what we can observe.
         114   My God, He Plays Dice!

               You must appreciate that observation is a very complicated process.
               The phenomenon under observation produces certain events in our
               measuring apparatus. As a result, further processes take place in the ap-
               paratus, which eventually and by complicated paths produce sense im-
               pressions and help us to fix the effects in our consciousness. Along this
               whole path - from the phenomenon to its fixation in our consciousness
               — we must be able to tell how nature functions, must know the natural
               laws at least in practical terms, before we can claim to have observed
               anything at all. Only theory, that is, knowledge of natural laws, enables
               us to deduce the underlying phenomena from our sense impressions.
               When we claim that we can observe something new, we ought really
               to be saying that, although we are about to formulate new natural laws
               that do not agree with the old ones, we nevertheless assume that the
Chapter 17




               existing laws — covering the whole path from the phenomenon to our
               consciousness—function in such a way that we can rely upon them and
               hence speak of ’observations’...
                “We shall talk about it again in a few years’ time. But perhaps I may
               put another question to you. Quantum theory as you have expounded
               it in your lecture has two distinct faces. On the one hand, as Bohr
               himself has rightly stressed, it explains the stability of the atom; it
               causes the same forms to reappear time and again. On the other hand,
               it explains that strange discontinuity or inconstancy of nature which we
               observe quite clearly when we watch flashes of light on a scintillation
               screen. These two aspects are obviously connected. In your quantum
               mechanics you will have to take both into account, for instance when
               you speak of the emission of light by atoms. You can calculate the
               discrete energy values of the stationary states. Your theory can thus
               account for the stability of certain forms that cannot merge continu-
               ously into one another, but must differ by finite amounts and seem
               capable of permanent re-formation. But what happens during the emis-
               sion of light?
                “As you know, I suggested that, when an atom drops suddenly from
               one stationary energy value to the next, it emits the energy difference
               as an energy packet, a so-called light quantum. In that case, we have
               a particularly clear example of discontinuity. Do you think that my
               conception is correct? Or can you describe the transition from one
               stationary state to another in a more precise way?”
                In my reply, I must have said something like this: “Bohr has taught
               me that one cannot describe this process by means of the traditional
               concepts, i.e., as a process in time and space. With that, of course,
               we have said very little, no more, in fact, than that we do not know.
               Whether or not I should believe in light quanta, I cannot say at this
               stage. Radiation quite obviously involves the discontinuous elements
               to which you refer as light quanta. On the other hand, there is a
                                                            Matrix Mechanics 115

      continuous element, which appears, for instance, in interference
      phenomena, and which is much more simply described by the wave
      theory of light. But you are of course quite right to ask whether
      quantum mechanics has anything new to say on these terribly difficult
      problems. I believe that we may at least hope that it will one day.
       “I could, for instance, imagine that we should obtain an interesting
      answer if we considered the energy fluctuations of an atom during
      reactions with other atoms or with the radiation field. If the energy
      should change discontinuously, as we expect from your theory of light
      quanta, then the fluctuation, or, in more precise mathematical terms,
      the mean square fluctuation, would be greater than if the energy
      changed continuously. I am inclined to believe that quantum mechan-
      ics would lead to the greater value, and so establish the discontinuity.




                                                                                       Chapter 17
      On the other hand, the continuous element, which appears in interfer-
      ence experiments, must also be taken into account. Perhaps one must
      imagine the transitions from one stationary state to the next as so many
      fade-outs in a film. The change is not sudden—one picture gradually
      fades while the next comes into focus so that, for a time, both pictures
      become confused and one does not know which is which. Similarly,
      there may well be an intermediate state in which we cannot tell whether
      an atom is in the upper or the lower state.”
       “You are moving on very thin ice,” Einstein warned me. “For you are
      suddenly speaking of what we know about nature and no longer about
      what nature really does. In science we ought to be concerned solely
      with what nature does. It might very well be that you and I know quite
      different things about nature. But who would be interested in that?
      Perhaps you and I alone. To everyone else it is a matter of complete
      indifference. In other words, if your theory is right, you will have to
      tell me sooner or later what the atom does when it passes from one
      stationary state to the next”
       “Perhaps,” I may have answered. “But it seems to me that you are
      using language a little too strictly. Still, I do admit that everything that I
      might now say may sound like a cheap excuse. So let’s wait and see how
      atomic theory develops.”
       Einstein gave me a skeptical look. “How can you really have so much
      faith in your theory when so many crucial problems remain completely
      unsolved?”2
   Heisenberg (with Bohr) “cannot say at this stage” (1926) whether
or not they can “believe in light quanta.” Nor do they understand at
all Einstein’s hope of understanding “objective reality,” what nature
really does and not just what we can say about it.
  2       Physics and Beyond, p. 67
