         200   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                                 m e nt
                          s u re
                       Mea oblem
Chapter 18




                         Pr




                                                                 This chapter on the web
                                      informationphilosopher.com/problems/measurement
                                                 Measurement            201


The Measurement Problem
   The “problem of measurement” in quantum mechanics has
been defined in various ways, originally by scientists, and more
recently by philosophers of science who question the “founda-
tions” of quantum mechanics.
  Measurements are described with diverse concepts in quantum
physics such as:
   • wave functions (probability amplitudes) evolving unitarily
and deterministically (preserving information) according to the
linear Schrödinger equation,
   • superposition of states, i.e., linear combinations of wave func-
tions with complex coefficients that carry phase information and
produce interference effects (the principle of superposition),
   • quantum jumps between states accompanied by the “collapse




                                                                          Chapter 18
of the wave function” that can destroy or create information (Paul
Dirac’s projection postulate, John von Neumann’s Process 1),
  • probabilities of collapses and jumps given by the square of the
absolute value of the wave function for a given state,
   • values for possible measurements given by the eigenvalues
associated with the eigenstates of the combined measuring appa-
ratus and measured system (the axiom of measurement),
  • the indeterminacy or uncertainty principle.
   The original measurement problem, said to be a consequence of
Niels Bohr’s “Copenhagen Interpretation” of quantum mechan-
ics, was to explain how our measuring instruments, which are
usually macroscopic objects and treatable with classical physics,
can give us information about the microscopic world of atoms and
subatomic particles like electrons and photons.
   Bohr’s idea of “complementarity” insisted that a specific experi-
ment could reveal only partial information - for example, a parti-
cle’s position or its momentum. “Exhaustive” or “complete” infor-
mation requires two complementary experiments. Measurement
of both a particle’s momentum and its position can only be within
         202     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               the limits of Werner Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. This
               demands that the product of the indeterminacy in the position Δx
               multiplied by the indeterminacy in the momentum Δp be equal to
               or greater than Planck’s quantum of action h.
                  Some define the problem of measurement simply as the logical
               contradiction between two laws describing the motion of quan-
               tum systems; the unitary, information preserving, continuous,
               and deterministic time evolution of the Schrödinger equation
               versus the non-unitary, discontinuous, and indeterministic col-
               lapse of the wave function. John von Neumann saw a problem
               with these two distinct (indeed, logically opposing) processes.
                  The mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics provides
               no way to predict when the wave function stops evolving in a uni-
               tary fashion and collapses. Experimentally and practically, how-
               ever, we can say that this occurs when the microscopic system
               interacts with a measurement apparatus. or indeed just with
Chapter 18




               another quantum system.
                 Others define the measurement problem as the failure to
               observe macroscopic superpositions.
                  Decoherence theorists1 (e.g., H. Dieter Zeh and Wojciech
               Zurek, who use various non-standard interpretations of quantum
               mechanics, denying the projection postulate, quantum jumps, and
               even the existence of particles), define the measurement problem
               as the failure to observe superpositions such as Schrödinger’s Cat.
               Unitary time evolution of the wave function according to the
               Schrödinger wave equation should produce such macroscopic
               superpositions, they claim.
                  Information physics treats a measuring apparatus quantum
               mechanically by describing parts of it as in a metastable state
               like the excited states of an atom, the critically poised electrical
               potential energy in the discharge tube of a Geiger counter, or the
               supersaturated water and alcohol molecules of a Wilson cloud
               chamber. (The pi-bond orbital rotation from cis- to trans- in the
               light-sensitive retinal molecule is an example of a critically poised
               apparatus).
                 1    See chapter 22.
                                                Measurement            203

   Excited (metastable) states are poised to collapse when an elec-
tron (or photon) collides with the sensitive detector elements in
the apparatus. This collapse is macroscopic and irreversible2, gen-
erally a cascade of quantum events that release large amounts of
energy, increasing the (Boltzmann) entropy. But in a “measure-
ment” there is also a local decrease in the entropy. This negative
entropy corresponds to the information gained in the measure-
ment. The global entropy increase is normally orders of magni-
tude more than the small local decrease in entropy (an increase in
stable information or Shannon entropy) that constitutes the “mea-
sured” experimental data available to human observers.
   The creation of new information in a measurement thus follows
the same two core processes of all information creation - quan-
tum cooperative phenomena and thermodynamics. These two are
involved in the formation of microscopic objects like atoms and
molecules, as well as macroscopic objects like galaxies, stars, and




                                                                         Chapter 18
planets.
   According to the correspondence principle, all the laws of
quantum physics asymptotically approach the laws of classical
physics in the limit of large quantum numbers and large numbers
of particles. Quantum mechanics can be used to describe even the
largest macroscopic systems.
   Does this mean that the positions and momenta of macro-
scopic objects are uncertain? Yes, it does. Although the uncer-
tainty becomes vanishingly small for large objects, it is not zero.
   Noting that the momentum p is the product of mass and veloc-
ity mv, Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle, Δp Δx > h, can be
rewritten as Δv Δx > h / m. It is thus not when h is small, but when
the mass m is large enough and h / m is small enough, that errors
in the position and momentum of macroscopic objects become
smaller that can be measured.
    Niels Bohr used the uncertainty of macroscopic objects to
defeat Albert Einstein’s several objections to quantum mechan-
ics at the 1927 Solvay conference.
  2    See chapter 25.
         204          Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  But Bohr and Heisenberg also insisted that a measuring appara-
               tus must be a regarded as a purely classical system. They can’t have it
               both ways. Can the macroscopic apparatus also be treated by quan-
               tum physics or not? Can it be described by the Schrödinger equa-
               tion? Can it be regarded as in a superposition of states?
                  The most famous example of macroscopic superposition is no
               doubt Schrödinger’s Cat3, which is claimed to be in a superposi-
               tion of live and dead cats, and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experi-
               ment, in which entangled electrons or photons are in a superposi-
               tion of two-particle states that collapse over macroscopic distances
               to exhibit properties “nonlocally” at speeds faster than the speed of
               light.
                  The radical treatments of macroscopic systems, by Schrödinger
               and Einstein and his colleagues, were intended to expose inconsis-
               tencies and incompleteness in quantum theory. The critics hoped to
               restore determinism and “local reality” to physics. They resulted in
Chapter 18




               some strange and extremely popular “mysteries” about “quantum
               reality,” such as the “many-worlds” interpretation, “hidden vari-
               ables,” and signaling faster than the speed of light.
                  We develop a quantum-mechanical treatment of macroscopic
               systems, especially a measuring apparatus, to show how it can create
               new information. If the apparatus were describable only by classical
               deterministic laws, no new information could come into existence.
               The apparatus need only be adequately determined, that is to say,
               “classical” to a sufficient degree of accuracy.
                 As Landau and Lifshitz described it in their 1958 textbook,
                     “The possibility of a quantitative description of the motion of an elec-
                     tron requires the presence also of physical objects which obey classi-
                     cal mechanics to a sufficient degree of accuracy. If an electron interacts
                     with such a “classical object”, the state of the latter is, generally speaking,
                     altered. The nature and magnitude of this change depend on the state of
                     the electron, and therefore may serve to characterise it quantitatively...
                     “We have defined “apparatus” as a physical object which is governed,
                     with sufficient accuracy, by classical mechanics. Such, for instance, is
                     a body of large enough mass. However, it must not be supposed that

                 3       See chapter 23
                                                               Measurement        205

      apparatus is necessarily macroscopic. Under certain conditions, the part
      of apparatus may also be taken by an object which is microscopic, since
      the idea of “with sufficient accuracy” depends on the actual problem
      proposed.
      “Thus quantum mechanics occupies a very unusual place among physi-
      cal theories: it contains classical mechanics as a limiting case [corre-
      spondence principle], yet at the same time it requires this limiting case
      for its own formulation.”4
Von Neumann’s Two Processes
  The measurement problem was analyzed mathematically in 1932
by John von Neumann. Following the work of Bohr and Heisen-
berg, he divided the world into a microscopic (atomic-level) quan-
tum system and a macroscopic (classical) measuring apparatus.
  Von Neumann explained that two fundamentally different pro-
cesses are going on in quantum mechanics.
   First, a non-causal Process 1, in which the measured electron
winds up randomly in one of the possible physical states (eigen-




                                                                                    Chapter 18
states) of the measuring apparatus plus electron.
   This process came to be called the “collapse of the wave function”
or the “reduction of the wave packet.”
   The probability for finding the electron in a specific eigenstate
is given by the square of the coefficients cn of the expansion of the
original system state (wave function ψ) in an infinite set of wave
functions φn that represent the eigenfunctions of the measuring
apparatus plus electron.
   This is as close as we get to a description of the motion of the par-
ticle aspect of a quantum system. According to von Neumann, the
particle simply shows up somewhere as a result of a measurement.
   Information physics says that the particle “shows up” only when
a new stable information structure is created, information that sub-
sequently can be observed.
  So we can also add a Process 1b. The information created in von
Neumann’s Process 1 will only be stable if an amount of positive
entropy greater than the negative entropy in the new information
  4       Quantum Mechanics, non-relativistic theory, pp.1-2
         206       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               structure is transported away, in order to satisfy the second law of
               thermodynamics.
                  Next, von Neumann’s causal Process 2, in which the electron
               wave function ψ evolves deterministically according to Schröding-
               er’s equation of motion for the wavelike aspect.
                 (ih/2π) ∂ψ/∂t = Hψ.
                  This evolution describes the motion of the probability ampli-
               tude wave ψ between measurements. The wave function exhibits
               interference effects. But the particle path itself can not be observed.
               Interference is destroyed if the particle has a definite position or
               momentum. The particle does not have a definite position between
               measurements.
                  Von Neumann claimed there is another major difference between
               his two processes. Process 1 is thermodynamically irreversible.
               Process 2 is reversible. This confirms the fundamental connection
Chapter 18




               between quantum mechanics and thermodynamics that informa-
               tion physics finds at the heart of all information creation.
                  Information physics can show quantum mechanically how Pro-
               cess 1 creates information. Something like Process 1 is always
               involved when any information is created, whether or not the new
               information is ever “observed” by a human being.
                 Process 2 is deterministic and information conserving.
                  Just as the new information recorded in the measurement appa-
               ratus cannot subsist unless a compensating amount of entropy is
               transferred away from the new information, something similar to
               Process 1b must happen in the mind of an observer if the new infor-
               mation is to constitute an “observation.”
                  It is only in cases where information persists long enough for a
               human being to observe it that we can properly describe the obser-
               vation as a “measurement” and the human being as an “observer.”
               So, following von Neumann’s “process” terminology, we can com-
               plete his theory of the measuring process by adding an anthropo-
               morphic third process.
                                                            Measurement            207

   Process 3 is a conscious observer recording new information in
a mind. For this we need two local reductions in the entropy (new
information in the measurement apparatus, new information in the
mind), both balanced by even greater increases in positive entropy
that must be transported away from the apparatus and the mind, so
the overall increase in entropy can satisfy the second law of thermo-
dynamics.
Designing a Quantum Measurement Apparatus
   The first step is to build an apparatus that allows different com-
ponents of the wave function to evolve along distinguishable paths
into different regions of space, where the different regions corre-
spond to (are correlated with) the physical properties we want to
measure. We then can locate a detector in these different regions of
space to catch particles travelling a particular path.
   We do not say that the system is on a particular path in this first
step. Knowing the position would cause the probability amplitude




                                                                                     Chapter 18
wave function to collapse. This first step is reversible, at least in prin-
ciple. It is deterministic and an example of von Neumann Process 2.
   Let’s consider a birefringent crystal separating a beam of photons
into horizontally and vertically polarized photons.5
   We need a beam of photons (and the ability to reduce the inten-
sity to a single photon at a time). Vertically polarized photons pass
straight through the crystal. They are called the ordinary ray. Hori-
zontally polarized photons, however, are deflected at an angle
though the crystal, then exit the crystal back at the original angle.
This is the extraordinary ray.




     Figure 18-11. Separating horizontal and vertical polarized photons

   Note that this first part of our apparatus accomplishes the
separation of our two states into distinct physical regions.

    5     See http://www.informationphilosopher.com/problems/measurement/#design
for an animation of the birefringent crystal experiment
         208       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  We have not actually measured yet, so a single photon passing
               through our measurement apparatus is described as in a linear com-
               bination (a superposition) of horizontal and vertical polarization
               states,
                 | ψ > = ( 1/√2) | h > + ( 1/√2) | v >             (1)
                 A Reversible Example of Process 2
                  To show that process 2 is reversible, we can add a second
               birefringent crystal upside down from the first, but inline with the
               superposition of physically separated states,




                    Figure 18-12. If we don’t measure, we can recombine the beams
Chapter 18




                  Since we have not made a measurement and do not know the
               path of the photon, the phase information in the (generally com-
               plex) coefficients of equation (1) has been preserved, so when they
               combine in the second crystal, they emerge in a state identical to the
               state they had before entering the first crystal.
               An Irreversible Example of Process 1
                  But now suppose we insert something between the two crystals
               that is capable of a measurement to produce observable informa-
               tion. We need detectors that may locate the photon in one of the
               two rays.
                 Let’s consider an ideal photographic plate capable of precipitat-
               ing visible silver grains upon the receipt of a single photon (and
               subsequent development). Today photography cannot detect single
               photons, but detectors using charge coupled devices (CCDs) are
               approaching this sensitivity.
                 We can write a quantum description of the plate as containing
               two sensitive collection areas, the part of the apparatus measuring
               horizontally polarized photons, | Ah > (shown as the upper spot),
                                                         Measurement      209

and the part of the apparatus measuring vertically polarized
photons, | Av > (shown as the lower spot).




     Figure 18-13. Two possible paths become one actual when detected.

  We treat the detection systems quantum mechanically, and say
that each detector has two eigenstates, e.g., | Ah0 >, corresponding to
  • the jump of the probability amplitude wave function | ψ > of the
photon in equation (1) into the horizontally polarized state | h >.
   • the quantum jump of the horizontal detector from | Ah0 > to
| Ah1 >.




                                                                            Chapter 18
  These two happen together, as the initial states of the detectors
are correlated with no photons, and the final state | Ah1 >, in which
the upper detector has registered a horizontal photon.
   When we actually detect the photon, say in a horizontal polariza-
tion state with statistical probability 1/2, two “collapses” or “jumps”
occur. They are correlated with the states of the sensitive detectors
in the classical apparatus.
   One can say that the photon has become entangled with the sensi-
tive horizontal detector area, so that the wave function describing
their interaction is a superposition of photon and apparatus states
that cannot be observed independently.
  | ψ > + | Ah0 >        =>      | ψ, Ah0 >        =>      | h, Ah1 >
   These jumps destroy (unobservable) phase information, raise the
(Boltzmann) entropy of the apparatus, and increase visible informa-
tion (Shannon entropy) in the form of the visible spot. The entropy
increase takes the form of a large chemical energy release when the
photographic spot is developed (or a cascade of electrons in a CCD).
  Note that the birefringent crystal and the parts of the macroscopic
apparatus other than the sensitive detectors are treated classically.
         210         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 We animate these irreversible and reversible processes on our
               website.6
                 We see that our example agrees with Von Neumann Process 1.
               A measurement which finds the photon in a specific state n is ther-
               modynamically irreversible, whereas the deterministic evolution
               described by Schrödinger’s equation is reversible.
                  We thus establish a clear connection between a measurement,
               which increases the information by some number of bits (Shan-
               non entropy), and the necessary compensating increase in the
               (Boltzmann) entropy of the macroscopic apparatus, and the cosmic
               creation process, where new particles form, reducing the entropy
               locally, and the energy of formation is radiated or conducted away
               as Boltzmann entropy.7
                  Note that the Boltzmann entropy can only be radiated away (ulti-
               mately into the night sky to the cosmic microwave background)
               because the expansion of the universe provides a sink for the
Chapter 18




               entropy, as pointed out by David Layzer. Note also that this cosmic
               information-creating process requires no conscious observer. The
               universe is its own observer.
               The Boundary between the Classical and Quantum Worlds
                  Some scientists, von Neumann and Heisenberg for example, have
               argued that in the absence of a conscious observer, or some “cut”
               between the microscopic and macroscopic world, the evolution
               of the quantum system and the macroscopic measuring apparatus
               would be described deterministically by Schrödinger’s equation of
               motion for the wave function | ψ + A > with the Hamiltonian H
               energy operator,
                 (ih/2π) ∂/∂t | ψ + A > = H | ψ + A >.
                  Our quantum mechanical analysis of the measurement appara-
               tus in the above case allows us to locate the “cut” precisely at those
               components of the “adequately classical and deterministic” appa-
               ratus that put the apparatus in an irreversible stable state providing
               new information to the observer.

                 6     informationphilosopher.com/problems/measurement/#birefringence
                 7     See appendix B for details
                                                                 Measurement   211

   John Bell drew a diagram to show the various possible locations
for what he called the “shifty split.” Information physics shows us
that the correct location for the boundary is the first of Bell’s possi-
bilities.




                                                                                 Chapter 18



     Figure 18-14. John Bell’s illustration of the “shifty split.”

The Role of the Conscious Observer
  In 1941, Carl von Weizsäcker described the measurement
problem as an interaction between a Subject and an Object, a view
shared by the philosopher of science Ernst Cassirer.
         212         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Fritz London and Edmond Bauer made the strongest case for
               the critical role of a conscious observer in 1939:
                     “So far we have only coupled one apparatus with one object. But a cou-
                     pling, even with a measuring device, is not yet a measurement. A mea-
                     surement is achieved only when the position of the pointer has been
                     observed. It is precisely this increase of knowledge, acquired by obser-
                     vation, that gives the observer the right to choose among the different
                     components of the mixture predicted by theory, to reject those which
                     are not observed, and to attribute thenceforth to the object a new wave
                     function, that of the pure case which he has found.
                     “We note the essential role played by the consciousness of the observer
                     in this transition from the mixture to the pure case. Without his effective
                     intervention, one would never obtain a new function.” 8
                  In 1961, Eugene Wigner made quantum physics even more sub-
               jective, claiming that a quantum measurement requires a conscious
               observer, without which nothing ever happens in the universe.
                     “When the province of physical theory was extended to encompass
                     microscopic phenomena, through the creation of quantum mechanics,
Chapter 18




                     the concept of consciousness came to the fore again: it was not possible
                     to formulate the laws of quantum mechanics in a fully consistent way
                     without reference to the consciousness All that quantum mechanics
                     purports to provide are probability connections between subsequent
                     impressions (also called “apperceptions”) of the consciousness, and even
                     though the dividing line between the observer, whose consciousness is
                     being affected, and the observed physical object can be shifted towards
                     the one or the other to a considerable degree [cf., von Neumann] it
                     cannot be eliminated.” 9
                 Other physicists were more circumspect. Niels Bohr contrasted
               Paul Dirac’s view, which stressed the randomness of the outcome,
               with that of Heisenberg, who stresses the observer’s “free choice” of
               what is to be measured:
                     ‘The question was whether, as to the occurrence of individual effects, we
                     should adopt a terminology proposed by Dirac, that we were concerned
                     with a choice on the part of “nature,” or, as suggested by Heisenberg, we
                     should say that we have to do with a choice on the part of the “observer”
                     constructing the measuring instruments and reading their recording.
                     Any such terminology would, however, appear dubious since, on the one

                 8       Theory of Observation in Quantum Mechanics, in Wheeler and Zurek, p.251
                 9       Remarks on the Mind-Body Question, in Wheeler and Zurek, p.169
                                                           Measurement                213

     hand, it is hardly reasonable to endow nature with volition in the ordi-
     nary sense, while, on the other hand, it is certainly not possible for the
     observer to influence the events which may appear under the conditions
     he has arranged. To my mind, there is no other alternative than to admit
     that, in this field of experience, we are dealing with individual phenom-
     ena and that our possibilities of handling the measuring instruments
     allow us only to make a choice between the different complementary
     types of phenomena we want to study.’ 10
  Landau and Lifshitz said clearly that quantum physics was inde-
pendent of any observer:
     “In this connection the ‘classical object’ is usually called apparatus, and
     its interaction with the electron is spoken of as measurement. However,
     it must be most decidedly emphasised that we are here not discussing
     a process of measurement in which the physicist-observer takes part.
     By measurement, in quantum mechanics, we understand any process
     of interaction between classical and quantum objects, occurring apart
     from and independently of any observer.” 11
  David Bohm agreed that what is observed is distinct from the
observer:




                                                                                        Chapter 18
     “If it were necessary to give all parts of the world a completely quantum-
     mechanical description, a person trying to apply quantum theory to the
     process of observation would be faced with an insoluble paradox. This
     would be so because he would then have to regard himself as something
     connected inseparably with the rest of the world. On the other hand,the
     very idea of making an observation implies that what is observed is
     totally distinct from the person observing it.” 12
   And John Bell said:
     “It would seem that the [quantum] theory is exclusively concerned
     about ‘results of measurement’, and has nothing to say about anything
     else. What exactly qualifies some physical systems to play the role of
     ‘measurer’? Was the wavefunction of the world waiting to jump for thou-
     sands of millions of years until a single-celled living creature appeared?
     Or did it have to wait a little longer, for some better qualified system...
     with a Ph.D.? If the theory is to apply to anything but highly idealised
     laboratory operations, are we not obliged to admit that more or less
     ‘measurement-like’ processes are going on more or less all the time,
     more or less everywhere? Do we not have jumping then all the time?” 13

    10    Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, Niels Bohr, p.51
    11    Quantum Mechanics, Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz, p.2
    12    Quantum Theory, David Bohm, p.584
    13    “Against Measurement,” in Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics,
p. 216)
         214       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               Three Essential Steps in a “Measurement” and “Observation”
                 We can distinguish three required elements in a measurement
               that can clarify the ongoing debate about the role of a conscious
               observer.
                 1) In standard quantum theory, the first required element is the
               collapse of the wave-function. This is the Dirac projection postulate
               and von Neumann Process 1.
                  However, the collapse might not leave a determinate record. If
               nothing in the environment is macroscopically affected so as to
               leave an indelible record of the collapse, we can say that no infor-
               mation about the collapse is created. The overwhelming fraction of
               collapses are of this kind. Moreover, information might actually be
               destroyed. For example, collisions between atoms or molecules in a
               gas that erase past information about their paths.
                  2) If the collapse occurs when the quantum system is entangled
Chapter 18




               with a macroscopic measurement apparatus, a well-designed appa-
               ratus will also “collapse” into a correlated “pointer” state.
                  As we showed above for photons, the detector in the upper half of
               a Stern-Gerlach apparatus will fire, indicating detection of an elec-
               tron with spin up. As with photons, if the probability amplitude | up
               > in the upper half does not collapse as the electron is detected, it
               can still be recombined with the probability amplitude | down > in
               the lower half to reconstruct the unseparated beam.
                  When the apparatus detects a particle, the second required ele-
               ment is that it produce a determinate record of the event. But this
               is impossible without an irreversible thermodynamic process that
               involves: a) the creation of at least one bit of new information (nega-
               tive entropy) and b) the transfer away from the measuring apparatus
               of an amount of positive entropy (generally much, much) greater
               than the information created.
                 Notice that no conscious observer need be involved. We can gen-
               eralize this second step to an event in the physical world that was
               not designed as a measurement apparatus by a physical scientist,
               but nevertheless leaves an indelible record of the collapse of a quan-
               tum state. This might be a highly specific single event, or the macro-
               scopic consequence of billions of atomic-molecular level of events.
                                                Measurement             215

   3) Finally, the third required element is an indelible determinate
record that can be looked at by an observer (presumably conscious,
although the consciousness itself has nothing to do with the mea-
surement).
  When we have all three of these essential elements, we have what
we normally mean by a measurement and an observation, both
involving a human being.
   When we have only the first two, we can say metaphorically that
the “universe is measuring itself,” creating an information record
of quantum collapse events. For example, every hydrogen atom
formed in the early recombination era is a record of the time period
when macroscopic bodies could begin to form. A certain pattern
of photons records the explosion of a supernova billions of light
years away. When recorded by the CCD in a telescope, it becomes
a potential observation at a later time when an astronomer looks at
the data.




                                                                          Chapter 18
   Craters on the back side of the moon have for billions of years
recorded collisions with solar system debris. But that could become
observations only when the first NASA Apollo mission circled the
moon.
Quantum Collapses Can Produce New Information
  But they are not measurements, or even observations, until the
existence of a semi-permanent record has been made first.
  And that permanence requires positive entropy to be carried
away from the event, whether in a physics lab, on the back of the
moon, in a distant supernova, or a photon emitted by an atom in the
cosmic microwave background.
  If the positive entropy is not carried away, there is no permanent
(or semi-permanent) record to be observed.
   In that case, the new information is simply destroyed. The vast
fraction of all quantum collapses do not produce lasting new infor-
mation. Just as the vast fraction of negative entropy streams avail-
able do not create any new information structures.14
  14   See Appendix B for more details,
