         336      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                   m inis        m
                                          De t e r

                                                            t i b i l i s m
                                                  Co    mpa                 ism
                                                                   rmin
                         ter  minism               Sof   t D e t e
                  De
             Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                    o m p atibi
                                                            S oft C
                                  ilism
Hard I
       n         co   m p a t i
                               M
                                b
                                  e l e’s                                                In
                        re d
                     Alf odSeemsictom   p a t i bilism

               n ism    M ianism
   Ill u s i o
                         e r t a r compatibilism
                     Lib Narrow In
                         sm
Chapter 26




       p o s sibili
    Im
                                                                 p atib ilism
                                                      t In c o m
                                                 Sof                                      y
                         del                                                      Leewa
                   an Mo
             Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                           a
                                          r c e I ncom nce)
                                      Sou          l S e que
                                        (Actu   a
                                                                             i m i t e d
                                                      e lw             ith L
                                                  o d
                                - S t      a ge M
                           Tw o                        This chapter on the web
                      informationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/mele/
                              m inis           m
                     de t e r                                           Alfred Mele            337
               In
               Alfred Mele’s rianism
                       L i b e r ta
               Modest Libertarianism
                                                                          t - C a usal
                                                                        n who
                                                                Ageagents,
                  Alfred Mele has developed the idea of autonomous
               among other things exercise a kind of self-control that is related to
                                       ausa    l
                                 t
               metaphysical freedom
                               n   - Cterms like “free will” and “free action.” He
                         Eve a number of models for free will, most notably
               has also developed
               his 1995 two-stage model called “Modest Libertarianism. Others usal
               include Soft Compatibilism, Soft Libertarianism, and N  Daring   Ca
                                                                          on-Soft
              Libertarianism
                               m                  SFtoAthe idea that human autonomy
        a t i b i lis
                   Without committing himself

    omp
              is compatible with determinism or incompatible (the position of
                                                                                     y
                                                                             saoflitautono-
nc            the libertarians), Mele provides arguments inC
              mous agents for both positions. He is,S       aso
                                                                  t     a  u
                                                                      support
                                                               hef says, “officially agnos-
              tic about the truth
                              t i b i l  sm
                                        iof compatibilism” and describes his position as
                   c o
              “agnostic
                n
                            a
                        mpautonomism.”                                                 a r i a n ism
              I                                                                      t
                                                                                   r and
    Broad Mele’s opponents are those who believeSthere              o      Libnoefree
                                                                       ft are
              morally responsible human beings. They are philosophers who
                                 a r
              deny both compatibilism  i a n ism
                                               and libertarianism - Richard Double
                                                                                                    e r taria
                           e r t
                      LibHonderich, for example, “Impossibilists”nlike                        L i b
           d e
              andt Ted
                s                                                            i  g   S  oft
                                                                                     Galen
         o
      M Strawson, “Hard Incompatibilists” like Derk                        r
                                                                     DaPereboom and
                                                                                                   Chapter 26
              “Illusionists” Saul Smilansky. Mele
                                                o g i t o  has debated    the psychologist
              Daniel Wegner, whoseCposition is that the conscious will is an
           p a t i b ilism
              illusion,   based primarily on the Libet experiments.
     c o m                 s) Randolph Clarke’s “narrow incompatibilism”                           m
 I n
            q u   e n
                   Notecethat
                                                                              r m i n is
          e
ative S denies                                        In                det
                         the compatibilism of free will and determinism, bute
                                              i t e d
              accepts the compatibilism of moral responsibility and deter-

                                       nd Lim
              minism. John Martin Fischer’s “semicompatibilism” similarly
                                    a
       r m i n ism
              accepts the compatibilism of moral responsibility, while remain-

  Dete
              ing agnostic about free will and the truth of determinism. Clarke’s
              and Fischer’s morally responsible agents presumably would be
              Mele “autonomous agents.”
         338     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy


               Agnostic Autonomous Agents
                 Most libertarians, Mele thinks, both agent-causalists like
               Timothy O’Connor and event-causalists, like Robert Kane,
               might subscribe to his “autonomous agent” idea.
                     “My plan in Mele [Autonomous Agents] 1995 was to use
                     the resources both of libertarianism and of compatibil-
                     ism in defending agnostic autonomism and to do that partly
                     by developing the best compatibilist and libertarian posi-
                     tions I could develop. Part of my strategy was to construct an
                     account of an ideally self-controlled agent (where self-control is
                     understood as the contrary of akrasia: [a Greek term, meaning]
                     roughly, weakness of will), to argue that even such an agent may
                     fall short of autonomy (or free agency), and to ask what may be
                     added to ideal self-control to yield autonomy (or free agency). I
                     offered two answers, one for compatibilists and another for lib-
                     ertarians. I then argued that a disjunctive thesis associated with
                     both answers—agnostic autonomism - is more credible than
                     [believing there are no free and moral human beings] NFM.” 1

               Modest Libertarianism
                  Mele in his 1995 book Autonomous Agents, had proposed a
               “Modest Libertarianism” for consideration by libertarians.2 He
               himself did not endorse the idea. But he is concerned about the
Chapter 26




               proper place to locate the indeterminism. His soft libertarians
               locate it somewhere in the chain of events leading up to the for-
               mation of intentions, the evaluation of options, the decision and
               ultimate action. His “daring soft libertarians” move the indeter-
               minism up into the “time of action,” where indeterministic alter-
               native possibilities for actions may (or may not) exist.
                  He made it clear, following Daniel Dennett’s “Valerian” mod-
               el in Brainstorms, 1978, that any indeterminism should come
               early in the overall process. He even describes the latter - deci-
               sion - stage of the process as compatibilist (effectively determin-
               ist). This of course could only be adequate determinism. Mele
                 1       Mele (2006) p. 5.
                 2       Mele (1995) p. 211.
                        Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                  339

proposes a “soft compatibilism” that sees some value for indeter-
minism in the early stages. This will be the basis for our “Compre-
hensive Compatibilism” proposal in Chapter 28.
      “These observations indicate that it might be worth exploring
      the possibility of combining a compatibilist conception of the
      later parts of a process issuing in full blown, deliberative, inten-
      tional action with an incompatibilist conception of the earlier
      parts. For example, it might be possible to gain “ultimate con-
      trol” while preserving a considerable measure of nonultimate
      agential control by treating the process from proximal decisive
      better judgment through overt action in a compatibilist way
      and finding a theoretically useful place for indeterminacy in
      processes leading to proximal decisive better judgments.” 3
  For Mele and most other modern compatibilists, quantum
physics has shown that determinism is not true.
      “Recall that compatibilism does not include a commitment to
      determinism. The thesis is that determinism does not preclude
      autonomy. Treating the process from proximal decisive better
      judgment through overt action in a compatibilist way does not
      require treating it in a determinist way. Compatibilists may,
      in principle be willing to accept an account of causation that
      accommodates both deterministic and probabilistic instances,
      and they are not committed to holding that probabilistic causa-


                                                                               Chapter 26
      tion in the process just mentioned precludes the freedom of its
      product. In the same vein, advocates of autonomy who seek a
      “theoretical useful place” for indeterminism in the springs of
      action need not insist that indeterminism does not appear at
      other places, as well, in internal processes issuing in autono-
      mous action. Their claim on that matter may merely be that
      indeterminism at these other junctures is of no use to them.
      “External indeterminism, as I have already explained, does
      not give libertarians what they want. That leaves internal
      indeterminism. Assume, for the sake of argument, that human
      beings sometimes act autonomously, that acting autonomously
      requires “ultimate control,” and that the latter requires internal
      indeterminism. Then, with a view to combining ultimate control
  3       Mele (1995) p. 212.
         340     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     with robust nonultimate control, we can ask what location(s)
                     for internal indeterminism would do us the most good.” 4

               A Problem about Luck for Libertarians
               Mele’s plan in his book Free Will and Luck is to pay more atten-
               tion to Frankfurt-style examples and to “agential luck.”
                     “Agents’ control is the yardstick by which the bearing of luck
                     on their freedom and moral responsibility is measured. When
                     luck (good or bad) is problematic, that is because it seems sig-
                     nificantly to impede agents’ control over themselves or to high-
                     light important gaps or shortcomings in such control. It may
                     seem that to the extent that it is causally open whether or not,
                     for example, an agent intends in accordance with his consid-
                     ered judgment about what it is best to do, he lacks some con-
                     trol over what he intends, and it may be claimed that a positive
                     deterministic connection between considered best judgment
                     and intention would be more conducive to freedom and moral
                     responsibility.
                     “This last claim will be regarded as a nonstarter by anyone who
                     holds that freedom and moral responsibility require agential
                     control and that determinism is incompatible with such con-
                     trol. Sometimes it is claimed that agents do not control anything
                     at all if determinism is true. That claim is false.
Chapter 26




                     “As soon as any agent...judges it best to A, objective probabili-
                     ties for the various decisions open to the agent are set, and the
                     probability of a decision to A is very high. Larger probabilities
                     get a correspondingly larger segment of a tiny indeterministic
                     neural roulette wheel in the agent’s head than do smaller prob-
                     abilities. A tiny neural ball bounces along the wheel; its landing
                     in a particular segment is the agent’s making the corresponding
                     decision. When the ball lands in the segment for a decision to
                     A, its doing so is not just a matter of luck. After all, the design is
                     such that the probability of that happening is very high. But the
                     ball’s landing there is partly a matter of luck.

                 4       Mele (1995) p. 213.
                         Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                341

      “All libertarians who hold that A’s being a free action depends
      on its being the case that, at the time, the agent was able to do
      otherwise freely then should tell us what it could possibly be
      about an agent who freely A-ed at t in virtue of which it is true
      that, in another world with the same past and laws of nature, he
      freely does something else at t. Of course, they can say that the
      answer is “free will.” But what they need to explain then is how
      free will, as they understand it, can be a feature of agents — or,
      more fully, how this can be so where free will, on their account
      of it, really does answer the question. To do this, of course, they
      must provide an account of free will — one that can be tested
      for adequacy in this connection.” 5
   Mele proposes his “modest libertarianism” to satisfy these
needs. It includes a two-stage process that first generates random
alternative possibilities, which is then followed by a determina-
tion stage. When he first mentioned his idea in 1995, Mele cited
the similar “Valerian” example Daniel Dennett had proposed in
1978 as something libertarians should want.
   Note that both Dennett and Mele are skeptical that any such
process exists, but note that Mele’s model does indeed satisfy most
of the requirements for libertarian free will. 6
A Modest Libertarian Proposal (redux)

                                                                              Chapter 26
      “According to typical event-causal libertarian views, the proxi-
      mate causes of free actions indeterministically cause them. This
      is a consequence of the typical event-causal libertarian ideas
      that free actions have proximate causes and that if an agent
      freely A-s at t in world W, he does not A at t in some other pos-
      sible world with the same laws of nature and the same past up
      to t. Now, approximate causes of actions, including actions that
      are decisions, are internal to agents.” 7
      “In light of the general point about the proximate causation of
      actions, typical event-causal libertarianism encompasses a com-
      mitment to what may be termed agent-internal indeterminism.

  5       Mele (2006) p. 7.
  6       See Chapter 5.
  7       Mele (2006) p. 9.
         342   Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                   “What I call modest libertarianism (see Mele 1995, pp. 211-
                   21) embraces that commitment, too, even though it rejects the
                   idea that the proximate causes of free actions indeterministi-
                   cally cause the actions. Indeterministic worlds in which every
                   instance of causation within any agent is deterministic are hos-
                   tile environments for libertarian freedom. What libertarians
                   want that determinism precludes is not merely that agents have
                   open to them more than one future that is compatible with
                   the combination of the past and the laws of nature, but that,
                   on some occasions, which possible future becomes actual is
                   in some sense and to some degree up to the agents. The want
                   something that seemingly requires that agents themselves be
                   indeterministic in some suitable way - that some relevant things
                   that happen under the skin are indeterministically caused by
                   other such things. The focus is on psychological events, of
                   course (as opposed, for example, to indeterministically caused
                   muscle spasms), and, more specifically, on psychological events
                   that have a significant bearing on action.
                   “Requiring internal indeterminism for free action and moral
                   responsibility is risky. To be sure, quantum mechanics, accord-
                   ing to leading interpretations, is indeterministic. But indeter-
                   minism at that level does not ensure that any human brains
                   themselves sometimes operate indeterministically, much less
                   that they sometimes operate indeterministically in ways appro-
Chapter 26




                   priate for free action and moral responsibility. One possibility,
                   as David Hodgson reports, is that “in systems as hot, wet, and
                   massive as neurons of the brain, quantum mechanical indeter-
                   minacies quickly cancel out, so that for all practical purposes
                   determinism rules in the brain” (2002, p. 86). Another is that
                   any indeterminism in the human brain is simply irrelevant to
                   free action and moral responsibility. Modest libertarians join
                   other event-causal libertarians in taking this risk.” 8
                   “In principle, an agent-internal indeterminism may provide for
                   indeterministic agency while blocking or limiting our proxi-
                   mal control over what happens only at junctures at which we
                   have no greater proximal control on the hypothesis that our
                   universe is deterministic. Obviously, in those cases in which

               8       Mele (2006) p. 10.
                   Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                   343

 we act on the basis of careful, rational deliberation, what we do
 is influenced by at least some of the considerations that “come
 to mind” — that is, become salient in consciousness — during
 deliberation and by our assessments of considerations. Now,
 even if determinism is true, it is false that, with respect to every
 consideration — every belief, desire, hypothesis, and so on —
 that comes to mind during our deliberation, we are in control of
 its coming to mind, and some considerations that come to mind
 without our being in control of their so doing may influence the
 outcome of our deliberation. Furthermore, a kind of internal
 indeterminism is imaginable that limits our control only in a
 way that gives us no less proximal control than we would have
 on the assumption that determinism is true, while opening up
 alternative deliberative outcomes. (Although, in a determinis-
 tic world, it would never be a matter of genuine chance that a
 certain consideration came to mind during deliberation, it may
 still be a matter of luck relative to the agent’s sphere of control.)
 As I put it in Mele 1995, “Where compatibilists have no good
 reason to insist on determinism in the deliberative process as
 a requirement for autonomy, where internal indeterminism
 is, for all we know, a reality, and where such indeterminism
 would not diminish the nonultimate control that real agents
 exert over their deliberation even on the assumption that real
 agents are internally deterministic — that is, at the intersection
 of these three locations — libertarians may plump for ultimacy-


                                                                           Chapter 26
 promoting indeterminism (p. 235). Modest libertarians try to
 stake out their view at this intersection.” 9
 “One kind of possible deliberator may be so constituted that no
 beliefs and desires of his that are directly relevant to the topic of
 his current deliberation have a chance of not coming to mind
 during his deliberation, whereas it is causally open whether
 some of his indirectly relevant beliefs and desires will come to
 mind. The causally open possibilities of this kind do not need
 to be extensive to secure the possibility of more than one delib-
 erative outcome. Modest libertarians both need and fear inter-
 nal indeterminism, and they are disposed to constrain it when
 engaged in the project of inventing indeterministic agents who
 can act freely and morally responsibly.” 10

9    Mele (2006) pp. 11-12.
10   ibid.
         344     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Alfred Mele here comes as close as any philosopher to my Cogito
               model of free will.
                       “The modest indeterminism at issue allows agents ample
                  control over their deliberation. Suppose a belief, hypothesis, or
                  desire that is indirectly relevant to a deliberator’s present prac-
                  tical question comes to mind during deliberation but was not
                  deterministically caused to do so. Presumably, a normal agent
                  would be able to assess this consideration. And upon reflec-
                  tion might rationally reject the belief as unwarranted, rationally
                  judge that the hypothesis does not merit investigation, or ratio-
                  nally decide that the desire should be given little or no weight in
                  his deliberation. Alternatively reflection might rationally lead
                  him to retain the belief, to pursue the hypothesis to give the
                  desire significant weight. That a consideration is indeterministi-
                  cally caused to come to mind does not entail that the agent has
                  no control over how he responds to it. Considerations that are
                  indeterministically caused to come to mind (like considerations
                  that are deterministically caused to come to mind) are nothing
                  more than input to deliberation. Their coming to mind has at
                  most an indirect effect on what the agent decides, an effect that
                  is mediated by the agent’s assessment of them. They do not set-
                  tle matters. Moreover, not only do agents have the opportunity
                  to assess these considerations, but they also have the opportu-
                  nity to search for additional relevant considerations before they
                  decide, thereby increasing the probability that other relevant
Chapter 26




                  considerations will be indeterministically caused to come to
                  mind. They have, then, at least sometimes, the opportunity to
                  counteract instances of bad luck — for example, an indetermin-
                  istically caused coming to mind of a misleading consideration
                  or, a chance failure to notice a relevant consideration. And giv-
                  en a suitable indeterminism regarding what comes to mind in
                  an assessment process, there are causally open alternative pos-
                  sibilities for the conclusion or outcome of that process.” 11
                  “Compatibilists who hold that we act freely even when we are
                  not in control of what happens at certain specific junctures in
                  the process leading to action are in no position to hold that an
                  indeterministic agent’s lacking control at the same junctures
                 11   Mele (2006) p. 12.
                     Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                  345

   precludes free action. And, again, real human beings are not
   in control of the coming to mind of everything that comes to
   mind during typical processes of deliberation. If this lack of
   perfect proximal control does not preclude its being the case
   that free actions sometimes issue from typical deliberation on
   the assumption that we are deterministic agents, it also does
   not preclude this on the assumption that we are indeterministic
   agents.
   “Now, even if garden-variety compatibilists can be led to see
   that the problem of luck is surmountable by a libertarian, how
   are theorists of other kinds likely to respond to the libertar-
   ian position that I have been sketching? There are, of course,
   philosophers who contend that moral responsibility and free-
   dom are illusions and that we lack these properties whether
   our universe is deterministic or indeterministic — for example,
   Richard Double (1991) and Galen Strawson (1986).” 12
   “Modest libertarians can also anticipate trouble from traditional
   libertarians, who want more than the modest indeterminism
   that I have described can offer. Clarke, who has done as much
   as anyone to develop an agent-causal libertarian view, criticizes
   event-causal libertarianism on the grounds that it adds no “pos-
   itive” power of control to compatibilist control but simply plac-
   es compatibilist control in an indeterministic setting. Of course,
   given that combining compatibilist control with indeterminism

                                                                            Chapter 26
   in a certain psychological sphere was my explicit strategy in
   constructing a modest libertarian position (Mele 1995, pp. 212-
   13, 217), I do not see this as an objection. In any case, tradition-
   al libertarians need to show that what they want is coherent.” 13
  In my view, there is no avoiding luck in general, but keeping
randomness out of the decision and action prevents it from un-
dermining control and responsibility
   “That requires showing that what they want does not entail or
   presuppose a kind of luck that would itself undermine moral
   responsibility. The typical libertarian wants both indetermin-
   ism and significant control at the moment of decision. That is
  12   Mele (2006) pp. 13-14.
  13   Mele (2006) p. 14.
         346     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  the desire that prompts a serious version of the worry about
                  luck I sketched earlier. In the absence of a plausible resolution
                  of the worry, it is epistemically open that a modest libertarian
                  proposal of the sort I sketched is the best a libertarian can do.
                  Of course, even if I happen to hit on the best libertarian option,
                  it does not follow that I have hit on the best option for believers
                  in free action and moral responsibility — as long as compatibil-
                  ism is still in the running.” 14
                 But true compatibilism, which assumes determinism is true, is
               not in the running. Mele and his colleagues have long ago given
               up hope for determinism being true. See the Strawson/Fischer/
               Mele hypothesis below.
               The Modest Libertarianism Process




                 Figure 26-1. Mele’s Modest Libertarianism.
                  Al Mele’s modest libertarianism provides what he calls an
               “incompatibilist” first stage (he means indeterminist) and a com-
Chapter 26




               patibilist second stage (he means determinist).
                  Mele does not (as do many philosophers since a mistaken read-
               ing of R. E. Hobart’s 1934 Mind article) think this determination
               of the will would imply pre-determinism.
                  Mele locates the randomness in the incompatibilist first stage
               of his two-stage model, where alternative possibilities are gener-
               ated.
                  Mele’s model is similar to Dennett’s, but he does not argue for
               Dennett’s pseudo-random (deterministic) randomness. Howev-
               er, because Mele is agnostic about the truth of determinism and
               indeterminism, he does not discuss the importance of quantum
               randomness explicitly.

                 14    Mele (2006) p. 14.
                    Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                  347


Mele’s Other Models for Free Will
   Being a self-proclaimed “agnostic” on these questions, Mele
has developed both compatibilist and libertarian positions. His
position on compatibilism needs some explaining. He says that
because contemporary compatibilists (he mentions especially
John Martin Fischer) attend to what modern quantum physics
tell us, the overwhelming majority do not believe that determin-
ism is true.
   One might then ask what they think free will is compatible
with, if not determinism. The answer is that they believe that
even if determinism were true, it would leave it open that people
sometimes act freely. “Freely” here is in the compatibilist sense of
free will that Immanuel Kant called a “wretched subterfuge and
William James called a “quagmire of evasion.” I call their idea the
Strawson/Fischer/Mele Hypothesis.
   Mele says this is the traditional framing of the problem of
whether “free action” (to be distinguished from free will”) is pre-
cluded by determinism. Ever since Hume, as long as an agent is
not coerced physically, her/his actions could be judged to be free,
even if they are part of a deterministic causal chain. But “freedom
of action” (Isaiah Berlin’s negative liberty) is distinctly not free-
dom of the will. See Chapter 3.

                                                                           Chapter 26
   Mele’s 1995 Modest Libertarianism discussed above is Mele’s
strongest two-stage model. In 1996 he developed a related posi-
tion called “Soft Libertarianism,” useful in the context of Frank-
furt-style cases. Then in his 2006 work he developed a variation
called “Daring Soft Libertarianism.”
Soft Libertarianism
   Soft libertarians find determinism unacceptable because it
claims that for all their intentions, evaluations, decisions, and sub-
sequent actions, events were in progress before they were born
that cause all those intentions and actions. This is the core concern
         348     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               of Peter van Inwagen’s Consequence Argument. Soft libertar-
               ians are not primarily motivated because indeterminism may
               provide the alternative possibilities that are denied by Frankfurt
               cases, but simply that the causal chain of determinism might be
               broken, allowing them to make a causal contribution. He says,
                  “Unlike hard libertarians, soft libertarians leave it open that
                  determinism is compatible with our actions’ being up to us in
                  a way conducive to freedom and moral responsibility [presum-
                  ably in the second stage of a two-stage model?]. However, they
                  believe that a more desirable freedom and moral responsibility
                  require that our actions not be parts of the unfolding of deter-
                  ministic chains of events that were in progress even before we
                  were born. If soft libertarians can view themselves as making
                  some choices or decisions that are not deterministically caused
                  or that are deterministically caused by, for example, something
                  that includes deliberative judgments that are not themselves
                  deterministically caused, then they can view themselves as ini-
                  tiating some causal processes that are not intermediate links in
                  a long deterministic causal chain extending back near the big
                  bang.” 15
                  Soft libertarianism differs from modest libertarianism in that
               it does not require robust alternative possibilities. But, somewhat
               inconsistently?, Mele says (p.113) that soft libertarians do not
               assert that free action and moral responsibility require the falsity
Chapter 26




               of determinism. Mele briefly mentions a “soft compatibilism,” but
               does not develop it beyond saying that “soft compatibilism leaves
               soft libertarianism open but is not committed to it.”
               Daring Soft Libertarianism
                  In his 2006 book Free Will and Luck, Mele extended his soft
               libertarian idea to “Daring Soft Libertarianism.” Mele reaches out
               to Robert Kane’s idea of Ultimate Responsibility, in which we
               can be responsible for current actions, ones that are essentially
               determined by our character and values, as long as we formed
                 15   Mele (2006) p. 97.
                     Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                 349

that character ourselves by earlier free actions that he calls Self-
Forming Actions (SFAs). SFAs in turn require brains that are not
deterministically caused by anything outside the agent.
   Some may argue that a modest libertarianism gives libertarians
all the openness they can get without introducing into an agent
a kind of openness that entails freedom-precluding and respon-
sibility-precluding luck. But libertarians like Kane will not settle
for such modest libertarianism. For them, Mele developed a more
daring soft libertarian view, DSL.
   Daring soft libertarians, he says, especially value a power to
make decisions that are not deterministically caused - a certain
initiatory power. They opt for event-causal soft libertarianism
(p. 113). They do not like decisions made indeterministically or
at random, what Mele calls basically free action. But they accept
what Mele calls basically* free action (note the asterisk), whose
requirement for alternative possibilities at the time of action are
reduced, but whose requirement for indeterministic free actions
some time in the past (Kane’s SFAs?) is intact (p. 115).
   They can then replace the indeterministic connection between
judgments and actions with a deterministic one (p. 117). (Note
this can only be the adequate determinism of the two-stage mod-
els like Mele’s modest libertarianism.)
   Mele says that,

                                                                           Chapter 26
     “Part of what DSLs are driving at in their claims about influ-
   ence is that probabilities of actions — practical probabilities —
   for agents are not always imposed on agents. Through their past
   behavior, agents shape present practical probabilities, and in
   their present behavior they shape future practical probabilities.
   The relationship between agents and the probabilities of their
   actions is very different from the relationship between dice and
   the probabilities of outcomes of tosses. In the case of dice, of
   course, the probabilities of future tosses are independent of the
   outcomes of past tosses. However, the probabilities of agents’
   future actions are influenced by their present and past actions.”16

  16   Mele (2006) p. 122.
         350     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                      “DSLs maintain that in the vast majority of cases of basi-
                  cally* free actions and actions for which agents are basically*
                  morally responsible, agents have some responsibility for the rel-
                  evant practical probabilities... These chances are not dictated by
                  external forces, and they are influenced by basically* free and
                  morally responsible actions the agents performed in the past.” 17

               The Strawson/Fischer/Mele Hypothesis
                  Mele tells me that he and John Martin Fischer subscribe to
               the view that “even if determinism is true, we would still have free
               will.” 18 This can only be what Immanuel Kant calls the “wretched
               subterfuge” of compatibilist “free will.” As I see it, this hypoth-
               esis derives from two sources. First, there is P. F. Strawson’s view
               that whether determinism or indeterminism is true, we would
               not be willing to give up moral responsibility. Second, there is
               Fischer’s view that free will is only the “control condition” for
               moral responsibility.
                  So we can restate the hypothesis as “even if determinism is true,
               we would still have moral responsibility.” Determinism is not true,
               but with this hypothesis I can completely agree.
                  And I can go farther and formulate what might be called the
               Strawson/Doyle hypothesis - “even if indeterminism is true, we
               still have free will and moral responsibility.” In my two-stage
Chapter 26




               model, indeterminism in the first stage does not prevent our will
               and our actions from being adequately determined by reasons,
               motives, feelings, etc., as compatibilists have always wanted. But
               the existence of indeterminism in the first stage means that our
               actions were not pre-determined from the moment just before
               we began to generate alternative possibilities for our actions, let
               alone from before we were born or from the origin of the universe.
                  Thoughts come to us freely. Actions go from us willfully.
                  First chance, then choice. First “free,” then “will.”
                 17   ibid. p. 123.
                 18   Personal communication.
                   Alfred Mele’s Modest Libertarianism                  351


Mele and the Libet Experiments
   Mele has lectured and written extensively on interpretations of
the Libet experiments.19 (See Chapter 17.) He has debated Daniel
Wegner, the Harvard psychologist and author of The Illusion of
Conscious Will, who claims that the experiments deny free will.
   Mele’s main criticism is what he sees as a systematic bias in data
collection. All the Libet experiments work by permanently storing
the last few seconds of data that have been collected, when trig-
gered by detecting the wrist flex itself.
   If there is no wrist flex, there is no data collected. The equally
likely (in my view) cases of a rise in the readiness potential (RP)
followed by no wrist flex would have been systematically ignored
by Libet’s method of data collection.
   It seems to imply a one-to-one relationship between initial rise
in RP and the flex, which is misinterpreted as a causal relationship.
   I explain the initial rise in the readiness potential as the first
stage in my Cogito model, where alternative possibilities for
action are being considered, including to flex or not to flex. See
pages 241-3 for more details.
Big Questions in Free Will

                                                                          Chapter 26
   Mele directs a four-year project at Florida State funded with
$4.4 million from the Templeton Foundation. He will be offering
multiple $40,000/year post-doc positions. We can expect some
significant new research on the free-will problem over the next
four years. My hope is that the post-docs will read this book.
Mele in Barcelona
   You can see a discussion between Mele, Robert Kane, and
myself on YouTube debating whether two-stage models should be
called “determined,” because the word implies pre-determinism
to so many philosophers, and our two-stage models are distinctly
not pre-determined.20
  19   Mele (2010)
  20   www.youtube.com/watch?v=iwDZUXr6dIc
