            14   Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 2




                                    ys i c s
                          M    etaph




                                                                    This chapter on the web
                                                                          metaphysicist.com
                                          informationphilosopher.com/problems/metaphysics
                                                           Metaphysics          15


 Metaphysics
   We apply methods of information philosophy to metaphysics




                                                                                     Chapter 2
and find solutions to several classic problems, puzzles and para-
doxes. You can find them all on our new website metaphysicist.
com and in our forthcoming book Metaphysics. In this chapter,
we discuss just a few of them, absolute and relative identity, the
problem of composition (parts/wholes), coinciding objects (colo-
cation), Aristotelian essentialism, the need for metaphysical pos-
sibility, and the semantics and modal logic of "possible worlds."
   Many ancient puzzles are variations on the problem of coincid-
ing objects, including Dion and Theon, the Growing Argument,
and the Statue and the Clay. We solve these puzzles.
  A central problem in information philosophy is the existential
or ontological status of ideas. The creation of new ideas requires
the existence of ontological chance. Metaphysical possibility must
therefore be a fundamental aspect of metaphysical reality.
  Information provides a unique explanation of self-identity and
the relative identity of numerically distinct objects. It also explains
the existential status of abstract entities.
   Metaphysics is an abstract human invention about the nature
of concrete reality – immaterial thoughts about material things.
Information philosophy explains the metaphysics of chance and
possibilities, which always underlie the creation of new informa-
tion. Without metaphysical possibilities, there can be no human
creativity and no new knowledge.
  A materialist metaphysics asks questions about the underly-
ing substrate presumed to constitute all the objects in the uni-
verse. Unfortunately, most modern philosophers are eliminative
materialists and determinists who think there is "nothing but" the
substrate of matter. As Jaegwon Kim puts it,
      “bits of matter and their aggregates in space-time exhaust the contents
      of the world. This means that one would be embracing an ontology
      that posits entities other than material substances — that is, imma-
      terial minds, or souls, outside physical space, with immaterial, non-
      physical properties.”1
  1       Physicalism, or Something Near Enough. p.71
            16      Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    A formalist or idealist metaphysics asks about the arrangement
                 and organization of matter that shapes material objects, what
                 brings their forms into existence, and what causes their changes
Chapter 2




                 in space and time. Information philosophy defends a Platonic
                 realm of immaterial ideas in a property dualism with the realm
                 of matter. The information realm is physical and natural. It is not
                 supernatural and “outside space and time.” Ideas are embodied
                 in matter and use energy for their communication. But they are
                 neither matter nor energy. They are forms that inform.
                    The total amount of matter (and energy) in the universe is a
                 conserved quantity. Because of the universe expansion, there is
                 ever more room in space for each material particle, ever more
                 ways to arrange the material, ever more possibilities. The total
                 information in the universe is constantly increasing. This is the
                 first contribution of information philosophy to metaphysics.
                    The second contribution is to restore a dualist idealism, based
                 on the essential importance of information communication in
                 all living things. Since the earliest forms of proto-life, informa-
                 tion stored in each organism has been used to create the following
                 generations, including the variations that have evolved to become
                 thinking human beings who have invented the world of ideas
                 that contains metaphysics. Abstract information is an essential, if
                 immaterial, part of reality. Plato was right that his “ideas” (ἰδέας)
                 are real. Plato's forms inform.
                    A third contribution from information philosophy adds biology
                 to the analysis of metaphysical problems which began in puzzles
                 over change and growth. The parts of living things – we call them
                 biomers – are communicating with one another, which integrates
                 them into their “wholes” in a way impossible for mere material
                 parts – we find a biomereological essentialism.
                    The arrangement of individual material particles and their
                 interaction is abstract immaterial information. The metaphysics
                 of information can explain the cosmic creation process underly-
                 ing the origin of all information structures in the universe and the
                 communication of information between all living things, which
                                                  Metaphysics           17

we will show use a meaningful biological language, consisting of
arbitrary symbols. Biological communications have evolved to
become human language.




                                                                             Chapter 2
  Ontology asks the question “what is there?”
   Eliminative materialism claims that nothing exists but mate-
rial particles, which makes many problems in ancient and modern
metaphysics difficult if not insoluble. To be sure, we are made
of the same material as the ancient metaphysicians. With every
breath we take, we inspire 10 or 20 of the fixed number of mol-
ecules of air that sustained Aristotle. We can calculate this because
the material in the universe is a constant.
   But information is not a fixed quantity. The stuff of thought and
creativity, information has been increasing since the beginning of
the universe. There is ever more knowledge (but relatively little
increase in wisdom?) With hundreds if not thousands of times as
many philosophers as ancient Greece, can we still be debating the
same ancient puzzles and paradoxes?
   Information philosophy restores so-called “non-existent
objects” to our ontology. Abstract entities consist of the same kind
of information that provides the structure and process informa-
tion of a concrete object. What we call a “concept” about an object
is some subset of the immaterial information in the object, accu-
rate to the extent that the concept is isomorphic to that subset.
  Epistemology asks, “how do we know what there is?”
   Immaterial information provides a new ground for epistemol-
ogy, the theory of knowledge. We know something about the
“things themselves” when we discover an isomorphism between
our abstract ideas and concrete objects in the material world. But
words and names are not enough. Information philosophy goes
beyond the logical puzzles and language games of analytic phi-
losophy. It identifies knowledge as information in human minds
and in the external artifacts of human culture.
            18       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     Abstract information is the foundation – the metaphysical
                 ground – of both logic and language as means of communication.
                 It is a dual parallel to the material substrate that the Greeks called
Chapter 2




                 ὑποκείμενον - the “underlying.” It gives matter its form and shape.
                 Form informs.
                    Much of formal metaphysics is about necessary relationships
                 between universal ideas, certain knowledge that we can believe
                 independent of any experience, knowledge that is “a priori” and
                 “analytic” (true by logic and reason alone, or by definition). Some
                 of these ideas appear to be unchanging, eternal truths in any pos-
                 sible world.
                    Information philosophy now shows that there is no necessity
                 in the natural world. Apodeictic certainty is just an idea. There
                 is no a priori knowledge that was not first discovered empirically
                 (a posteriori). Only after a fact is discovered do
                                                                          There is no
                 we see how to demonstrate it logically as a priori.
                                                                     necessity in the
                 And everything analytic is part of a humanly con-
                                                                       natural world
                 structed language, and thus synthetic. All such
                 “truths” are philosophical inventions, mere con-
                 cepts, albeit some of the most powerful ideas ever to enter the
                 universe.
                    Most important, a formal and idealistic metaphysics is about
                 abstract entities, in logic and mathematics, some of which seem to
                 be true independent of time and space. Aristotle, the first metaphy-
                 sician, called them “first principles” (archai, axioma). Gottfried
                 Leibniz said they are true in all possible worlds, which is to say
                 their truth is independent of the world.
                    But if these abstract metaphysical truths are not material,
                 where are these ideas in our world? Before their discovery, they
                 subsisted as unknown properties. Once invented and discovered
                 to be empirical facts, they are embedded in material objects, arti-
                 facts, and minds – the software in our hardware. Those ideas that
                 are invented but not found empirically “real” (imagined fictions,
                 flawed hypotheses, round squares) are also added to the sum of
                 human knowledge, even if never embodied.
                                                 Metaphysics            19

   Many unchanging abstract entities share a property that the
early philosophers Parmenides, Plato, and Aristotle called “Being,”
to distinguish its nature from “Becoming,” the property of all
material objects that change with time. Certain truths cannot pos-




                                                                             Chapter 2
sibly change. They are eternal, “outside space and time.”
   It is unfortunate that information philosophy undermines the
logical concepts of metaphysical necessity, certainty, the a priori
and analytic, even truth itself, by limiting their analyticity to the
unchanging abstract entities in the realm of Being. But, on the
positive side, information philosophy now establishes the meta-
physical possibility of ontological possibilities.
   Possibilities depend on the existence of irreducible ontological
chance, the antithesis of necessity. Without metaphysical possi-
bilities, no new information can be created.
   Information philosophy and metaphysics restore an immate-
rial mind to the impoverished and deflated metaphysics that we
have had since empiricism and naturalism rejected the dualism of
René Descartes and its troublesome mind-body problem.
  Naturalism is a materialism. Just as existentialism is a human-
ism. Even stronger, naturalism is an eliminative materialism. It
denies the immaterial and particularly the mental.
  While information philosophy is a form of the great dualism
of idealism versus materialism, it is not a substance dualism.
Information is a physical, though immaterial, property of matter.
Information philosophy is a property dualism.
   Abstract information is neither matter nor energy, although it
needs matter for its embodiment and energy for its communica-
tion.
  Information is immaterial. It is the modern spirit, the ghost in
the machine. It is the mind in the body. It is the soul. And when
we die, our personal information and its communication perish.
The matter remains.
  Information is the underlying currency of all communication
and language. Passive material objects in the universe contain
            20         Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 information, which metaphysicians and scientists analyze to
                 understand everything material. But passive material objects do
                 not create, actively communicate, and process information, as do
Chapter 2




                 all living things.
                   Realism is the ontological commitment to the existence of
                 material things. Information realism is equally committed to the
                 existence or subsistence of immaterial, but physical, ideas.
                    Human language is the most highly evolved form of informa-
                 tion communication in biology. But even the simplest organisms
                 signal their condition and their needs, both internally among
                 their smallest parts and externally as they compete with other
                 living things in their environment.
                    Biosemioticians convincingly argue that all the messages in
                 biology, from the intracellular genetic codes sent to the ribosomes
                 to produce more of a specific protein, to the words in sentences
                 like this one, are a meaningful part of one continuously evolv-
                 ing semantic system. All messaging is as purposeful as a human
                 request for food, so biology is called teleonomic, though not teleo-
                 logical. This “telos” or purpose in life did not pre-exist life.2
                    Like human language, the signs used in biological messages can
                 be symbolic and arbitrary, having no iconic or indexical or any
                 other intrinsic relation between a signifier and the signified con-
                 cept or object. Like human signs, the meaning of a biological sign
                 is highly dependent on the context. Only four neurotransmitters
                 act as primary messengers sent to a cell, inside of which one of
                 dozens of secondary messengers may be activated to determine
                 the use inside the particular cell - the ultimate Wittgensteinian
                 “meaning as use” in the message.
                    Modern Anglo-American metaphysicians think problems in
                 metaphysics can be treated as problems in language, potentially
                 solved by conceptual analysis. They are analytical language phi-
                 losophers. But language is too flexible, too ambiguous and full
                 of metaphor, to be a diagnostic tool for metaphysics. We must
                 go beyond language games and logical puzzles to the underlying
                 information contained in a concept or object.
                   2     See Appendix G on Biosemiotics.
                                                  Metaphysics             21

   Information philosophy restores the metaphysical existence of
a realm that is “beyond the natural” in the sense since at least
David Hume and Immanuel Kant that the “laws of nature”




                                                                               Chapter 2
completely determine everything that exists, everything that hap-
pens, in the phenomenal and material world.
   Although the immaterial realm of information is not “super-
natural” in any way, the creation of information throws consider-
able light on why so many humans, though few scientists, believe
– correctly as it turns out – that there is a providential force in the
universe.3
   Martin Heidegger, the philosopher of “Being,” called
Friedrich Nietzsche the “last metaphysician.” Nietzsche
thought that everything in his “lebensphilosophie” was the cre-
ation of human beings. Indeed, when we are creative, what we
create is new information.
   Did we humans “discover” the abstract ideas, or did we “invent”
them and then find them to be true of the world, including those
true in any possible world?
  As opposed to an analytic language metaphysician, a meta-
physicist searches for answers in the analysis of immaterial (but
physical) information that can be seen when it is embodied in
external material information structures. Otherwise it can only
be known – in minds.
   Metaphysical truths are pure abstract information, subsisting
in the realm of ideas.
  Metaphysical facts about the world are discovered when there
are isomorphisms between abstract ideas and the concrete struc-
tures in the external world that embody those ideas.
   Information philosophy bridges the ideal and material worlds
of Plato and Aristotle and the noumenal and phenomenal worlds
of Kant. It demonstrates how immaterial minds are a causal force
in the material world, connecting the psychological and phe-
nomenological with the “things themselves,” which are seen as
embodiments of our ideas.

  3     See chapter 7.
            22       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    The causal force of ideas, combined with the existence of alter-
                 native possibilities, is the information philosophy basis for human
                 free will.
Chapter 2




                    What are we to say about a field of human inquiry whose major
                 problems have hardly changed over two millennia? Information
                 philosophy looks at a wide range of problems in metaphysics,
                 situating each problem in its historical framework and providing
                 accounts of the best work by today’s metaphysicians. Metaphy-
                 sicians today are analytic language philosophers, some of whom
                 work on a surprisingly small number of metaphysical problems
                 that began as puzzles and paradoxes over two thousand years ago.
                    The metaphysicist adds biological knowledge and quantum
                 physics to help investigate the fundamental nature of reality.
                 David Wiggins called for the former and E. Jonathan Lowe
                 called for the latter. David Chalmers thinks information may
                 help solve the "hard problem" of consciousness.
                    An information-based metaphysics provides a single explana-
                 tion for the origin and evolution of the universe as well as life on
                 Earth. Since the beginning, it is the creation of material infor-
                 mation structures that underlies all possibilities. From the first
                 living thing, biological communication of information has played
                 a causal role in evolution.
                   Metaphysics must include both the study of matter and its
                 immaterial form. A quantum particle is pure matter. The quantum
                 wave function is pure abstract information about possibilities.
                   The metaphysics of possibility grounds the possibility of meta-
                 physics.
                 Possibility and Possible Worlds
                    In the “semantics of possible worlds,” necessity and possibil-
                 ity in modal logic are variations of the universal and existential
                 quantifiers of non-modal logic. Necessary truth is defined as
                 “truth in all possible worlds.” Possible truth is defined as “truth
                 in some possible worlds.” These abstract notions about “worlds” –
                 sets of propositions in universes of discourse – have nothing to do
                 with physical possibility, which depends on the existence of real
                                                 Metaphysics            23

contingency. Propositions in modal logic are required to be true or
false. Contingent statements that are neither true or false are not
allowed. So much for real possibilities in modal logic!




                                                                             Chapter 2
   Historically, the opposition to metaphysical possibility has
come from those who claim that the only possible things that can
happen are the actual things that do happen. To say that things
could have been otherwise is a mistake, say the eliminative mate-
rialists and determinists. Those other possibilities simply never
existed in the past. The only possible past is the past we have actu-
ally had.
  Similarly, there is only one possible future. Whatever will
happen, will happen. The idea that many different things can
happen, the reality of modality and words like “may” or “might”
used in everyday conversation, have no place in metaphysical
reality. The only “actual” events or things are what exists. For
“presentists,” even the past does not exist. Everything we remem-
ber about past events is just a set of “Ideas.” And philosophers
have always been troubled about the ontological status of Plato’s
abstract “Forms,” entities like the numbers, geometric figures,
mythical beasts, and other fictions.
  Traditionally, those who deny alternative possibilities in this
way have been called “Actualists.”
   Reading the last half-century with the development of modal
logic, one might think that metaphysical possibilities have been
restored. So-called modal operators like “necessarily” and “pos-
sibly” have been added to the structurally similar quantification
operators “for all” and “for some.” The metaphysical literature is
full of talk about “possible worlds.”
   The most popular theory of possible worlds is David Lewis’s
“modal realism,” an infinite number of worlds, each of which
is just as actual (eliminative materialist and determinist) for its
inhabitants as our world is for us.
   There are no genuine possibilities in Lewis’s “possible worlds”!
It comes as a shock to learn that every “possible world” is just
as actual, for its inhabitants, as our world is for us. There are no
alternative possibilities, no contingency, no things that might
            24       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 have been otherwise, in any of these possible worlds. Every world
                 is as physically deterministic as our own.
                                         Modal logicians now speak of a “rule of
Chapter 2




                   There are no
                   possibilities in necessitation” at work in possible world
                   David Lewis's      semantics. The necessarily operator and the
                   possible worlds possibly operator are said to be “duals” - either
                                      one can be defined in terms of the other, so
                 either can be primitive. But most axiomatic systems of modal
                 logic appear to privilege necessity and de-emphasize possibility.
                 They rarely mention contingency, except to say that the necessity
                 of identity appears to rule out contingent identity statements.
                    The rule of necessitation is that “if p, then necessarily p.” It
                 gives rise to the idea that if anything exists, it exists necessarily.
                 This is called “necessitism.” The idea that if two things are identi-
                 cal, they are necessarily identical. The “necessity of identity” was
                 “proved” by Ruth Barcan Marcus in 1947, by her thesis adviser
                 F. B. Fitch in 1952, and by Willard Van Orman Quine in 1953.
                 David Wiggins in 1965 and Saul Kripke in 1971 repeated the
                 arguments, with little or no reference to the earlier work.
                 Naming and Necessity
                    Perhaps Kripke's most famous work is his idea that proper
                 names are "rigid designators" that are necessarily true in all pos-
                 sible worlds. That is to say, the same individual in other possible
                 worlds must have exactly the same name. This raises the ques-
                 tion of "trans-world identity." Must every possible property of
                 any individual be exactly the same? According to Leibniz's Law,
                 which Kripke uses, two entities are only identical if every prop-
                 erty they have is identical. So far, so good. But what about the
                 property of being in two different worlds, two different places?
                 If that one property differs, why shouldn't many other propeties,
                 including their names?
                    Kripke and Hilary Putnam famously asked whether the word
                 "water" and the molecular formula H2O are necessarily the same
                 in all possible worlds, because water is a "natural kind?"
                                                 Metaphysics            25


   There is simply no necessity in the physical world, neither the
actual world nor "possible" other worlds. Necessitism exists only
in the ideal worlds of logic and mathenatics.




                                                                             Chapter 2
   The emphasis on necessitation in possible-world semantics
leads to a flawed definition of possibility, one that has no connec-
tion with the ordinary and scientific meanings of possibility.
   Modal logicians know little if anything about real possibilities
and nothing at all about possible physical worlds. Their possible
worlds are abstract universes of discourse, sets of propositions that
are true or false. Contingent statements, that may be either true or
false, like statements about the future, are simply not allowed in
systems of formal logic.
   Modal logicians define necessary propositions as those that are
“true in all possible worlds.” Possible propositions are those that
are only “true in some possible worlds.” This is the result of forc-
ing the modal operators ‘necessarily’ and ‘possibly’ to correspond
to the universal and existential quantification operators ‘for all’
and ‘for some.’ But the essential nature of possibility is the con-
junction of contingency and necessity. Contingency is defined as
the not impossible and the not necessary.
   We propose the existence of a metaphysical possibilism along-
side the notion of necessitism.
   “Actual possibilities” exist in minds and in quantum-mechan-
ical “possibility functions” It is what we might call “actual possi-
bilism,” the existence in our actual world of possibilities that may
never become actualized, but that have a presence as abstract enti-
ties that have been embodied as ideas in minds. In addition, we
include the many possibilities that occur at the microscopic level
when the quantum-mechanical probability-amplitude wave func-
tion collapses, making one of its many possibilities actual.
Actual Possibles
  Although there are no genuine possibilities in Lewis’s “possible
worlds,” we can explain the existence of “actual possibles” in meta-
physical terms using the possible world semantics of Saul Kripke,
            26         Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 who maintained that his semantics could be used to describe vari-
                 ous ways our actual world might have been. Unlike many other
                 “possible world” interpretations, Kripke accepts that empirical
Chapter 2




                 facts in the physical world are contingent, that many things might
                 have been otherwise. Kripke’s counterfactuals are genuinely dif-
                 ferent ways the actual world might have been or might become.
                       I will say something briefly about ‘possible worlds’. (I hope to elab-
                       orate elsewhere.) In the present monograph I argued against those
                       misuses of the concept that regard possible worlds as something like
                       distant planets, like our own surroundings but somehow existing in a
                       different dimension, or that lead to spurious problems of ‘transworld
                       identification’. Further, if one wishes to avoid the Weltangst and phil-
                       osophical confusions that many philosophers have associated with
                       the ‘worlds’ terminology, I recommended that ‘possible state (or his-
                       tory) of the world’, or ‘counterfactual situation’ might be better. One
                       should even remind oneself that the ‘worlds’ terminology can often be
                       replaced by modal talk—’It is possible that . . .’
                       ‘Possible worlds’ are total ‘ways the world might have been’, or states or
                       histories of the entire world.4
                    Following Kripke, we build a model structure M as an ordered
                 triple <G, K, R>. K is the set of all “possible worlds,” G is the
                 “actual world,” R is a reflexive relation on K, and G ε K.
                   If H1, H2, and H3 are three possible worlds in K, H1RH2 says
                 that H2 is “possible relative to” or “accessible from” H1, that every
                 proposition true in H2 is possible in H1.
                    Indeed, the H worlds and the actual world G are all mutually
                 accessible and each of these is possible relative to itself, since R is
                 reflexive.
                   Now the model system M assigns to each atomic formula
                 (propositional variable) P a truth-value of T or F in each world
                 H ε K.
                    Let us define the worlds H1, H2, and H3 as identical to the real
                 world G in all respects except the following statements describing
                 actions of a graduating college student Alice deciding on her next
                 step.

                   4       Naming and Necessity, p. 15, 18
                                                  Metaphysics             27

 In H1, the proposition “Alice accepts admission to Harvard
Medical School” is true, but false in other worlds, so “possible.”
  In H2, the proposition “Alice accepts admission to MIT” is true.




                                                                               Chapter 2
   In H3, the proposition “Alice postpones her decision and takes
a ‘gap year’” is true.
  At about the same time, in the actual world K, the statement
“Alice considers graduate school” is true.
   Note that the abstract information that corresponds to the three
possible worlds H is embodied physically in the matter (the neu-
rons of Alice’s brain) in the actual world and in the three possible
worlds. There is no issue with the “transworld identity” of Alice
as there would be with Lewis’s “modal realism,” because all these
possible worlds are in the same spatio-temporal domain.
   The metaphysical question is which of the three possible worlds
becomes the new actual world, say at time t. What is the funda-
mental structure of reality that supports the simultaneous exis-
tence of alternative possibilities?
   Just before time t, we can interpret the semantics of the model
structure M as saying that the above statements were “merely pos-
sible” thoughts about future action in Alice’s mind.
   Note also that just after the decision at time t, the three possible
alternatives remain in Alice’s experience recorder and reproducer
as memories.
  Some consequences of Alice’s alternative possible decisions.
   In the future of world H1, Alice’s research discovers the genetic
signals used in messaging by cancer cells and cancer is eliminated.
Several hundred million lives are saved (extended) in Alice’s life-
time.
   In the future of world H2, Alice engineers the miniaturization
of nuclear weapons so they are small enough to be delivered by
tiny drones. One is stolen from an air force base by a terrorist and
flown to an enemy country where millions of lives are lost. Alice
kills herself the next day.
            28       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    In the future of world H3, a mature Alice returns to school,
                 completes her Ph.D. in Philosophy at Princeton and writes a book
                 titled Free Will and Moral Responsibility.
Chapter 2




                 Actualism
                   Actualism appeals to philosophers who want the world to be
                 determined by physical laws and by theologians who want the
                 world to be in the hands of an omnipotent, omniscient, and
                 benevolent god.
                    Some physicists think the future is causally closed under deter-
                 ministic laws of nature and the “fixed past.” If the knowledge that a
                 Laplacian “super-intelligence” could gather about all the motions
                 of material particles at a single instant is fixed for all time, then
                 everything today might have been pre-determined from the earli-
                 est moments of the physical universe.
                   The special theory of relativity, for example, describes a four-
                 dimensional “block universe” in which all the possible events of
                 the future already exist alongside those of the past. It makes “fore-
                 knowledge” of the future conceivable.
                   Diodorus Cronus dazzled his contemporaries in the fourth
                 century BCE with sophisticated logical arguments, especially par-
                 adoxes, that “proved” there could be only one possible future.
                    Diodorus’ Master Argument is a set of propositions designed
                 to show that the actual is the only possible and that some true
                 statements about the future imply that the future is already deter-
                 mined. This follows logically from his observation that if some-
                 thing in the future is not going to happen, it must have been that
                 statements in the past that it would not happen must have been
                 true.
                    Modern day “actualists” include Daniel Dennett, for whom
                 determinism guarantees that the actual outcome is and always
                 was the only possible outcome. The notion that we can change the
                 future is absurd, says Dennett, change it from what to what?
                   The ancient philosophers debated the distinction between
                 necessity and contingency (between the a priori and the
                                                  Metaphysics             29

a posteriori). For them, necessity included events or concepts
that are logically necessary and physically necessary, contingency
those that are logically or physically possible. In the middle ages




                                                                               Chapter 2
and the enlightenment, necessity was often contrasted with free-
dom. In modern times it is often contrasted with mere chance.
   Causality is often confused with necessity, as if a causal chain
requires a deterministic necessity. But we can imagine chains
where the linked causes are statistical, and modern quantum
physics tells us that all events are only statistically caused, even if
for large macroscopic objects the statistical likelihood approaches
certainty for all practical purposes. The apparent deterministic
nature of physical laws is only an “adequate” determinism.
  In modern philosophy, modal theorists like David Lewis dis-
cuss counterfactuals that might be true in other “possible worlds.”
Lewis’ work at Princeton may have been inspired by the work of
Princeton scientist Hugh Everett III. Everett’s interpretation of
quantum mechanics replaces the “collapse” of the wave function
with a “splitting” of this world into multiple worlds.
   According to the Schrödinger equation of motion, the time evo-
lution of the wave function describes a “superposition” of possible
quantum states. Standard quantum mechanics says that interac-
tion of the quantum system with other objects causes the system
to collapse into one of these possible states, with probability given
by the square of the “probability amplitude.”
   One very important kind of interaction is a measurement by a
“conscious observer.”5
  In standard quantum theory, when a measurement is made,
the quantum system is “projected” or “collapsed” or “reduced”
randomly into a single one of the system’s allowed states. But if
the system was “prepared” in one of these “eigenstates,” then the
measurement will find it in that state with probability one (that is,
with certainty).
  So modern physics does not deny the possibility of a certain
measurement outcome, with probability equal to one, or even an
impossible one, with probability equal to zero. But these are very
special physical circumstances.
  5     See chapter 18
            30       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 Identity
                  In information philosophy, identity depends on the total infor-
                 mation in an object or concept.
Chapter 2




                    We distinguish the intrinsic information inside the object (or
                 concept) from any relational information with respect to other
                 objects that we call extrinsic or external. We can “pick out” the
                 intrinsic information as that which is “self-identical” in an object.
                 The Greeks called this the πρὸς ἑαυτο - self-relation. or ἰδίος
                 ποιὸν, “peculiar qualifications” of the individual.
                    Self-identity, then, is the fact that the intrinsic information as
                 well as the extrinsic relational or dispositional information are
                 unique to this single object. No other object can have the same
                 disposition relative to other objects. This is an absolute kind of
                 identity. Some metaphysicians say that such identity is logically
                 necessary. Some say self-identity is the only identity, but we can
                 now support philosophers who argue for a relative identity.
                    To visualize our concept of information identity, imagine put-
                 ting yourself in the position of an object. Look out at the world
                 from its vantage point. No other object has that same view, that
                 same relation with the objects around you, especially its relation
                 with you. Now another object could have intrinsic information
                 identicality. We will in fact identify a very large number of objects
                 and concepts in the world that are intrinsically identical, includ-
                 ing natural and artifactual kinds, which we may call digital kinds,
                 since they are identical, bit for bit.
                   We can now offer three fundamental facts about identity:
                   Id1. Everything is identical to everything else in some respects.
                    Id2. Everything is different from everything else in some other
                 respects.
                    Id3. Everything is identical to itself in all respects at each
                 instant of time, but different in some respects from itself at any
                 other time.
                                                  Metaphysics            31

   We can rewrite these observations in terms of information phi-
losophy
  I1. Any two things have some information in common.




                                                                              Chapter 2
  I2. Any two things have some different information.
   I3.The identity of anything over time is changing because the
information in it (and about it) is changing with time.
   These three observations might be called information axioms.
Armed with them, we are in a position to “dis-solve” or decon-
struct some of the most famous metaphysical puzzles and para-
doxes.
A Criterion for Identity
   After accepting the fundamental fact that nothing is perfectly
identical to anything but itself, the criterion for relative identity,
for identical “in some respect,” or qua that respect, is that some
subset of the information in two different things must be the same
information, bit for bit.
   Relative identity means that a can be the same I as b, but not
the same E as b, where I is the sum of all the intrinsic properties
and relations - internal self-relations between an object’s differ-
ent parts. For physical objects, these could be within some physi-
cal boundary, subject to conditions of vagueness. In a biological
entity, it also includes the vast communications going on inside
and between the cells, which makes it much more than a mereo-
logical sum of its parts.
  The E for an object is the sum of extrinsic relations an object has
with things outside, including its disposition in space and time.
  Mathematically, ∫iF(x) = ∫iG(x) , but ∫eF(x) ≠ ∫eG(x) , which says
that F(x) and G(x) are identical over their intrinsic domains (i)
but differ over their extrinsic domains (e) .
  Set theoretically, in classical propositional calculus, we can say
that Ia is the set of intrinsic properties and internal relations that
            32       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 can be predicated in propositions about an object a. Ea is the set of
                 extrinsic relations. We can now describe why absolute identity is
                 limited to self-identity.
Chapter 2




                   If Ia + Ea = Ib + Eb, then a and b are one and the same object.
                    And, if Ia = Ib, then a and b are relatively identical, qua their
                 information content.
                   Note that while self-identity is reflexive, symmetric, and an
                 equivalence self-relation, relative identity is often none of these.
                 This is because, unlike Max Black’s identical spheres, Saul
                 Kripke’s natural kinds, and our many digital clones, some part of
                 the information in a and b may be identical, but the information
                 that is not identical may also differ in quantity. We can say that if
                 aRb is 60% identical, bRa may be only 10% identical.
                    Extensional quantification over things in analytic language
                 philosophy is about their set membership, which is dependent on
                 language references to the properties of objects.
                    By contrast, quantification in information philosophy is a cal-
                 culation of the total information content in the entities, in prin-
                 ciple, free of language ambiguities, in practice, very difficult.
                 A Criterion for Essence
                    Information identity suggests a possible definition of the
                 “essence” of an object, what is “essential” about it. Furthermore, if
                 two objects are considered “essentially” the same, we can pick out
                 the subset of information that corresponds to that “essence.”
                    A subset of the intrinsic information may be essential with
                 respect to (qua) some concept of the object. As Edmund Husserl
                 emphasized, our concepts about objects depend on our intentions,
                 our intended uses of the object, which give it different (pragmatic)
                 meanings. We can say that an essence is the subset of an object’s
                 information that is isomorphic to the information in the concept.
                   What we call a “concept” about a material object is usually some
                 subset of the information in the object, accurate to the extent that
                                                Metaphysics            33

the concept is isomorphic to that subset. By “picking out” differ-
ent subsets, we can sort objects. We can compare objects, finding
them similar qua one concept and different qua another concept.




                                                                            Chapter 2
We can say that “a = b” qua color but not qua size.
   But there are concepts that may have little to do with the
intrinsic peculiar information about an object. They are concepts
imposed on the object by our intended uses of it.
   We must distinguish these extrinsic essences – our external
ideas and concepts about what the object is – from the intrinsic
essences that depend only on the object itself and its own pur-
poses, if any. The essences we see in an object are subjective, but
we may define an objective essence as the total intrinsic informa-
tion, including internal messaging, in the object.
   Husserl and Gottlob Frege both pointed out that our ideas
are dependent on our personal experience. Experience constrains
and amplifies our possible concepts. Two persons may get the
general “sense” or “meaning” of something referred to, but Frege
said the “idea” or representation (Vorstellung) in each mind can be
very different, based on that individual’s experience. Information
philosophy locates the creation of meaning in the responses of the
experience recorder and reproducer (ERR) to different stimuli.
   The relation “identical to,” between two numerically distinct
concrete or abstract entities, is the source of logical puzzles and
language games through the ages that are little more than verbal
disputes. Most such disputes are easily resolved or “dis-solved” by
paying careful attention to all the information, all the particular
properties, intrinsic and extrinsic, of the two entities that may be
identical qua some particular properties.
Coinciding Objects
   The problem of coinciding objects (sometimes called coloca-
tion) is whether two things can be in the same place at the same
time. Common sense says that they cannot.
  John Locke described the impossibility that two things of the
same kind should exist in the same place at the same time.
            34       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     ANOTHER occasion the mind often takes of comparing, is the very
                     being of things, when, considering anything as existing at any deter-
                     mined time and place, we compare it with itself existing at another
Chapter 2




                     time, and thereon form the ideas of wherein identity and diversity.
                     When we see anything to be in any identity place in any instant of
                     time, we are sure (be it what it will) that it is that very thing, and not
                     another which at that same time exists in another place, how like and
                     undistinguishable soever it may be in all other respects: and in this
                     consists identity, when the ideas it is attributed to vary not at all from
                     what they were that moment wherein we consider their former exis-
                     tence, and to which we compare the present. For we never finding, nor
                     conceiving it possible, that two things of the same kind should exist in
                     the same place at the same time, we rightly conclude, that, whatever
                     exists anywhere at any time, excludes all of the same kind, and is there
                     itself alone. 6
                   In modern metaphysics, the problem of coinciding objects
                 should be the question of whether one mass of material – what the
                 Greeks called substrate or ὑποκείμενον (“the underlying”) – could
                 contain the whole of two (or more) separate objects containing
                 that same mass.
                   It is now common for many identity theorists to claim that the
                 whole of one object and the whole of another can occupy just
                 the same place at just the same time. Among them, according to
                 Michael Burke, are Roderick Chisholm, E. Jonathan Lowe,
                 Saul Kripke, and David Wiggins.
                    But it is not clear that this was the ancient problem in debates
                 between the Academic Skeptics and the Stoics. In modern times,
                 multiple ancient puzzles are used to pose the problem of coin-
                 ciding objects. One is the Statue and the Clay from which it is
                 sculpted. Another is Dion and Theon, known as the “body-minus”
                 problem. Another is Tibbles, the Cat and a similar cat missing his
                 tail. A third is the Stoic Chrysippus’s so-called “Growing Argu-
                 ment.”
                   All these modern claims that there can be two “coinciding
                 objects” can be shown to be distinguishing between different
                 aspects, in particular, the matter and form, of a single object,

                    6     Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Of Identity and Diversity, Book II,
                 ch xxvii
                                                              Metaphysics            35

giving them different names, and then arguing that they have dif-
ferent persistence conditions.
  Aristotle’s Metaphysics makes perhaps the earliest and clearest




                                                                                          Chapter 2
such distinction, using the example of a statue and its matter.
      The term “substance” (οὐσία) is used, if not in more, at least in
      four principal cases; for both the essence and the universal and the
      genus are held to be the substance of the particular (ἑκάστου), and
      fourthly the substrate (ὑποκείμενον). The substrate is that of which
      the rest are predicated, while it is not itself predicated of anything else.
      Hence we must first determine its nature, for the primary substrate
      (ὑποκείμενον) is considered to be in the truest sense substance.
      Now in one sense we call the matter (ὕλη ) the substrate; in another,
      the shape (μορφή); and in a third, the combination Both matter and
      form and their combination are said to be substrate of the two. By
      matter I mean, for instance, bronze; by shape, the arrangement of the
      form (τὸ σχῆμα τῆς ἰδέας); and by the combination of the two, the
      concrete thing: the statue (ἀνδριάς). Thus if the form is prior to the
      matter and more truly existent, by the same argument it will also be
      prior to the combination.7
  Aristotle clearly sees the statue as a combination of its form/
shape and its matter/clay.
   Of course Aristotle sees no problem with the body and soul of
a person being combined in one substance (οὐσία), but a hundred
or so years after Aristotle, the Academic Skeptics attacked the
Stoics, saying Stoics were making single things into dual beings,
two objects in the same place at the same time, but indistinguish-
able. And this may have been the beginning of the modern prob-
lem.
   The “two things” that bothered the Skeptics appeared first in the
“growing argument” described by the later second century BCE
Stoics, Posidonius and Mnesarchus, as reported by Stobaeus in
the fifth century CE. What is it that grows, they asked, the mate-
rial substance or the peculiar qualities of the individual? But note
that this is still matter versus form. The substance (matter) does
not grow. It is the individual that grows.
      The substance neither grows nor diminishes through addition or sub-
      traction, but simply alters, just as in the case of numbers and mea-
      sures. And it follows that it is in the case of peculiarly qualified indi-

  7       Metaphysics, Book VII, § iii, 1-2
            36        Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                     viduals, such as Dion and Theon, that processes of both growth and
                     diminution arise.
                     Therefore each individual’s quality actually remains from its genera-
Chapter 2




                     tion to its destruction, in the case of destructible animals, plants and
                     the like. In the case of peculiarly qualified individuals they say that
                     there are two receptive parts, the one pertaining to the presence of the
                     substance, the other to that of the qualified individual...
                     The peculiarly qualified thing is not the same as its constituent sub-
                     stance. Nor on the other hand is it different from it, but is all but the
                     same, in that the substance both is a part of it and occupies the same
                     place as it, whereas whatever is called different from something must
                     be separated from it and not be thought of as even part of it...8
                    Like Aristotle, the Stoics were distinguishing the individual’s
                 “constituent substance” from the “peculiar qualifications” of the
                 individual.
                    The Stoic term for “constituent substance” or substrate, follow-
                 ing Aristotle, was ὑποκείμενον. Their term for the unique person,
                 possibly separate from the material body, was ἰδίος ποιὸν - a par-
                 ticular individual “who,” for example, Socrates, as opposed to
                 κοινός ποιὸν, a general “whoness,” for example, a human being.
                   But in the vehement debates of the third century BCE the Aca-
                 demic skeptics laughed at the Stoics for seeing a dual nature in
                 man. Their most famous puzzle was the coinciding objects of Dion
                 and Theon (reframed by Peter Geach as the puzzle of Tibbles,
                 the Cat and a similar cat lacking a tail).
                    Plutarch, writing in the first century CE, accused the Stoics
                 of “crazy arithmetic” and absurdity, that “each of us is a pair of
                 twins, two-natured and double, joined in some parts but separate
                 in others, two bodies sharing the same color, the same shape, the
                 same weight, the same place,”
                     Yet this difference and distinction in us no one has marked off or dis-
                     criminated, nor have we perceived that we are born double, always in
                     flux with one part of ourselves, while remaining the same people from
                     birth to death with the other...
                    8     Stobaeus (I,177,21 - 179,17, in The Hellenistic Philosophers, A.A.Long and
                 D.N.Sedley, v.1, p.168
                                                           Metaphysics                37

    If when we hear Pentheus in the tragedy say that he sees two suns and
    a double Thebes we say he is not seeing but mis-seeing, going crazy in
    his arithmetic, then when these people propose that, not one city, but




                                                                                           Chapter 2
    all men, animals, trees, furniture, implements and clothes are double
    and two-natured, shall we not reject them as forcing us to misthink
    rather than to think?9
   Another early statement is in the first century BCE.
    That what concerns the peculiarly qualified is not the same as what
    concerns the substance, Mnesarchus says is clear. For things which are
    the same should have the same properties. For if, for the sake of argu-
    ment, someone were to mould a horse, squash it, then make a dog, it
    would be reasonable for us on seeing this to say that this previously
    did not exist but now does exist. So what is said when it comes to the
    qualified thing is different.
    So too in general when it comes to substance, to hold that we are
    the same as our substances seems unconvincing. For it often comes
    about that the substance exists before something’s generation, before
    Socrates’ generation, say, when Socrates does not yet exist, and that
    after Socrates’ destruction the substance remains although he no
    longer exists.10
An Information Analysis of “Coinciding Objects”
   Most of these metaphysical puzzles start with a single object,
then separate it into its matter and its form, giving each of them
names and declaring them to be two coinciding objects. Next we
postulate a change in either the matter or the form, or both. It is
of course impossible to make a change in one without the other
changing, since we in fact have only one object.
   But our puzzle maker asks us to focus on one and insist that the
change has affected the status of only that one, usually claiming
that the change has caused that one to cease to exist. This follows
an ancient view that any change in material constitutes a change
in identity. But the modern metaphysicist knows that all objects
are always changing and that a change in identity may always pre-
serve some information of an entity. The puzzle claims that an
   9      “Against the Stoics on Common Conceptions” 1083, The Hellenistic Philoso-
phers, A.A.Long and D.N.Sedley, v.1, p.166-7
   10     ibid, p.168
            38       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 aspect of the object persists if the relative identity, or identity “in
                 some respect” has not changed.
                   To create a paradox, we use two of our axioms about identity,
Chapter 2




                   Id1. Everything is identical to everything else in some respects.
                    Id2. Everything is different from everything else in some other
                 respects.
                    We (in our minds) “pick out” one respect whose identity per-
                 sists over time because of Id1 and a second respect which changes
                 in time because of Id2.
                    We now have one object that both persists and does not persist
                 (in different respects, of course), the very essence of a paradox.
                 We call them different objects to create the puzzle.
                    For example, in the case of the statue and the clay, Mnesarchus’s
                 original version assumed that someone moulds a horse, then
                 squashes it. We are asked to pick out the horse’s shape or form.
                 The act of squashing changes that shape into another relatively
                 amorphous shape. The object changes its identity with respect
                 to its shape. Mnesarchus said it would be reasonable to see this
                 sequence of events as something coming into existence and then
                 ceasing to exist. The most obvious thing changing is the horse
                 shape that we name “statue.”
                    By design of the puzzle, there is no change in the amount of
                 clay, so the matter is considered identical over time with respect
                 to the amount of clay. The clay persists.
                    We now claim to have seen a difference in persistence condi-
                 tions. The object qua clay persists. The object qua statue goes in
                 and out of existence.
                   But this is just a way of talking about what has happened because
                 a human observer has “picked out” two different aspects of the
                 one object. As the statue is being smashed beyond recognition,
                 every part of the clay must move to a new position that accom-
                 modates the change in shape of the statue. There are changes in
                                                  Metaphysics            39

the clay with identical information to the change in the shape of
the statue. These we ignore to set up the puzzle.
   In more modern versions of the statue and clay puzzle, we can




                                                                              Chapter 2
make a change in the matter, for example by breaking off an arm
and replacing it with a new arm made of different material but
restoring the shape. We ignore the change in form, although it
was obviously a drastic change until the restoration, and we focus
on the clay, making the claim that the original clay has ceased to
exist and new clay come into existence.
  In either case, the claim to see different persistence conditions is
the result of focusing on different subsets of the total information.
   When identity theorists say that the whole of one object and
the whole of another can occupy just the same place at just the
same time, they are never talking about two objects of the same
type, kind, or sort. They are always “picking out” different aspects
of a single object and giving them differing existential status.
Composition (Parts and Wholes)
   Debates about the relation of parts to wholes is a major part
of modern metaphysics. Many puzzles have to do with different
persistence conditions of the “parts” of a composited whole, as we
saw with the idea of coinciding objects.
   “Mereological universalism” or extensional mereology is an
abstract idea, defined in 1937 by Stanislaw Leśniewski and later
by Henry Leonard and Nelson Goodman (1940). It claims that
any collection of things, for example the members of a set in sym-
bolic logic, can be considered as the parts of a whole, a “fusion”
or “mereological sum,” and thus can compose an object. Critics
of this idea says that such arbitrary collections are just “scattered
objects.” A mind-independent connection between things is
needed for them to be considered integral “parts.”
  That connection is to be found in the information that led to the
whole in the first place and/or is now maintaining that integrity.
            40       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                    “Mereological essentialism” is Roderick Chisholm’s radical
                 idea that every whole has its parts necessarily and in every pos-
                 sible world. This goes too far. No physical object can maintain its
Chapter 2




                 parts indefinitely and freeze its identity over time. Recall our third
                 axiom of identity:
                    Id3. Everything is identical to itself in all respects at each
                 instant of time, but different in some respects from itself at any
                 other time.
                    “Mereological nihilism” is the opposite extreme. Peter van
                 Inwagen and the early Peter Unger denied the existence of
                 composites, seeing them as simples (partless entities) arranged to
                 look like a composite object. For van Inwagen, a table is “simples
                 arranged table-wise.”
                    It is the information in the process that is doing the arranging is
                 responsible for the composite whole.
                   Van Inwagen made a surprising exception for living objects. He
                 bases the composite nature of biological entities on the Cartesian
                 dualist view that humans are thinking beings!
                   Van Inwagen’s says that his argument for living beings as
                 composite objects is based on the Cartesian “Cogito,” I think,
                 therefore I am.
                     My “reasons for believing in organisms,” therefore, are reasons for
                     stopping where I do and not going on to maintain that there are no
                     organisms but are only simples arranged organically. My argument
                     for the existence of organisms, it will be remembered, involved in an
                     essential way the proposition that I exist.11
                   With van Inwagen’s exception of living things, and now that
                 Unger has abandoned his own form of nihilism in recent years,
                 both philosophers now accept that they themselves exist (sic).
                   Van Inwagen could see no obvious demarcation level at which
                 even the simplest living things should not be treated as composite
                 objects. We shall see that it is biological information that makes a
                 whole being out of just matter and energy.
                   Information philosophy and metaphysics ask who or what is
                 doing the arranging? Information provides a more fundamental
                   11    Material Beings, p.213
                                                  Metaphysics            41

reason than van Inwagen’s for treating living things as integrated
composites and not simply mereological sums of scattered objects.
Furthermore, it extends a true composite nature to artifacts and




                                                                              Chapter 2
to groupings of living things because they share a teleonomic
property – a purpose. And it shows how some “proper parts” of
these composites can have a holistic relation with their own parts,
enforcing transitivity of part/whole relations.
   A process that makes a composite object an integrated whole
we call teleonomic (following Colin Pittendrigh, Jacques
Monod, and Ernst Mayr) to distinguish it from a teleological
cause with a “telos” pre-existing all life. Teleonomy is the explana-
tory force behind van Inwagen’s “arrangement” of simple parts.
  Biological parts, which we can call biomers, are communicat-
ing systems that share information via biological messaging with
other parts of their wholes, and in many cases communicate with
other living and non-living parts of their environments. These
communications function to maintain the biological integrity (or
identity) of the organism and they control its growth. Artifacts
have their teleonomy imposed by their creators. For example,
when a carpenter cuts the wood for a table, it is the “telos,” the
end or purpose for the table, that “arranges it table-wise.”
   Biocommunications are messages transferring information,
inside the simplest single-cell organisms. For the first few bil-
lion years of life these were the only living things, and they still
dominate our planet. Their messages are the direct ancestors of
messages between cells in multicellular organisms. They evolved
to become all human communications, including the puzzles and
problems of metaphysics. A straight line of evolution goes from
the first biological message to this book of Great Problems.
   Like many metaphysical problems, composition arose in the
quarrels between Stoics and Academic skeptics that generated
several ancient puzzles still debated today. But it has roots in Aris-
totle’s definition of the essence (ουσία), the unchanging “Being”
of an object. We will show that Aristotle’s essentialism has a bio-
logical basis that is best understood today as a biomereological
            42       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 essentialism. It goes beyond mereological sums of scattered
                 objects because of the teleonomy shared between the parts,
                 whether living or dead, of a biomeric whole.
Chapter 2




                    The essence of an object, the “kind” or “sort” of object that it
                 “is”, its “constitution,” its “identity,” includes those “proper” parts
                 of the object without which it would cease to be that sort or kind.
                 Without a single essential part, it loses its absolute identity.
                    While this is strictly “true,” for all practical purposes most
                 objects retain the overwhelming fraction of the information that
                 describes them from moment to moment, so that information
                 philosophy offers a new and quantitative measure of “sameness”
                 to traditional philosophy, a measure that is difficult or impossible
                 to describe in ordinary language.
                    Nevertheless, since even the smallest change in time does make
                 an entity at t + Δt different from what it was at t, this has given rise
                 to the idea of “temporal parts.”
                 Temporal Parts
                   Philosophers and theologians, e.g., Alfred North Whitehead
                 and Jonathan Edwards, have argued for distinct temporal parts,
                 with the idea that each new part is a completely new creation ex
                 nihilo. The world is newly created at every instant! Even modern
                 physicists (e.g., Hugh Everett III) talk as if parallel universes are
                 brought into existence at an instant by quantum experiments that
                 collapse the wave function.
                    David Lewis, who claims there are many possible worlds,
                 is a proponent of many temporal parts. His theory of “perdur-
                 ance” asserts that the persistence through time of an object is as a
                 series of completely distinct entities, one for every instant of time.
                 Lewis’s work implies that the entire infinite number of his possible
                 worlds (as “real” and actual as our world, he claims), must also be
                 entirely created anew at every instant.
                   While this makes for great science fiction and helps to pop-
                 ularize metaphysics, at some point attempts to understand the
                                                Metaphysics            43

fundamental nature of reality must employ Occam’s Razor and
recognize the fundamental conservation laws of physics. If a new
temporal part is created ab initio, why should it bear any resem-




                                                                            Chapter 2
blance at all to its earlier version?
  It is extravagant in the extreme to suggest that all matter dis-
appears and reappears at every instant of time. It is astonishing
enough that matter can spontaneously be converted into energy
and back again at a later time.
   Most simple things (the elementary particles, the atoms and
molecules of ordinary matter, etc.) are in stable states that exist
continuously for long periods of time, and these compose larger
objects that persist through “endurance,” as Lewis describes the
alternative to his “perdurance.” Large objects are not absolutely
identical to themselves at earlier instants of time, but the differ-
ences are infinitesimal in terms of information content.
   The doctrine of temporal parts ignores the physical connec-
tions between all the “simples” at one instant and at the follow-
ing moment. It is as if this is an enormous version of the Zeno
paradox of the arrow. The arrow cannot possibly be moving when
examined at an instant. The basic laws of physics describe the con-
tinuous motions of every particle. They generally show very slow
changes in configuration – the organizational arrangement of the
particles that constitutes abstract information about an object.
   One might charitably interpret Lewis as admitting the endur-
ance of the elementary particles (or whatever partless simples he
might accept) and that perdurance is only describing the con-
stant change in configuration, the arrangement of the simples, the
information, that constitute or compose the whole.
   Then Lewis’s temporal parts would be a series of self-identical
objects that are not absolutely identical to their predecessors and
successors, just a temporal series of highly theoretical abstract
ideas, perhaps at the same level of (absurd) abstraction as his pos-
sible worlds?.
            44       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   Is a temporal part a reasonable concept? What exactly is a part?
                 And what constitutes a whole? For each concept, there is a strict
                 philosophical sense, an ordinary sense, and a functional or teleo-
Chapter 2




                 nomic sense.
                   In the strict sense, a part is just some subset of the whole. The
                 whole itself is sometimes called an “improper part.”
                    In the ordinary sense, a part is distinguishable, in principle sep-
                 arable, from other neighboring parts of some whole. The small-
                 est possible parts are those that have no smaller parts. In physics,
                 these are the atoms, or today the elementary particles, of matter.
                   In the functional sense, we can say that a part serves some pur-
                 pose in the whole. This means that it has may be considered a
                 whole in its own right, subordinate to any purpose of the whole
                 entity. Teleonomic examples are the pedals or wheel of a bicycle,
                 the organs of an animal body, or the organelles in a cell.
                    The teleonomic sense of an object is that it seems to have a
                 purpose, the Greeks called it a telos, either intrinsic as in all living
                 things, or extrinsic as in all artifacts, where the purpose was
                 invented by the object’s creator.
                   The most important example of a teleonomic process is of
                 course biology. Every biological organism starts with a first cell
                 that contains all the information needed to accomplish its “pur-
                 pose,” to grow into a fully developed individual, and, for some, to
                 procreate others of its kind.
                   By contrast, when a philosopher picks out an arbitrary part of
                 something, declaring it to be a whole something for philosophical
                 purposes, perhaps naming it, the purpose is simply the philoso-
                 pher’s intention of analyzing it further.
                    For example, something that has no natural or artifactual basis,
                 that does not “carve nature at the joints,” as Plato described it, that
                 arbitrarily and violently divides the otherwise indivisible, may be
                 a perfectly valid philosophical “idea,” an abstract entity.
                                                      Metaphysics          45

  But temporal parts do not “carve nature at the joints.” They do
not capture the fundamental nature of reality.
  Temporal parts are bad metaphysics.




                                                                                Chapter 2
  Aristotelian Essentialism
  Aristotle knew that most living things can survive the loss of
various parts (limbs, for example), but not others (the head). By
analogy, he thought that other objects (and even concepts) could
have parts (or properties) that are essential to its definition and
other properties or qualities that are merely accidental.
  Aristotelian essentialism is the study of those essential parts.
   For Aristotle, and in ordinary use, not every part of a whole
is a necessary part (let alone in all possible worlds). Much of the
verbal quibbling in metaphysical disputes is about objects that are
defined by language conventions as opposed to “natural kinds”
that we can recognize by their information contents.
   When we can identify the origin and current processing of that
information, we have the deep metaphysical sense of essence.
Aristotle called the arrangement “the scheme of the ideas.”
   By matter I mean, for instance, bronze; by shape, the arrangement of
   the form (τὸ σχῆμα τῆς ἰδέας); and by the combination of the two, the
   concrete thing: the statue (ἀνδριάς)12
  Information philosophy provides the deep reason behind
Aristotle’s essentialism for living things and artifacts.
   The “parts” of biological organisms are created and maintained
(arranged) by anti-entropic processes that distribute matter and
energy to all the vital parts. There is a purpose or “telos.” Aris-
totle called it a built-in telos or “entelechy” (loosely translated
as “having the final cause within”). The telos is implemented by
messaging between all the vital parts or “proper parts.” A bio-
mereological essentialism notes that every biomer (a biological
part) is normally in direct or indirect communication with vast
numbers of other biomers in the living organism and with the
extra-cellular environment. Communication is information that

  12   Metaphysics, Book VII, § vii
            46       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 is neither matter nor energy. It is the ideal content of the message
                 that implements the organism’s “telos.” Some examples...
                   • Human artifacts. Here the “telos” comes from the creator.
Chapter 2




                 The leg of a table is an essential part of the original design. Such
                 proper parts often have recognizable functions, so when they are
                 missing the whole is no longer functional.
                   • Physical combinations of elementary particles into nuclei and
                 chemically emergent combinations of atoms – water from hydro-
                 gen and oxygen and salt from sodium and chlorine.
                    • Cosmological and other material objects formed with an
                 anti-entropic process that created their information. Astronomi-
                 cal bodies were pulled together by gravity into information struc-
                 tures. Crystals grow information rich structures (e.g., snowflakes).
                   Many of these “wholes” can survive the loss of some parts. But
                 we are back quibbling. When their efficient/material causes and
                 their formal and final causes are “teleonomic” and not simply
                 arbitrary human conventions, we can say these are “natural kinds.”
                    The problem of composition becomes more severe when some
                 metaphysicians consider matter to be infinitely divisible, just as
                 the real number line contains an infinite number of numbers
                 between any two numbers (and a higher order of infinity of irra-
                 tional numbers!).
                    By contrast, the metaphysicist’s view is that matter is discrete,
                 not infinitely divisible like the continuous spatial and tempo-
                 ral dimensions. The Greek materialists argued for simple atoms
                 separated by a void. Ludwig Boltzmann and Albert Einstein
                 showed that the atoms of nineteenth-century chemistry really
                 exist. In modern physics the simplest elementary particles are
                 quarks, leptons, and bosons. So let’s suppose that we have a region
                 of space with two oxygen atoms in it. It seems reasonable to say
                 that it contains two simple things (the atoms).
                   Peter van Inwagen denies the mereological sum. David
                 Lewis defends it. Recent mereological debates in metaphysics
                 have taken this form:
                                                  Metaphysics            47

  Mereological nihilist: There are two things in this region.
   Mereological universalist: There are three things in this region
(the two simples and the mereological sum).




                                                                              Chapter 2
   Now a metaphysicist can still argue cleverly and cogently about
the proper number of parts and the choice of the proper whole.
The oxygen atoms each contain eight protons, eight neutrons, and
eight electrons. So one possible count is the 48 sub-atomic par-
ticles that are visible. We can go deeper by noting that the nuclear
particles are each made up of three quarks, which are not observ-
able. We then can count 112 parts to the whole?
   And the metaphysicist has a strong argument for the two
simple atoms to be considered a whole. If the two atoms are very
close, they can form an oxygen molecule. Even when disassoci-
ated, quantum mechanics that treats them as a quasi-molecule is
more accurate than a description as two independent atoms.
Why Modal Logic Is Not Metaphysics
   Modal logicians from Ruth Barcan Marcus to Saul Kripke,
David Lewis, and the necessicist Timothy Williamson are right
to claim metaphysical necessity as the case in the purely abstract
informational world of logic and mathematics. But when infor-
mation is embodied in concrete matter, which is subject to the
laws of quantum physics and ontological chance, the fundamental
nature of material reality is possibilist.
   There are two reasons for the failure of modal logic to represent
metaphysical reality. The first is that information is vastly superior
to language as a representation of reality. The second is that truths
and necessity cannot be the basis for metaphysical possibility.
   Possible world semantics is a way of talking about universes
of discourse - sets of true propositions - that considers them
“worlds.” It may be the last gasp of the attempt by logical positiv-
ism and analytic language philosophy to represent all knowledge
of objects in terms of words.
            48       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   Ludwig Wittgenstein’s core idea from the Tractatus had the
                 same goal as Gottfried Leibniz’s ambiguity-free universal lan-
                 guage,
Chapter 2




                    “The totality of true propositions is the whole of natural science
                 (or the whole corpus of the natural sciences)”13
                    Information philosophy has shown that the meaning of words
                 depends on the experiences recalled in minds by the experience
                 recorder and reproducer (ERR).14 Since every human being has
                 a different set of experiences, there will always be variations in
                 meaning about words between different persons.
                    The goal of intersubjective agreement in an open community of
                 inquirers hopes to eliminate those differences, but representation
                 of knowledge in words will always remain a barrier and source of
                 philosophical confusion. The physical sciences use analytic differ-
                 ential equations to describe the deterministic and continuous time
                 evolution of simple material objects, which is a great advance over
                 ambiguous words. But these equations fail at the quantum level
                 and where discrete digital messages are being exchanged between
                 biological interactors. Moreover, while mathematical methods are
                 precise, their significance is not easily grasped.
                    The very best representation of knowledge is with a dynamic
                 and interactive model of an information structure, what Ludwig
                 Wittgenstein may have seen as a model and “picture of reality.”
                 Today that is a three-dimensional model implemented in a digi-
                 tal computer with a high-resolution display, even a virtual reality
                 display, some day visible on the Internet. While computer models
                 are only “simulations” of reality, they incorporate the best “laws”
                 of physics, chemistry, and biology.
                    Sadly, modal logicians have never proposed more than a hand-
                 ful of specific propositions for their possible worlds, and many
                 of these generated controversies, even paradoxes, about sub-
                 stitutivity of presumed identicals in modal contexts. Word and
                 object have degenerated to words and objections. By comparison,
                 molecular models of the extraordinary biological machines that
                   13   Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 4.11
                   14   See Appendix E.
                                                  Metaphysics            49

have evolved to keep us alive and let us think can be “shown,” not
said, just as Wittgenstein imagined.
   His later work can be summed up as the failure of language




                                                                              Chapter 2
to be a picture of reality. Information philosophy gives us that
picture, not just a two-dimensional snapshot, but a lifelike anima-
tion and visualization of the fundamental nature of metaphysical
reality.
   Our information model incorporates the irreducible onto-
logical chance and future contingency of quantum physics. The
claimed “necessity of identity,” and the “necessary a posteriori” of
natural and artificial digital “kinds” with identical intrinsic infor-
mation content are just more “ways of talking.” There is no neces-
sity in the physical world.
  Truths and necessity are ideal concepts “true in all possible
worlds,” because they are independent of the physical world. They
have great appeal as eternal ideas “outside space and time.”
   Possible worlds semantics defines necessity as “propositions
true in all possible worlds” and possibility as “propositions true
in some possible worlds.” There is no contingency here, as the
only allowed propositions are either true or false. Modal logicians
have little knowledge of our actual physical world and zero factual
knowledge, by definition, of other possible worlds. The possible
worlds of “modal realism” are all actual worlds, deterministic and
eliminatively materialist. There are no possibilities in possible
worlds, even the equally deterministic “many worlds” of physics.
  A necessicist metaphysics is only a half-truth. Without meta-
physical possibility, we cannot account for the information in the
universe today, nor can we explain the cosmic, biological, and
human creation of new information in our free and open future.
  Necessitism and possibilism are another variation of the great
duals of idealism and materialism.15 See possibilist.com.
  History of Metaphysics
   Metaphysics has signified many things in the history of phi-
losophy, but it has not strayed far from a literal reading of “beyond

  15    See the table of dualisms in chapter 9.
            50       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 the physical.” The term was invented by the first-century BCE
                 head of Aristotle’s Peripatetic school, Andronicus of Rhodes,
                 who edited and arranged Aristotle’s works, giving the name Meta-
Chapter 2




                 physics (τα μετα τα φυσικα βιβλια), literally “the books beyond
                 the physics,” perhaps the books to be read after reading Aristotle’s
                 books on nature, which he called the Physics.
                     Aristotle never used the term metaphysics. For Plato, Aristo-
                 tle’s master, the realm of abstract ideas was more “real” than that
                 of physical objects, because ideas could be more permanent (the
                 Being of Parmenides), whereas material objects are constantly
                 changing (the Becoming of Heraclitus). Neoplatonists like
                 Porphyry worried about the existential status of the Platonic
                 ideas. Does Being exist? What does it mean to say “Being Is”?
                   Aristotle’s original concerns in his “First Philosophy” were
                 ontology (the science of being), cosmology (the fundamental pro-
                 cesses and original causes of physical things), and theology (is a
                 god required as a "first mover" or “first cause?”).
                    Aristotle’s Physics describes four “causes” or “explanations”
                 (aitia) of change and movement of objects already existing in
                 the universe (the ideal formal and final causes, vs. the efficient
                 and material causes). Aristotle’s metaphysics can then be seen as
                 explanations for existence itself. What exists? What is it to be?
                 What processes can bring things into (or out of) existence? Is
                 there a cause or explanation for the universe as a whole?
                    In critical philosophical discourse, metaphysics has perhaps
                 been tarnished by its Latinate translation as “supernatural,” with
                 its strong theological implications. But from the beginning, Aris-
                 totle’s books on “First Philosophy” considered God among the
                 possible causes of the fundamental things in the universe. Tracing
                 the regress of causes back in time as an infinite chain, Aristotle
                 postulated a first cause or “uncaused cause.” Where every motion
                 needs a prior mover to explain it, he postulated an “unmoved first
                 mover.” These postulates became a major element of theology
                 down to modern times.
                                                       Metaphysics          51


   Metaphysics is the division of philosophy which includes ontol-
ogy, or the science of being, and cosmology, or the science of the
fundamental causes and processes of things. The primary mean-




                                                                                 Chapter 2
ing of metaphysics is derived from those discussions by Aristotle
which later commentators suggested should be read before Aris-
totle's great works on Physics and other subjects.
   For medieval philosophers, metaphysics was understood as the
science of the supersensible. Albertus Magnus called it sci-
ence beyond the physical. Thomas Aquinas narrowed it to the
cognition of God. Aquinas argued that 1) God had given man the
power of reason, 2) God had used reason to create the universe, so
that 3) man can use reason alone to understand the world.
  John Duns Scotus disagreed with Aquinas, arguing that God’s
omnipotence is not constrained by reason. God has freedom of
the will, so only study of the world as it has been created can yield
knowledge of the world and thus God. Scotus was arguably the
origin of British empiricism, just as Aquinas was the source of
Continental rationalism.
   René Descartes began a turn from what exists to knowledge
of what exists. He changed the emphasis from a study of being to a
study of the conditions of knowledge or epistemology. For empir-
icists in England like John Locke and David Hume, metaphysics
includes the “primary” things beyond psychology and “second-
ary” sensory experiences. They denied that any knowledge was
possible apart from experimental and mathematical reasoning.
Hume thought metaphysics is sophistry and illusion.
   If we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics,
   for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning con-
   cerning quantity or number? No. Does it contain any experimental
   reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence? No. Commit it
   then to the flames: for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illu-
   sion.16

  16   (Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, section XII)
            52       Great Problems of Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                   In Germany, Immanuel Kant’s Critiques of Reason claimed
                 a transcendental and noumenal realm for pure, or a priori, reason
                 beyond the merely phenomenal. The phenomenal realm is deter-
Chapter 2




                 ministic, matter governed by Newton’s laws of motion. The nou-
                 menal is the metaphysical realm of the “things themselves” along
                 with freedom, God, and immortality. Kant also identified ontol-
                 ogy not with the inaccessible things themselves but what we can
                 think - and reason - about the things themselves. In either case, he
                 thought metaphysical knowledge might be impossible for “finite”
                 minds.
                    The notion that metaphysics transcends experience and the
                 material world led to nineteenth-century positivists like August
                 Comte and Ernst Mach, and twentieth-century empiricists
                 like Rudolf Carnap and Moritz Schlick, also denying the
                 possibility of metaphysical knowledge.
                    Naturalism is the anti-metaphysical claim that there is nothing
                 in the world beyond the material (including energy), that every-
                 thing follows “laws of nature,” and that these laws are both causal
                 and deterministic. So “supernatural” appears to imply the free-
                 dom to break the laws of nature. Information philosophy denies
                 the supernatural. But it defends immaterial information as that
                 which constitutes the human spirit, or soul, the “ghost in the
                 machine.” And it defends ontological chance as the generator of
                 novel possibilities that are not determined by the “fixed past.”
                    Positivism is the claim that the only valid source of knowledge
                 is sensory experience, reinforced by logic and mathematics.
                 Together these provide the empirical evidence for science. Com-
                 tean positivism rejected metaphysics and theology as obsolete
                 earlier phases in the development of knowledge.
                    Mach’s positivism claimed that science consists entirely of
                 “economic summaries” of the facts (the results of experiments).
                 He rejected theories about unobservable things like Ludwig
                 Boltzmann’s atoms, just a few years before Albert Einstein
                 used Boltzmann’s work to prove that atoms exist.
                                               Metaphysics           53

  The logical positivism of Bertrand Russell and Ludwig
Wittgenstein claims that all valid knowledge is scientific
knowledge, though science is often criticized for “reducing” all




                                                                          Chapter 2
phenomena to physical or chemical events. The logical positivists
may have identified ontology not with the things themselves but
what we can say - using concepts and language - about the things
themselves. Logical positivists and the logical empiricists of the
Vienna Circle asserted that all knowledge is scientific knowledge,
that it is derived from experience, i.e., from verifiable observa-
tions. They added the logical analysis of language as a tool for
solving philosophical problems. They divided statements into
those reducible to simpler statements about experience and those
with no empirical basis, which they called “metaphysical” and
“meaningless.”
   Most analytic language philosophers of the mid-twentieth
century continued to deny traditional metaphysics, which P. F.
Strawson famously called “obscure and panicky.” But starting
in the 1970’s a new group of analytic-language metaphysicians
defended a new materialist and determinist metaphysics grounded
in modal thinking about possible worlds.
  See metaphysicist.com for discussions of the work of David
Armstrong, Michael Burke, David Chalmers, Rod Chisholm,
Peter Geach, David Lewis, E. Jonathan Lowe, Trenton Merricks,
Huw Price, Willard van Orman Quine, Michael Rea, Nicholas
Rescher, Alan Sidelle, Ted Sider, Richard Taylor, Peter Unger,
Peter van Inwagen, David Wiggins, and Timothy Williamson.
