         332   My God, He Plays Dice!




                                 e i n’s
                            Einst akes
                             Mist
Chapter 42
                                                     Einstein’s Mistakes 333


Einstein’s Mistakes
   We must first acknowledge that Einstein’s mistakes have given
us in general more important theoretical insights than those of all
but a handful of great physicists’s successes. Einstein’s mistakes lie
behind the greatest puzzles and mysteries in physics today.
   While Einstein did not solve these mysteries, in most of
them so far neither has any other scientist provided convincing
explanations. That his phenomenal mind saw them at all is his
great gift to science.
   When we see his mistakes for what they are, and when we add
them to his extraordinary successes, Einstein emerges as the single
greatest force behind both of the leading fields of physics today,
relativity and quantum mechanics.
Fields and Particles
   Unified Field Theory
   In terms of effort spent and results achieved, surely his unified
field theory was Einstein’s greatest mistake, first because it was
deterministic, second because there are now so many fields.
   He wrote his friend Michele Besso the year before he died,
      “I consider it quite possible that physics cannot be based on
      the field concept, i.e:, on continuous structures. In that case,
      nothing remains of my entire castle in the air, gravitation
      theory included, [and of] the rest of modern physics.” 1
                                                                           Chapter42
   Space and Time
   Einstein is said to have combined space and time into a single
four-dimensional continuum. This was first done by Hermann
Minkoswki, but Einstein deserves credit for developing the four-
dimensional energy-momentum tensor that describes his theory
of general relativity.

  1       Pais, 1982, p.467
         334       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  In his later years Einstein had many doubts about the reality of
               space and time, wondering if they may be just convenient fictions,
               “free creations of the human mind,” which just happen to describe
               accurately the “real” things, the material particles.
               Quantum Physics
                  Ontological Chance
                  Without a doubt, it was Einstein’s two papers in 1916 and early
               1917 that established chance in the emission and absorption of his
               light quanta. The times and directions of light interactions with
               matter are completely indeterminate. Einstein gave credit to Ernest
               Rutherford for discovering a similar indeterminacy in radioactive
               decay.
                  Einstein said chance must be considered a “weakness in the
               theory.”
                  But it was Einstein’s proof that thermal equilibrium between
               Planck’s radiation distribution and the Maxwell-Boltzmann
               velocities distribution of matter could not be maintained without
               the emission of photons going off in all directions at random.
                  Einstein’s canonical paper on the A and B coefficients for emission
               and absorption is a foundational element of the statistical nature
               of quantum mechanics, and it predicted the stimulated emission of
               radiation that underlies the working of lasers.
                  Einstein’s mistake was to not accept for many years the conclu-
               sion that natural processes involve chance. “God does not play dice.”
Chapter 42




                  This one “mistake” explains how the universe can create
               unpredictable new information structures like atoms, stars, galaxies,
               living things, minds, and new ideas! See chapter 43.
                  The Statistical Interpretation
                  Max Born’s interpretation of the quantum mechanical wave
               function of a material particle as the probability (amplitude) of
               finding a material particle was a direct extension of Einstein’s
               interpretation of light waves as giving probability of finding photons.
                                               Einstein’s Mistakes 335

   To be sure, Einstein’s interpretation may be considered only
qualitative, where Born’s was quantitative. He made it the squared
modulus of the probability amplitude |ψ|2. The new quantum
mechanics gives us exact calculations - of statistics!
   As with his dislike of chance, Einstein was happy to give Born all
the credit, including a Nobel Prize, for the statistical interpretation.
   Nonlocality
   When Einstein first thought about a light wave spreading out in
space, only to collapse to a point when all the light was collected into
a single atom in metal to eject a single electron, he briefly thought
distributed energy must have moved faster than light to collect itself
together.
   To be sure, Einstein hypothesized that perhaps light is not
continuously distributed over an increasing space but consists of
a finite number of energy quanta which are localized at points in
space. But this did not stop him from worrying about nonlocality.
   Einstein saw spacelike separated events occurring simultaneously,
an apparent violation of his special theory of relativity, which claims
that simultaneity is impossible in an absolute sense
  Symmetry and Conservation
   EPR-Entanglement
   Einstein’s greatest biographer, Abraham Pais, concluded in 1982,
that the EPR paradox “had not affected subsequent developments
in physics, and it is doubtful that it ever will.” 2 Einstein had drawn    Chapter42
attention for decades to the appearance of nonlocality and in the
1935 EPR paper added his separation principle, but his orthodox
physicist colleagues could make no sense of his paper.
   Einstein’s mistake was to say we should absolutely agree that the
real factual situation of one system is independent of what is done
with another which is spatially separated. 3 Erwin Schrödinger
immediately pointed out that the two-particle wave function would
not separate without an interaction or measurement.t


  2     Pais, 1982, p.456
  3     Einstein, 1949a, p.85
         336         My God, He Plays Dice!

                  But it was Einstein himself who first imagined two events in a
               spacelike separation occurring simultaneously, an impossibility
               according to his own special theory of relativity.
                  Spooky Action-at-a-Distance
                  Einstein described spooky action as one particle acting
               “telepathically” on another particle spatially separated. 4 It may be
               no exaggeration to say that spooky action is one of Einstein’s greatest
               original ideas.
                  Adding “spooky” in 1949 to his decades of complaints about non-
               locality and nonseparability did catch the world’s attention.
                  But Einstein should have seen that all these cases were not
               “actions” by one particle on a distant particle. Einstein added a false
               asymmetry into a symmetric situation.
                  Schrödinger’s Cat
                  This famous cat began with Einstein criticizing the implication
               of Schrödinger’s wave equation. He told Schrödinger to imagine a
               charge of gunpowder that can spontaneously combust, on average
               once a year. Then “your ψ-function describes a sort of blend of not-
               yet and already exploded systems.” Schrödinger famously adapted
               Einstein’s idea to his cat in a “superposition” of dead and alive.
                  Both Einstein and Schrödinger were making fun of superposition,
               but Einstein should have known it was just a mathematical tool to
               calculate statistical probabilities.
                  Schrödinger switched from joking about superposition to
Chapter 42




               claiming that entanglement is the “characteristic trait” of quantum
               mechanics. He and Einstein parted ways.
               Cosmology
                  The Cosmological Constant
                  Einstein himself described the addition of a constant to his
               equations of general relativity, in order to produce a static universe,
               his “biggest blunder,” in conversation with George Gamow.5
                 4     Schilpp, 1949, p. 85
                 5     Gamow, 1970, p.44
                                              Einstein’s Mistakes 337

   The Expansion of the Universe
   Had Einstein not forced his theory to match the poor observational
data of his time, he might have speculated that the universe was
adding space by expanding or contracting, over a decade before
Edwin Hubble found the expansion of external galaxies in 1927.
   The Flat Universe
   As Einstein’s field equations for general relativity improved in
the early years, he might have noted that when the expansion rate
- the motion energy gets near the gravitational binding energy, the
overall curvature approaches zero and the “radius” of the observable
universe approaches infinity.
   As observations have improved, the universe now appears within
a factor of three of having enough matter to make the universe “flat”
and its geometry Euclidean.
   Einstein might have appreciated this symmetry between energy
and matter,
  Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics
   Gibbs-Liouville
   The conservation of any particular volume of phase space (the
Liouville theorem) led J. Willard Gibbs to claim that information
is also conserved. Einstein claimed that he did little or nothing more
than Gibbs. But this was a mistake. Gibbs’ statistical mechanics
is a formal theory that does not even mention material particles.
Einstein’s work led to the proof of the existence of atoms!              Chapter42
