         248      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                   m inis        m
                                          De t e r

                                                            t i b i l i s m
                                                  Co    mpa                 ism
                                                                   rmin
                         ter  minism               Sof   t D e t e
                  De
             Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                    o m p atibi
                                                              oft C
                                  ilism
                                                      b i l
                                                            S
                                                            i t y
                                                 onsi
                      m p a t i b
        I nco                                                                            In
H a r d
                        R e s p                                 sm
                   oral                 m p a tibili
                                      o
               M                Semic
Chapter 19




   Illus       ionism
                                                                 p atib ilism
                                                        In c o m
                                                    w
                        sm                 Narro
   Impo         ssibili
                                                                 p atib   ilism
                                                      t In c o m
                                                 Sof                                      y
                         del                                                      Leewa
                   an Mo
             Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                           a
                                          r c e I ncom nce)
                                      Sou          l S e que
                                        (Actu   a
                                                                             i m i t e d
                                                      e lw             ith L
                                                  o d
                                - S t      a ge M
                           Tw o                    This chapter on the web
               informationphilosopher.com/freedom/moral_responsibility.html
                                m inis                   m
                       de t e r                                    Moral Responsibility 249
               In
               Moral Responsibility
                            rianis
                                   m
                                                         a
                                       Libert
                  Some philosophers deflect direct discussion of free will,
               primarily, no doubt, because of the scandal that the problem has
                                                                         t -
               resisted progress for so long. They study free will indirectlyC a usal
                                                                               and
                                                               Agen
               only as the “control condition” for moral responsibility.

                                     C a u   al of articles on free will, John
                  In his four-volume collection
                                           s
               Martin Fischer
                             Ev   t- this observation.
                              enmade
                      “Some philosophers do not distinguish between freedom and
                                                                                      C aus      al
                                                                                  n -
                      moral responsibility. Put a bit more carefully, they tend to begin
                                                                              N o
                      with the notion of moral responsibility, and “work back” to a

                                                         SFA
                      notion of freedom; this notion of freedom is not given inde-
                        m
               atibilis
                      pendent content (separate from the analysis of moral respon-

     p                                                                            ity
                      sibility). For such philosophers, “freedom” refers to whatever
ncom                  to be morally responsible.1              So f t C a usal
                      conditions are involved in choosing or acting in such a way as


                          ibilism
                  Manuel Vargas
                              t agrees:
                          paclear                                                                ism




                                                                                                   Chapter 19
           I n  c o  m                                                               t a r i a n
   Broad in mind by the term “free will.” Perhaps the
                 “It  is not       that  there is any single thing that people
                                                                                 er
                                                                                have
                                                                        ft Libcharac-
                                                                                     had
                                                                   S  o
                                                                      dominant
                 terization in the history of philosophy is that it is something like
                                 a r i
                 the freedom condition a n ism on moral responsibility. Roughly, the
                                                                                                    e r taria
                           e r t
                   Libis that to be morally responsible for something,nyou                    L i b
        d  e stidea                                                           i  g  S  oft
                                                                                     had
    M o          to  have   some   amount    of  freedom,  at some
                                                                       Da   r
                                                                     suitable time prior
                 to the action or outcome for which you are responsible. That
                 sense of freedom — whatever C  ogiittoamounts to — is what we mean
          a t i bto   smat by the phrase “free will.” ... Although I think much of
                  iliget
        p
 Incom uewhat    n   c  e   ) say can be applied to other aspects of thinking about
                 it, I will be primarily concerned with free will in its connection inis
                         Iswill
                                                                                                      m
      S e q
                                                                                 ter    m
ative            to moral responsibility, the sense in which people d
                                                 i t e d              In areeappropri-
                                         L  i m
                      ately praised or blamed.2
                                 n  Id
                         m    a
                     isresponsibility,
               In the next chapter,  present arguments for separating free will

       t e r       n
            fromimoral
             m                          just as my two-stage model of free will
  D   e separates the “free” stage from the “will” stage.
                  1       Fischer (2005) v.I, p. xxiii
                  2       Fischer (2007) p. 128.
         250     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                 Indeed, I will go further and recommend that we separate
               “moral” from “responsibility.” The latter is a scientific empirical
               problem. The former is an ethical problem to be settled by moral
               philosophers and social scientists in a cultural context.
                 The focus on moral responsibility had a very specific start-
               ing point in the history of the free will problem, as we noted in
               Chapter 7 (see p. 115).
               Peter Strawson Changed the Subject
                  Peter Strawson argued in 1962 that whatever the deep meta-
               physical truth on the issues of determinism and free will, people
               would not give up talking about and feeling moral responsibility
               - praise and blame, guilt and pride, crime and punishment, grati-
               tude, resentment, and forgiveness.
                  These “reactive attitudes” were for Strawson more real than
               whether they could be explained by fruitless disputes about free
               will, compatibilism, and determinism. They were natural “facts”
Chapter 19




               of our human commitment to ordinary inter-personal attitudes.
               He said it was “a pity that talk of the moral sentiments has fallen
               out of favour,” since such talk was “the only possibility of reconcil-
               ing these disputants to each other and the facts.”
                  Strawson himself was optimistic that compatibilism could rec-
               oncile determinism with moral obligation and responsibility. He
               accepted the facts of determinism. He felt that determinism was
               true. But he was concerned to salvage the reality of our attitudes
               even for libertarians, whom he described as pessimists about de-
               terminism.
                   “What I have called the participant reactive attitudes are essen-
                   tially natural human reactions to the good or ill will or indif-
                   ference of others towards us, as displayed in their attitudes and
                   actions. The question we have to ask is: What effect would, or
                   should, the acceptance of the truth of a general thesis of deter-
                   minism have upon these reactive attitudes? More specifically,
                   would, or should, the acceptance of the truth of the thesis lead
                   to the decay or the repudiation of all such attitudes? Would, or
                   should, it mean the end of gratitude, resentment, and forgive-
                            Moral Responsibility and Free Will             251

      ness; of all reciprocated adult loves; of all the essentially per-
      sonal antagonisms?” 3
   Of course, from the earliest beginnings, the problem of “free
will” has been intimately connected with the question of moral
responsibility. Most of the ancient thinkers on the problem were
trying to show that we humans have control over our decisions,
that our actions “depend on us”, and that they are not pre-deter-
mined by fate, by arbitrary gods, by logical necessity, or by a natu-
ral causal determinism.
   But to say that today “free will is understood as the control con-
dition for moral responsibility” is to make a serious blunder in
conceptual analysis and clear thinking. Free will is clearly a pre-
requisite for responsibility. Whether the responsibility is a moral
responsibility depends on our ideas of morality.
Are only Moral Decisions Free?
   To say that a decision cannot be free unless it is a moral deci-




                                                                             Chapter 19
sion, I regard as an ethical fallacy, but it has a long tradition in the
history of philosophy.
   Some ancients and medieval thinkers argued that freedom
could be equated with morality. Men were free to do good. If they
did evil, it was the influence of some nefarious power preventing
them from doing good.
   Aristotle, Immanuel Kant, and others often describe
humans as free when we do good, otherwise as slaves to our igno-
rance. Aristotle’s equation of “virtue as knowledge” claims that we
do wrong only because we do not know the right.
   Starting with his 1985 book, Free Will and Values, Robert Kane
argued that important free choices (his Self-Forming Actions or
SFAs) are those moral and prudential decisions that have not yet
been narrowed down to an act of self-determination. He says that
the agent does not have “all-things-considered” reasons to choose
one rather than another.
   But freedom is a physical question, insofar as it is based on
arguments about determinism versus indeterminism. To be sure,
the will is in part also a psychological/physiological question.
  3       Strawson (1962) p. 10.
         252     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Responsibility is a causality question. Is the agent properly in
               the causal chain? Moral questions are not physical questions. To
               confound them is to connect ought with is.
                  Moral responsibility is a major field of ethics that can stand on
               its own without sophisticated attempts to deny the existence of
               free will. e.g., the sophistry of Frankfurt-type examples claiming
               to deny alternative possibilities and the ability to do otherwise.
               Naturalism and Moral Responsibility
                  For some Naturalists, the equation of free will and moral re-
               sponsibility is driven by their goal to eliminate what they see as
               unjust punishment, the result of a “culture of vengeance.” Their
               specious reasoning goes something like this - “If free will is re-
               quired for moral responsibility, we can deny moral responsibility
               by denying free will.”
                  Equating free will with moral responsibility, then to use spuri-
               ous arguments to deny free will, and thus to deny moral respon-
Chapter 19




               sibility - in order to oppose punishment - is fine humanism but
               poor philosophy, and terrible science.
                  Naturalists seem to naively accept the ancient religious argu-
               ments that free will is an exclusive property of humans (some
               religions limit it to males, for example). One strand in the natu-
               ralist argument then is to say that humans are animals and so we
               lack free will.
                  It will be interesting to see naturalists react to the establishment
               of a biophysical basis for behavioral freedom in lower animals.
               This behavioral freedom is conserved and shows up in higher ani-
               mals and humans as freedom of their wills, as we saw in Chapter
               16.
                  So a refined view of naturalism would be to extend behavioral
               freedom to all animals. We no longer need defend an exceptional
               human nature.
                          Moral Responsibility and Free Will             253


Even If Determinism Were True
   Alfred Mele tells me that he and John Martin Fischer have
agreed on the view that even if determinism were true, we would
still have free will.4
   This can be so for philosophers who have redefined free will
as the control condition for moral responsibility. If the world is
perfectly pre-determined, we might have no way to prove it, but
we know that moral responsibility is a natural fact of life.
   This hypothesis is just to agree with P. F. Strawson that even if
determinism were true we would not give up the reactive attitudes
of moral responsibility, so we can call it the Strawson/Fischer/
Mele hypothesis.
   In the next chapter, I argue strongly for the need to separate the
free will problem from moral responsibility, in order to analyze it
and understand it.
The Acquired Freedom of Self-Perfection




                                                                           Chapter 19
   Mortimer Adler, in two-volume work, The Idea of Freedom, de-
scribed three freedoms.5
   One was his Circumstantial Freedom of Self-Realization.
   This is voluntariness, Hobbes-Hume compatibilist freedom of
action, Berlin’s negative liberty.
   Another was the Natural Freedom of Self-Determination.
   This is Aristotle’s “up to us,” origination, alternative possibili-
ties, the libertarian freedom of the will explained by my Cogito
model.
   The third was an Acquired Freedom of Self-Perfection.
   This is becoming morally responsible. the acquired or learned
knowledge needed to distinguish right from wrong, good from
evil, true from false, etc.
   This is the answer to Manuel Vargas’ question “When do
children acquire free will? See page 259 in the next chapter.

  4     Personal communication
  5     Adler (1958) pp. 127-135, and (1961) p. 225.
