         208   My God, He Plays Dice!




                                             i l i t y
                                        arab
Chapter 27




                    n s e p
                 No




                                                            This chapter on the web
                               informationphilosopher.com/problems/nonseparability
                                              Nonseparability          209


Nonseparability
   Entangled particles are described by a single two-particle wave
function ψ12 that cannot be separated into a product of single-
particle wave functions ψ1 and ψ2 without a measurement or
external interaction that “decoheres” or “disentangles” them.
   The question for Albert Einstein and Erwin Schrödinger
was how long the particles could retain their correlation as they
traveled a great distance apart. Once disentangled, or “decohered,”
the two-particle wave function Ψ12 can be described as the product
of two single-particle wave functions Ψ1 and Ψ2 and there will no
longer be any quantum interference between them. But entangled
particles, it turns out, do not decohere spontaneously. They cannot
decohere without an external interaction (like a measurement).
   Einstein had objected to nonlocal phenomena as early as the
Solvay Conference of 1927, when he criticized the collapse of the




                                                                         Chapter 27
single-particle wave function as involving instantaneous “action-
at-a-distance” that looks like the spherical outgoing wave acting
at more than one place on the screen. He had seen single-particle
nonlocality as early as his light-quantum hypothesis paper of 1905,
as we saw in chapter 23. But we showed that the collapse of the
mathematical probabilities |Ψ|2 only involved the disappearance
of those probabilities. Without matter or energy moving, there is
no “action” being exerted on the particle by the wave.
   We can now try to understand the nonseparability of two
entangled particles in terms of single-particle nonlocality. The
entangled particles share one volume of nonlocality, i.e., wherever
the two-particle wave function has non-zero values of |Ψ12 |2.
   Quantum mechanics says that either particle has the same
possibility (with calculable probability) of appearing at any
particular location in this volume. Just as with the single-particle
nonlocality, in standard quantum mechanics we cannot say
where the two particles “are.” Either one may be anywhere up to
the moment of “collapse” of the two-particle wave function. But
conservation principles require that whenever they finally do
         210     My God, He Plays Dice!

               appear, it will be equidistant from the origin, in order to conserve
               linear momentum.
                  And more importantly, conservation principles and symmetry
               require that measurements of any particular property of the two
               particles find that they too are perfectly correlated, as we shall see
               in chapter 29.
                  Einstein’s “objective reality” assumes that the particles simply
               have continuous paths from the start of the experiment to the final
               measurement(s), although the limits of quantum measurement
               may never allow us to “know” those paths.
                  It is the fundamental principle of conservation that governs
               the correlated outcome, not some hypothetical, faster than light,
               communication of information between the particles.
                  But just because we cannot say or know a particle’s continuous
               path does not prove that it does not have a continuous path
               EPR According to Quantum Theory
Chapter 27




                  Quantum mechanics describes the probability amplitude wave
               function ψ12 of any two-particle system as in a superposition of
               two-particle states. It is not separable into a product of single-
               particle states, and there is no information about individual
               particles traveling along observable paths.
                  The Copenhagen Interpretation, by contrast, claims that
               quantum systems do not have properties until they are observed.
               And not merely measured by apparatus that records data.
               The result of the measurement must reach the mind of the
               experimenter, according to John von Neumann’s “psycho-
               physical parallelism.”
                  Einstein, however, frequently asked whether the particle has a
               position at the moment before it is measured? “Is the moon only
               there when we look at it,” he quipped. And he famously told the
               philosopher Hilary Putnam, “Look, I don’t believe that when I am
               not in my bedroom my bed spreads out all over the room, and
               whenever I open the door and come in it jumps into the corner.”
                  Einstein took the Copenhageners as saying the two particles
               may actually be anywhere that Ψ12 is non-zero, then they jump
               to places that conserve the momentum only at the measurement.
                                                 Nonseparability         211

   The particles are thought to be in a superposition of all possible
momentum or position eigenstates, as we see in the next chapter.
   Now when entangled particles experience a random interaction
with something in the environment (described as “decoherence”),
or an experimental measurement by an observer, the two-particle
wave function “collapses.”
   In the standard quantum physics view, all the possibilities/
probabilities that are not actualized go to zero, just as with the
single particle wave function. But now, two particles appear,
simultaneously in a special frame in which their center of mass is
not moving. In other moving frames, either particle may appear to
appear before the other.
   The two particles appear simultaneously, in a spacelike
separation, now disentangled, and symmetrically located about
the point of the interaction which entangled them.
   If they did not appear as symmetrically as they had been at the




                                                                           Chapter 27
beginning, both conservation laws and underlying principles of
symmetry would be violated.
   In Einstein’s “objective reality” picture, no faster-than-light
signaling is involved. There is no “action” going from one particle
to the other. Their linear momenta, correlated at their moment of
entanglement, always are correlated “locally” as they travel along
at the particles’ speed.
   The fact that momenta, and most of their properties, are found
synchronized, perfectly correlated, at later times, is because they
are always correlated until a disturbance occurs, e.g., an interaction
with the environment or a measurement by an observer.
   It is only once a disentangling interaction occurs with either
particle, that further interactions do nothing to the other, as
Einstein requires for his separability principle (Trennungsprinzip).
      But on one supposition we should, in my opinion, absolutely
      hold fast: the real factual situation of the system S2 is
      independent of what is done with the system S1, which is
      spatially separated from the former. 1
   S1 only appears to “act-at-a-distance” on S2 if we assume that S2
lacks properties until it is measured.

  1       Einstein, 1949a, p.85
