         384      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                   m inis        m
                                          De t e r

                                                            t i b i l i s m
                                                  Co    mpa                 ism
                                                                   rmin
                         ter  minism               Sof   t D e t e
                  De
             Hard                                                                 lism
                                                                    o m p atibi
                                                              oft C
                        p a t i b
                                 b
                                  ilism
                                   l e  m        s          S

H a r d I nco         m
                         e r Pro              y
                                                                                         In
                       h
                    Ot hiSleomsicoompp aht i b ilism

                     i n P       y  s i c    s
  Ill u s i o n ism
                            d P h
                        an Incompatibilism          w
                        sm                 Narro
   Impo         ssibili
                                                                 p atib ilism
                                                      t In c o m
                                                 Sof                                      y
                         del                                                      Leewa
Chapter 31




                   an Mo
             Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism          (Altern
                                                                                           a
                                          r c e I ncom nce)
                                      Sou          l S e que
                                        (Actu   a
                                                                             i m i t e d
                                                      e lw             ith L
                                                  o d
                                - S t      a ge M
                           Tw o                         This chapter on the web
                                          informationphilosopher.com/problems
                            m inis           m
                   de t e r                              Some Other Problems 385
              In
             I-Phi Philosophical
                            rianisProblems
                                   m
                                              a
                                Libert
              The fundamental question of information philosophy is cos-
             mological and ultimately metaphysical.
                                                                            inusa
                                                                            a      l
                                                                      t -
                   What is the process that creates information structuresC
                   the universe?                             Agen
                             n   t - C ausala thermodynamic
             Given the second law of thermodynamics,      which says that any
                     E  ve
          system will over     time   approach                  equilibrium of

                                                                                    sal
          maximum disorder or entropy, in which all information is lost,
                                                                            - C a u
          which says everything began in a state of equilibrium N
                                                                      on
          and given the best current model for the origin of the universe,
                                                                   some 13.75

                             m             SFAevery
          billion years ago, how can it be that living beings are creating and

        a t i b i lis
          communicating new information              day? Why are we not still

nc  omp   in that state of equilibrium?
                                                            a u  s a lity
                                                     oft Cof a two-part cos-
             The elucidation by information philosophy
                                                  S
          mic creation process casts light on some classical problems in
          philosophyaand         sm because it is the same process that cre- m
                         tibiniliphysics,
      a d I n
          ates   m
              cnew  p
               o biological species and explains the freedom and    e  r t a r ianis
                                                                        creativ-
   Bro ity of the human mind.                                    ib
                                                       Soft L
                        ianism
             Some OtherrPhilosophical
                       rta
                                      Problems
                                                                                i b ert     aria
               st Libe                                                 So f t L
      ModeThe Problem of Knowledge                              Darin
                                                                          g
                Epistemology is the problem of
                                       C  o
             means of perception is limited g i t
                                              and
                                                  o certain knowledge, when our
                                                    fallible. Instead of logical lan-
                  i l i s m
              tib debates about “justified true belief,” information philoso-
       o m paguage
 I n c       phy n
                e     cesto) information structures in the brain that correspondinism
                  looks
            q u                                                               rm
                                                                                       Chapter 31



ative S
          e to structures in the world and in other minds.
                                                               In   d e   t e
             The Problem of Value1
                                      i m   i t e d
                          a   n d
           Information philosophy   L the source of ultimate value be-
                                    moves

        r      n
         yondiman
          m       isandmour created Gods, beyond Life and the Earth, to its
  D  ete origins in a Cosmic Providence, which creates stable information
             structures we call Ergo. Note that quantum mechanics, though
             normally thought of as adding only indeterminacy, is the source
             of the stability in most information structures.
               1      informationphilosopher.com/value
         386     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Note that the problem of freedom (in this book) and the
               problem of value are tightly linked.
                  Values without Freedom are Useless.
                  Freedom without Value is Absurd.
                  The first of these views was the position of the John Stuart
               Mill utilitarians and the early twentieth-century Anglo-Ameri-
               can philosophers, who argued for utilitarian value but accepted
               determinism.
                  The second view was that of the Continental Existentialists,
               from Nietzsche to Heidegger to Sartre, that we have freedom, but
               because God is dead there are no absolute values.
                 The Problem of Free Will2
                  A dozen thinkers since William James in 1884 have proposed
               “two-stage” models of free will - first “free,” then will,” - first
               chance, then choice, - first alternative possibilities, then one ac-
               tuality. The most plausible and practical solution to the 2400-year
               old problem of free will is our Cogito model. The critical random
               component of the first stage is provided by noise in the brain’s
               information processing. The second stage is determined, but not
               pre-determined.
               Consciousness3
                  Consciousness can be defined as the capacity of an entity, usu-
               ally a living thing but we can also include artificially conscious
               machines or computers, to react to the information, and particu-
               larly to changes in the information, in its environment. We call it
               information consciousness.
Chapter 31




               The Problem of Evil4
                 Theodicy - “If God is Good He is not God. If God is God He is
               not Good.” (from J.B., by Archibald MacLeish) The question is not
               “Does God exist?” The question is “Does Goodness exist?” The
                 2    informationphilosopher.com/freedom
                 3    informationphilosopher.com/problems/consciousness
                 4    informationphilosopher.com/problems/evil
                     Some Other Philosophical Problems                    387

solution lies in a dualist world with both bad and good. If ergodic
information is an objective good, then entropic destruction of in-
formation is “the devil incarnate,” as Norbert Wiener put it.
Immortality5
   Information philosophy implies two kinds of immortality, the
material survival of genetic information and the survival of ideas
in the Sum of all knowledge and human artifacts. The survival of
parts of the genetic code in DNA is the longest approximation to
immortality known in living things. The “immortals” among us
are those whose life’s work is remembered.
The Mind-Body Problem6
   Solved in part by our Sum model, which explains how abstract
information, an idea, or knowledge is incorporated into a human
mind, and how pure ideas act on the physical world. Information
is neither energy nor matter. But it needs matter for its embodi-
ment and energy for its communication.
   Information is the mind in the body, the ghost in the machine,
as close to a spirit or soul as science can get. When we die, it is our
information that is lost.
   Our ERR (experience recorder and reproducer) model for the
mind is simpler than, but superior to, cognitive science computa-
tional models of the mind.
   Man is not a machine. And the mind is not a computer.
                                                                            Chapter 31




  5     informationphilosopher.com/problems/immortality
  6     informationphilosopher.com/problems/mind_body
         388         Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Some Other Physics Problems
                  It is of the deepest philosophical significance that information
               is based on the mathematics of probability. If all outcomes were
               certain, there would be no “surprises” in the universe. Informa-
               tion would be conserved and a universal constant, as some math-
               ematicians mistakenly believe it is.
                  Information philosophy requires the ontological uncertainty
               and probabilistic outcomes of modern quantum physics to pro-
               duce new information. But at the same time, without the extraor-
               dinary stability of quantized information structures over cosmo-
               logical time scales, life and the universe we know would not be
               possible.
                  Quantum mechanics reveals the architecture of the universe to
               be discrete rather than continuous, to be digital rather than ana-
               log.
                  Moreover, the “correspondence principle” of quantum mechan-
               ics and the “law of large numbers” of statistics ensures that mac-
               roscopic objects can normally average out microscopic uncertain-
               ties and probabilities to provide the “adequate determinism” that
               shows up in all our Laws of Nature.
               The Arrow of Time7
                  Arthur Stanley Eddington connected “Time’s Arrow” with the
               direction of increasing entropy and the second law of thermody-
               namics. We now show that it is also the direction of increasing
               information.
Chapter 31




               Entanglement/Nonlocality8
                  Thus is a mysterious phenomenon that seems capable of “trans-
               mitting” information over vast distances faster than the speed of
               light. Information physics shows that measurements change prob-
               abilities everywhere, faster than the speed of light, although no
               signaling is possible, since no matter or energy is transmitted.
               Macroscopic Recurrence9
                 Ernst Zermelo argued against Ludwig Boltzmann’s H-The-
               orem (his derivation of the second law of thermodynamics), on
                 7      informationphilosopher.com/problems/arrow_of_time
                 8      informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/EPR
                 9      informationphilosopher.com/problems/recurrence
                             Some Other Physics Problems                  389

the grounds that given enough time, any system would return to
the same starting conditions and thus entropy must decrease as
well as increase. Information physics shows that exactly the same
circumstances can never recur. Friedrich Nietzsche’s “Eternal
Return of the Same” is a physical impossibility, because of the in-
creasing information in the universe.
Microscopic Reversibility10
   Joseph Loschmidt also argued against Ludwig Boltzmann
on the grounds that if time were reversed the entropy would de-
crease. Boltzmann agreed that it would, according to his initial
version of the H-Theorem which was derived from classical dy-
namical physics. He then defended his case for entropy increase
on the basis of probabilities and an assumption of “molecular dis-
order.” A quantum-mechanical treatment of binary (two-particle)
collisions validates Boltzmann’s “molecular disorder” assumption.
The Problem of Measurement11
   We explain how our measuring instruments, which are usually
macroscopic objects and treatable with classical physics, can give
us information about the microscopic world of atoms and sub-
atomic particles like electrons and photons, which are described
with quantum physics. The so-called “cut” (John Bell called it
the “shifty split”) between the classical and quantum worlds oc-
curs at the moment that stable observable information enters the
world. It does not require the consciousness of an observer.
Schrödinger’s Cat12
                                                                            Chapter 31


   Erwin Schrödinger’s paradox of simultaneous live and dead
cats is solved by noting that the wave function probabilities refer
to the proportions of live and dead cats that would be found in
many identical experiments. In every particular case, the wave
functions collapse at the instant the random quantum event pro-
duces stable information in the world. No “conscious observer” is
needed. The cat is its own observer.


  10   informationphilosopher.com/problems/reversibility
  11   informationphilosopher.com/problems/measurement
  12   informationphilosopher.com/solutions/experiments/schrodingerscat
