         364   My God, He Plays Dice!




                            l e m s
                        Prob ed?
                         Solv
Chapter 45
                                               Problems Solved? 365


Problems Solved?
   In the preface we posed thirteen problems for which a deep
analysis of Einstein’s thinking, especially his idea of an “objective
reality,” might lead to plausible solutions.
   1. The 19th-century problem of microscopic irreversibility
   2. Nonlocality, first seen by Einstein in 1905
   3. Wave and particle “duality” (1909)
   4. The metaphysical question of ontological chance (1916)
   5. Nonlocality and “action-at-a-distance” (1927)
   6. The “one mystery” of the two-slit experiment
   7. The measurement problem (1930)
   8. The role of a “conscious observer” (1930)
   9. Entanglement and “spooky” action-at-a-distance (1935)
   10. Schrödinger’s Cat - dead and alive? (1936)
   11. No “hidden variables,” but hidden constants (1952)
   12. Conflict between relativity and quantum mechanics?
   13. Is the universe deterministic or indeterministic?
   Our proposed solutions are radical, if only compared to decades
of confusion and mystery surrounding quantum mechanics, but
we hope that you find most of them visualizable and intuitive, not
characteristics normally associated with the quantum.
Microscopic Irreversibility
   Problem: In classical mechanics, microscopic particle collisions
                                                                        Chapter 45

are time reversible, conserving entropy and information. Neither
entropy, nor more importantly information, can increase in a
deterministic, classical world. Ludwig Boltzmann showed that
random collisions could increase the macroscopic entropy, but
reversing the time would decrease it again.. Thus the puzzle, how
to reconcile macroscopic entropy with microscopic reversibility.
   Solution: Reversibility fails when any matter interacts with
radiation, e.g., emission of a photon during the collision, or
changes (quantum jumps) between internal energy levels, are
         366     My God, He Plays Dice!

               taken into account. Any quantum process with such transitions
               involves ontological chance as discovered by Einstein in 1916.
               Interaction with light introduces random changes in the energy
               and momentum of either or both particles. If all particle motions
               could be reversed, the absorption of a photon with the same energy
               in the opposite direction at the correct moment is not impossible,
               but statistically very unlikely to occur.
                  Comment: As Einstein noted in 1909, emission processes are
               not “invertible.” There are outgoing spherical waves, but incoming
               spherical waves are never seen. Josef Loschmidt’s reversibility
               paradox is removed. Ernst Zermelo’s recurrence objection is also
               eliminated because the recurrence of original, low entropy states
               is prevented by the expansion of the universe. The environment is
               always different. See chapters 11 and 12.
               Nonlocality
                  Problem: When a light wave, possibly carrying energy, spreads
               out in all directions, how can that energy be suddenly collected
               together at one point to eject an electron in the photoelectric
               effect? In 1909 Einstein feared this instantaneous “collapse” of the
               light wave was a violation of his special theory of relativity?
                  Solution: It took Einstein some years to see that the light wave
               is really just the abstract probability of finding his light quanta
               or material particles. One can think of the probability of find-
               ing a particle somewhere other than where it is actually found as
               suddenly going to zero, which gives the appearance of a “collapse.”
               In any case no matter, energy, or even abstract information is
Chapter 45




               moving when a particle is found somewhere. Nonlocality is only
               the appearance of change in spatially separated places. Nothing
               objectively real is moving.
                  Comment: Probabilities are solutions to the Schrödinger
               equation, determined by the boundary conditions of the
               experiment and the wavelength of incoming particles. Probabilities
               for other particles in the space do not change when one particle is
               detected. See chapters 6, 9, and 23.
               Wave-Particle Duality
                                                 Problems Solved? 367

   Problem: Popular interpretations of quantum mechanics
describe quantum objects as sometimes waves and sometimes
particles, or perhaps both at the same time?
   Solution: Particles are real objects. Einstein was first to see waves
as imaginary, mathematical fictions, “ghostly” and “guiding” fields,
that allow us to calculate probabilities for finding particles. These
waves have a statistical power over the location of particles that is
the one deep mystery of quantum mechanics.
   Particles are discrete discontinuous localized quanta of matter
or energy. It was Einstein in 1905 who proved the existence of
matter particles and hypothesized light particles, the prototypes of
the two families of elementary particles in the “standard model”
- fermions and bosons. Twenty years later, he discovered their dif-
ferent quantum statistics!
   Waves, or wave functions, are mathematical solutions to the
Schrödinger equation, with continuous values in all space, which
provide probabilities for finding particles in a given place and in a
specific quantum state.
    Comment: The time evolution of the wave function is not
the motion of the particle. It is only the best estimate of where
the particle might be found. Continuous wave functions evolve
deterministically. Particles are discrete and change their quantum
states indeterministically.
   As Max Born described it “The motion of the particle follows
the laws of probability, but the probability itself propagates in
accord with causal laws.“
                                                                           Chapter 45

   Particles are physics. Waves, and fields, are metaphysics.
   See chapter 9.
Ontological Chance
   Problem: If every collision between material particles is
controlled completely by the distribution and motions of all other
particles together with the natural force laws of classical physics,
then there is only one possible future.
   Solution:     In modern physics, all interactions between
material particles are mediated by the exchange of energy par-
ticles. Einstein’s light quanta (photons) are the mediating par-
         368       My God, He Plays Dice!

               ticles for electro­magnetic radiation. In 1916, Einstein showed that
               these energy particle exchanges always involve chance. Quantum
               mechanics is statistical, opening the possibilities needed for free
               will, the “free choice” of the experimenter, and “free creations of the
               human mind.”
                  Comment: The emergence of classical laws and apparent
               deterministic causality occurs whenever the number of particles
               grows large so quantum randomness can be averaged over. Bohr’s
               “correspondence principle” claims classicality also occurs when
               quantum numbers are large.
                  The “quantum-to-classical transition” occurs when the mass of
               an object m is very large compared to Planck’s constant h, so the
               uncertainty Δv Δx ≥ h / m is very small. See chapters 1 and 11.
               Nonlocality and Action-at-a-Distance
                  Problem: Einstein’s 1927 presentation at the fifth Solvay conference
               was his first public description of an issue that had bothered him
               since 1905. He thought he saw events at two places in a spacelike
               separation happening simultaneously. His special theory of relativity
               claims to show the impossibility of simultaneity.
                  Solution: Einstein’s blackboard drawing shows us that the
               electron’s wave function propagates in all directions, but when the
               particle appears, all of it is found at a single point.
                  Using Einstein’s idea of “objective reality,” without any interactions
               that could change the momentum, the particle must have traveled
               in a straight line from the origin to the point where it is found. The
               properties of the particle considered by Einstein in 1927 could have
Chapter 45




               evolved locally from the start of the experiment as what we called
               “hidden constants” of the motion.
                  Comment: There was no “action” by either particle on the other
               in this case, so we call it “knowledge-at-a-distance.” See chapters 9,
               17, 18, and 23.
               Two-Slit Experiment
                                               Problems Solved? 369

   Problem: In experiments where a single particle travels to the
screen at a time, large numbers of experiments show interference
patterns when both slits are open, suggesting that a particle must
move through both slits in order to “interfere with itself.”
   Solution: Solutions to the time-independent Schrödinger equation
for the given boundary conditions - two open slits, screen, particle
wavelength - are different for the case of one slit open. In Einstein’s
“objective reality,’ the particle conserves all its properties and goes
through only one slit. Probability amplitudes of the wave function
are different when two slits are open, explaining interference.
   Comment: Feynman’s path integral formulation of quantum
mechanics suggests the same solution. His “virtual particles” explore
all space (the “sum over paths”) as they determine the variational
minimum for least action, thus the resulting probability amplitude
wave function can be said to “know” which holes are open. How
abstract probabilities influence the particles’ motions is the one
remaining mystery in quantum mechanics.
   Bohmian mechanics also defends a particle that goes through
one slit reacting to probabilities that are based on two slits being
open. See chapter 33.
Measurement Problem
   Problem: John von Neumann saw a logical problem with two
distinct (indeed, opposing) processes, the unitary, continuous, and
deterministic time evolution of the Schrödinger equation versus
the non-unitary, discontinuous, and indeterministic “collapse of
the wave function.” Decoherence theorists and many-worlders are
                                                                          Chapter 45

convinced that quantum mechanics should be based on the wave
function alone. There are no particles, they say. Schrödinger agreed.
   Solution: We can think of the time evolution of a system as
involving these two processes, but one after the other. First, the
system evolves as a probability amplitude wave function according
to the time-dependent Schrödinger equation. Then, at an unknown
time (which bothers the critics), the particle appears somewhere.
   The time of collapse may simply be the moment an experimenter
makes a measurement. Measurement requires the recording of
irreversible information about the location of the particle, as von
         370        My God, He Plays Dice!

               Neumann knew. It does not have to be in the mind of a conscious
               observer.
                  Comment: This problem shows why we need to get “beyond logic”
               in the philosophy of science.
               Conscious Observer
                  Problem: The Copenhagen Interpretation and many of its
               supporters, e.g., Werner Heisenberg, John von Neumann, Eugene
               Wigner, considered a measurement not complete until it reaches
               the mind of the observer. They asked where is the “cut” (Schnitt)
               between the experiment and the mind?
                  Solution: Information must be recorded irreversibly before any
               observer can know the results of a measurement. Data recorded
               (ontologically) by a measuring instrument creates new information
               in the universe. But so does any newly created information structure
               in nature without an observer. Einstein wanted objective reality to
               be independent of observers, but there are measurements that are a
               “free choice” of the experimenter, creating a new part of reality.
                  Comment: We might say that information becomes known
               (epistemological) when it is recorded in the world and then seen by
               a human observer. But most new information created is ontological,
               the universe is observing itself. See chapter 25.
               Entanglement and “Spooky” Action-at-a-Distance
                  Problem: In his 1935 EPR paper, Einstein discussed two particles
               traveling away from the center. He used conservation principles to
               show that measuring one particle gives information about the other
Chapter 45




               without measuring it directly. We have shown the two particles’
               properties could have evolved locally from their original values
               at the center no matter how far the particles are apart, as long as
               no interaction with the environment has altered their values and
               destroyed their “coherence.” But a true nonlocality appears in David
               Bohm’s 1952 version the EPR experiment, in which electron spin
               components are measured instead of linear momenta.
                  Solution: As the electrons travel apart, each one stays in its state by
               conservation laws. Their spins and linear momenta are conserved.
               The left-moving particle electron is say -p. The other is p. The total
                                              Problems Solved? 371

linear momentum is zero. Similarly their total spin is zero. If one
electron is spin ℏ/2, the other is exactly opposite. But the original
process of entanglement has not left the electron spins with a
definite spatial direction.
   When Alice uses her “free choice” of which angle to measure
the spin (or polarization) component, she adds new information
which was not present at the original entanglement. Alice’s mea-
surement decoheres and disentangles the two-particle wave func-
tion. The particles now appear in a spacelike separation equidistant
from the origin. The directionless and opposite spins are projected
by her measurement into spin components, say z+ and z-. If Bob
then measures at the same angle, he gets the perfectly correlated
opposite value.
   Comments: It is part of the deep mystery of quantum mechanics
how the spatial directions of the two spins, created by a measurement
of the two-particle wave function anywhere, come out in perfectly
correlated directions. But had they not, something even worse
would have happened. Symmetry and conservation laws would
have been violated.
Schrödinger’s Cat
   Problem: Erwin Schrödinger imagined that the time evolution
of his equation could start with a microscopic radioactive nucleus
in a superposition of decayed and undecayed state, leading to a
macroscopic cat in a similar superposition. When he suggested it,
he was criticizing, really ridiculing, what he thought was an absurd
consequence of Paul Dirac’s principle of superposition, with its
                                                                        Chapter 45

probabilities for a system to be in different states
   Solution: Schrödinger was just criticizing superposition and its
probabilities. There is never an individual cat simultaneously dead
and alive. What the superposition of possible states in quantum
mechanics gives us are only probabilities for the cat being dead or
alive. The predicted probabilities are empirically confirmed by the
statistics in large numbers of identical experiments, each one of
which ends up with either a live or dead cat.
         372       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  Comment: The individual radioactive nucleus is never in a super-
               position of decayed and not decayed. Quantum mechanics gives
               us the probabilities of a decay or remaining undecayed. Once there
               is a decay, the evolution results in a dead cat. If no decay, then a
               live cat. Indeed, not only do macroscopic superpositions of cats not
               exist, the radioactive nucleus is not in a superposition. There are
               no macroscopic superpositions because there are no microscopic
               superpositions either.
               No “Hidden Variables,” but Hidden Constants
                  Problem: David Bohm suggested that “hidden variables”
               could instantaneously communicate information between
               entangled particles to perfectly correlate their properties at great
               distances, specifically the opposite +1/2 and -1/2 electron spins of a
               two-electron system with total spin zero.
                  Solution: In our adaptation of Einstein’s “objective reality,” the
               particles are generated with individual properties, momenta,
               angular momenta, spins, and they conserve these properties until
               they are measured. These properties are carried along “locally” with
               the particles, so do not violate special relativity as Einstein feared.
                  While there might not be Bohmian “hidden variables,” we can
               call these conserved quantities “hidden constants” (“constants of
               the motion,” hidden in plain sight). They explain the appearance
               of Einstein’s “spooky” action-at-a-distance. Our hidden constants
               can explain the original EPR results, but they cannot explain the
               measurements of electron spin components, which are created by
               Alice’s measurement.
Chapter 45




                  Comment: The two spin components, say z+ and z-, are Alice’s
               nonlocal projections of the opposing spins that traveled locally from
               the origin. The nonlocal aspect is that these spin components have
               perfectly opposing directions even though they are about to be
               greatly separated, once the two-particle wave function has collapsed
               into the product of two single-particle wave functions.
                  Of course if the opposing spins of the electrons that travel locally
               from the origin did not remain perfectly anti-correlated when
                                               Problems Solved? 373


measured and projected into a specific direction, that would be a
violation of the conservation laws.
Is the Universe Deterministic or Indeterministic?
   Problem: Einstein was well known, especially in his younger years,
for hoping quantum physics could be found to be a deterministic
theory. When in 1916 he discovered the randomness in quantum
physics, he called chance a “weakness in the theory.” And many times
he insisted that “God does not play dice.” Many of the alternative
“interpretations” of quantum mechanics are deterministic. See
chapters 30, 31, 32, and 34.
   Solution: Einstein had fully accepted the indeterministic nature of
quantum mechanics by some time around 1930. But his colleagues
paid little attention to his concerns, which had turned entirely to the
nonlocal aspects of quantum mechanics.
   Comment: Without indeterminism, we could not have a creative
universe and Einstein’s “free creations of the human mind.”
What Is Quantized?
   The “quantum condition” describes the underlying deep reason
for the existence of discrete objects.
   For Bohr in 1913, it was the angular momentum of electrons in
their orbits, as suggested by J.W.Nicholson. For Louis de Broglie in
1924 it was that the linear momentum p = h/λ and that an integer
number of wavelengths fits around an electron orbit. For Heisenberg
in 1925, it was the non-commutation of momentum and position
                                                                          Chapter 45

operator matrices, and in 1927 his resulting uncertainty principle
ΔpΔx = h. In Bohr’s otherwise obscure Como lecture of 1927, he
showed that ΔνΔt = 1, thus deriving the uncertainty principle with
no reference to measurements as “disturbances,” and embarrassing
Heisenberg.
   Multiplying ΔνΔt = 1 by Max Planck’s constant h, and noting
E = hν, we have ΔEΔt = ΔpΔx = ΔJΔφ = h. All of these expressions
have the same physical dimensions as angular momentum J.
         374       My God, He Plays Dice!

                  As Erwin Schrödinger explained, it is always action, or angular
               momentum, that is being quantized. Momentum p, position x,
               energy E, and time t, all take on continuous values. It is the angular
               momentum or spin J that comes in integer multiples of h.
                  Any interaction of radiation and matter involves at least one
               unit of Planck’s quantum of action h, which first appeared in 1900,
               though only as a heuristic mathematical device, not the radical
               core idea of a new physics. That was seen first by Einstein, like so
               many of the quantum mechanical concepts he saw long before the
               “founders” developed their powerful quantum calculation methods.
               The Bottom Line
                   There is no microscopic reversibility.
                   There is no nonlocality in the form of one event acting on another
               in a spacelike separation. There are simultaneous synchronized
               events in a spacelike separation, which Einstein feared violated his
               special theory of relativity. They do not.
                   Particles are real physics. Waves are imaginary. Fields are
               metaphysics.
                   Ontological chance exists. Without it, nothing ever happens.
                   Nothing physically “collapses” when a possibility is actualized.
                   The “one mystery” of quantum mechanics is how probability
               waves control the statistical motions of particles to produce
               interference effects.
                   The measurement problem is explained as when new information
               is irreducibly recorded in the measurement apparatus. Local entropy
Chapter 45




               is reduced. Global entropy increases.
                   There is no nonseparability. Particles separate as soon one leaves
               the other’s light cone. But two entangled particles retain their perfect
               correlation of properties as required by the conservation laws, until
               one interacts with something in the environment and decoheres.
               A measurement begins with the properties of the particles still
               correlated. It ends with decorrelation and disentanglement. The
               mysterious power of the two-particle wave function separates into
               single-particle functions with their new spatial spin direction also
               perfectly correlated. But the particular spin component direction
               chosen by Alice was not known at the origin. It can be viewed as
                                               Problems Solved? 375

new information appearing nonlocally, i.e. simultaneously in a
spacelike separation.
   “Spooky action-at-a-distance” is just the appearance of
communication or interaction when entangled particles are
measured at separation and found to remain perfectly corre-
lated. There is no “action” by one particle on the other. It is simply
“knowledge-at-a-distance.”
   There is no conflict between special relativity and quantum
mechanics, though there would have been if the probability waves
had been carrying energy or matter.
   Schrödinger’s cat will always be found as alive, dead, or dying if
the nuclear decay has occurred. This is just as individual objects are
never in a superposition, never in two places at the same time.
   There is one world. It is a quantum world. The world appears
classical for objects with large mass. And it is indeterministic, which
opens alternative possibilities for an open, free, and creative future,
for Einstein’s “free creations of the human mind.”
   Einstein’s “objective reality” can explain the world with standard
quantum mechanics, so much of which he discovered or created.
   His many criticisms and objections did not prevent him from
seeing the truly mysterious aspects of quantum physics well before
his colleagues, who often get the credit that belongs to him.
How to Restore Credit to Einstein
   To correct this problem, historians of physics and especially
teachers of quantum mechanics must change the way they discuss
and especially to teach Einstein’s contributions to physics.
                                                                          Chapter 45


   His paper explaining Brownian motion should be taught as the
first proof that matter is not continuous, but discrete. It consists
of quanta. He thought he had proved Boltzmann’s controversial
hypothesis of atoms.
   His paper explaining the “photoelectric effect,” for which he was
awarded the Nobel Prize, should be taught as the revolutionary
hypothesis that light energy also comes in discrete quanta hν.
   In these two 1905 papers, Einstein was the first to see the elements
in today’s “standard model” of particle physics - the fermions
         376       My God, He Plays Dice!

               (matter) and the bosons (energy). For this work alone, Einstein
               should be seen as the true founder of quantum mechanics
                  His third paper in 1905, explaining relativity, should not
               overshadow his quantization of matter and energy and his fourth
               paper that year, showing their interchangeability - E = mc2.
                  His 1907 paper explaining the anomalous specific heat of certain
               atoms should be taught as the discovery of energy levels in atoms and
               the “jumps” between them, six years before Niels Bohr’s quantum
               jumps between his postulated energy levels in the atom.
                  Einstein’s 1909 paper explaining wave-particle duality should be
               taught as the continuous wave (and later the wave function ψ) giving
               us the probability of finding a discrete particle. Quantum mechanics
               is statistical!
                  His 1916 paper on transition probabilities between energy levels,
               which discovered the stimulated emission of radiation behind
               today’s lasers, should be taught as the discovery of ontological chance
               in nature whenever matter and radiation interact. The interactions
               always involve at least one quantum of action h. They introduce
               statistics and indeterminacy a decade before Werner Heisenberg’s
               uncertainty principle.
                  Arthur Holly Compton’s 1923 explanation of the “Compton
               effect,” which confirmed Einstein’s 1916 prediction that particles of
               light have momentum as well as energy, should be taught as Einstein’s
               deep confidence in conservation principles, so that the motions
               and paths of quantum particles objectively exist and at all times
               are obeying those conservation laws for momentum and energy.
Chapter 45




               Einstein had used these fundamental principles to invalidate Niels
               Bohr’s final attempt to deny Einstein’s light quantum hypothesis in
               1924, in the Bohr-Kramers-Slater paper. This work should be taught
               as the basis for Einstein’s belief in an “objective reality.”
                  Particles don’t cease to exist, or appear simultaneously at multiple
               places, as claimed by the Copenhagen Interpretation of quantum
               mechanics. Just because we can’t continuously measure paths does
               not mean that particles do not exist until we observe them.
                  Einstein’s 1925 papers based on Satyendra Nath Bose’s very simple
               quantum derivation of the Planck law in 1924, should be taught as
                                                Problems Solved? 377

Einstein’s discovery of the indistinguishability of elementary particles
and their consequent strange and different statistics for half-spin
“fermions”and unit-spin “bosons.”
   Einstein’s misunderstood and ignored presentation at the Solvay
conference of 1927 showing the nonlocal behavior in a single particle
passing through a slit should be taught as the beginning of his 1935
EPR paper, when he showed that two particles a great distance apart
can acquire perfectly correlated properties instantaneously, his
discovery of nonseparability and entanglement.
    Poincaré and Einstein
   Some historians of science have pointed out how much Einstein
was inspired by Henri Poincaré’s great book Science and Hypothesis.
   Many of Einstein’s biographers have described the young Einstein’s
colleagues who met frequently to discuss new ideas in philosophy
and physics. They called themselves the Olympia Academy. After a
frugal evening meal of sausage, cheese, fruits, honey, and tea, they
read and discussed the great works of David Hume, John Stuart
Mill, Ernst Mach, and Karl Pearson. Several weeks were spent on
Henri Poincare’s La Science et l’Hypothèse.
    Recently a few scholars have shown that in his “miracle year” of
1905 Einstein solved three great problems described by Poincaré,
just one year after his book had been translated into German.
Arthur I. Miller cited three problems he thought Poincaré felt were
“pressing;” the failed attempts to detect the motion of Earth through
the “ether,” the photoelectric effect, and Brownian motion. 1 A close
reading of Poincaré’s book shows that great thinker suggested
                                                                           Chapter 45

several more problems to Einstein, most importantly the principle of
relativity, but also the one-way increase of entropy with its problem
of irreversibility, Maxwell’s demon, the question of determinism
or indeterminism, and amazingly “action-at-a-distance.” We now
realize that in quantum mechanics what Einstein discovered is only
“knowledge-at-a-distance.”
   We hope to have shown that the far-seeing Einstein grappled
with all these problems, a few unsuccessfully but always creatively,
between reading Poincaré in 1904 and his death five decades later.
1       Miller, 2002, p.185. Rigden 2005, p.8, Holt, 2018, p.5
