         292   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?




                               re n ce
                      R   ecur
Chapter 26




                                                                  This chapter on the web
                                         informationphilosopher.com/problems/recurrence
                                                    Recurrence          293


The Recurrence Problem
   The idea that the macroscopic conditions in the world will
repeat after some interval of time is an ancient idea, but it plays a
vital role in modern physics as well.
  Ancient middle eastern civilizations called it the Great Year.
They calculated it as the time after which the planets would realign
themselves in identical positions in the sky.
   The Great Year should not be confused with the time that the
precession of the equinoxes takes to return the equinoxes to the
same position along the Zodiac - although this time (about 26,000
years) is of the same order of magnitude as one famous number
given by Babylonian astronomers for the Great Year (36,000 years).
   Many societies have the concept of the Great Year, but none did
calculations as carefully as the Babylonians. But since the planets
orbital periods are not really commensurate, they kept increasing
the time for the Great Year searching for a better recurrence time.
   The Greek and Roman Stoics thought the Great Year was proof
of law in nature and the God of reason that lies behind nature.
   In modern philosophy, Friedrich Nietzsche described an
eternal return in his Also Sprach Zarathustra.


                                                                          Chapter 26
Zermelo’s Paradox
  Ernst Zermelo’ criticized Ludwig Boltzmann’s H-Theo-
rem, the attempt to derive the increasing entropy required by the
second law of thermodynamics from basic statistical mechanics.
  It was the second “paradox” attack on Boltzmann. The first was
Josef Loschmidt’s claim that entropy would be reduced if time
were reversed. This is the problem of microscopic reversibility.1
  Zermelo was an extraordinary mathematician. He was (in 1908)
the founder of axiomatic set theory, which with the addition of
the axiom of choice (also his work, in 1904) is the most common
foundation of mathematics. The axiom of choice says that given
any collection of sets, one can find a way to unambiguously select
one object from each set, even if the number of sets is infinite.
  1    See chapter 25 on irreversibility.
         294     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Before this amazing work, Zermelo was a young associate of
               Max Planck in Berlin, one of many German physicists who
               opposed the work of Boltzmann to establish the existence of
               atoms.
                 Zermelo’s criticism was based on the work of Henri Poincaré,
               an expert in the three-body problem, which, unlike the two-body
               problem, has no exact analytic solution.
                  Poincaré had been able to establish limits or bounds on the pos-
               sible configurations of the three bodies from conservation laws.
               Planck and Zermelo applied some of Poincaré’s thinking to the
               n particles in a gas. They argued that given a long enough time,
               the particles would return to a distribution in “phase space” (a
               6n-dimensional space of possible velocities and positions) that
               would be indistinguishable from the original distribution.
                  Thus, they argued, Boltzmann’s formula for the entropy would
               at some future time go back down, vitiating Boltzmann’s claim to
               have proved that entropy always increases - as the second law of
               thermodynamics requires.
                  Boltzmann replied that his argument was statistical. He only
               claimed that entropy increase was overwhelmingly more prob-
               able than Zermelo’s predicted decrease. Boltzmann calculated the
               probability of a decrease of a very small gas of only a few hundred
Chapter 26




               particles and found the time needed to realize such a decrease is
               many orders of magnitude larger than the presumed age of the
               universe.
                  The idea that a macroscopic system can return to exactly the
               same physical conditions is closely related to the idea that an agent
               may face “exactly the same circumstances in making a decision.
               Determinists maintain that given the “fixed past” and the “laws of
               nature” that the agent would have to make exactly the same deci-
               sion again.2
                 2    See chapter 5
                                                               Recurrence        295


The Extreme Improbability of Perfect Recurrence
   In a classical deterministic universe, given enough time, the
universe can return to the exact circumstance of any earlier instant
of time, because it contains the same amount of matter, energy,
and information.
   But, in the real universe, information expands from a minimum
at the origin, to ever larger amounts of information.
   Arthur Stanley Eddington was probably the first to see that
the expanding universe with increasing information provides a
resolution to Zermelo’s objection to Boltzmann.
      “By accepting the theory of the expanding universe we are relieved
      of one conclusion which we had felt to be intrinsically absurd. It was
      argued that every possible configuration of atoms must repeat itself
      at some distant date. But that was on the assumption that the atoms
      will have only the same choice of configurations in the future that
      they have now. In an expanding space any particular congruence
      becomes more and more improbable. The expansion of the universe
      creates new possibilities of distribution faster than the atoms can work
      through them, and there is no longer any likelihood of a particular
      distribution being repeated. If we continue shuffling a pack of cards
      we are bound sometime to bring them into their standard order — but
      not if the conditions are that every morning one more card is added
      to the pack.”3
   And note that it is the failure of recurrence that makes all the

                                                                                   Chapter 26
arrows of time of chapter 24 into one-way arrows.

  3       New Pathways in Science, 1939, p.68
