               170   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter
  Chapter




                                      e l f a n d
                                    S
        1515




                                  e
                                Th r Minds
                                Othe




                                                                   This chapter on the web
                                                    informationphilosopher.com/mind/ego
                                                           The Self 171


The Self and Other Minds
   Celebrating René Descartes, the first modern philosopher,
and his famous phrase Ego cogito, ergo sum, we call our model for
mind the Ego. It is implemented with our experience recorder and
reproducer (ERR).
   Our two-stage model for free will we call the Cogito. Our model
for an objective value, independent of humanity and earthly bio-
ethics, we call Ergo. And our model for knowledge we call the Sum.
   The Ego is more or less synonymous with the Self, the Soul, or
the Spirit - Gilbert Ryle’s “ghost in the machine.” We see it as
immaterial information. An immaterial self with causal power is
almost universally denied by modern philosophers as metaphysi-




                                                                                   1515
cal, along with related problematic ideas such as consciousness




                                                                             Chapter
and libertarian or indeterministic free will.




                                                                           Chapter
  Descartes illustrated a mechanical reflex path, from a foot feel-
ing pain from a fire, up a nerve to the pineal gland in the mind,
and back down to pull away the foot.
   It is important to note that Descartes made that gland the
                                      locus of undetermined freedom
                                      in humans. For him, the body
                                      was a deterministic mechani-
                                      cal system of tiny fibres causing
                                      movements in the brain (the
                                      afferent sensations), which then
                                      can pull on other fibres to acti-
                                      vate the muscles (the efferent
                                      nerve impulses). This is the basis
                                      of stimulus and response theory
                                      in modern physiology (reflexol-
                                      ogy). It is also the basis behind
                                      simple connectionist theories
  Figure 15-8. Descartes’ reflex arc. of mind. An appropriate neural
network (with all the necessary logical connections) need only
connect afferent to efferent signals. No thinking mind is needed
for animals. This “reflex arc” model is still common in biology.
             172       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  Descartes’ suggestion that animals are machines included the
               notion that man too is in part a machine - the human body obeys
               deterministic causal laws. Although for Descartes man also has a
               soul or spirit that is exempt from determinism and thus from what
               is known today as “causal closure,” Cartesian dualism was the first
               step to eliminative materialism.
               Mind Over Matter?
                 But as all critics of Descartes do, we must ask, how can the mind
               both cause something physical to happen and yet itself be acausal,?
               How is it exempt from causal chains coming up from the body?
                  Descartes’ vision of undetermined freedom for the mind is real-
               ized since our immaterial thoughts are free, whereas our actions
               are adequately determined by our will. This combination of ideas
Chapter 15




               is the basis for our two-stage model of free will.1 It is a model of
               agent causation. New causal chains originate as ideas in our minds.
               Once evaluated and chosen they are adequately determined to lead
               to willed actions. This is a model for self-determination.
                  The “self ” or ego, the psyche or soul, is the self of this self-deter-
               mination. Self-determination is of course limited by our control
               over matter and energy, but within those physical constraints our
               selves can consider ideas, decide to act on one and take full respon-
               sibility for our actions.
                  The Self is often identified with one’s “character.” This is the basis
               for saying that our choices and decisions are made by evaluating
               freely generated alternative possibilities in accordance with our rea-
               sons, motives, feelings, desires, etc. These are in turn often the con-
               sequence of our past experiences, along with inherited (biologically
               built-in) preferences. And this bundle of motivating factors is essen-
               tially what is known as our character. Someone familiar with all of
               those preferences would be able to predict our actions with some
               certainty, though not perfectly, when faced with particular options
               and the circumstances. The self is the agent that is responsible for
               those actions.
                                                 173
                   1     See chapter 4.
                                                                      The Self 173
   The self is also often described as the seat of consciousness. Infor-
mation philosophy defines consciousness as attention to information
coming in to the mind and the resulting actions that are responsive
to the external stimuli (or bodily proprioceptions). Consciousness
thus depends in part on past experiences which are recalled by the
experience recorder and reproducer as responses to external stim-
uli. In this way, what it’s like to be a conscious agent depends on the
kinds of experiences that the agent can notice.
   David Hume’s so-called “bundle theory” of the self is quite con-
sistent with the information philosophy view. His fundamental
ideas of causality, contiguity, and resemblance as the basis for the
association of ideas are essential aspects of the experience recorder
and reproducer. He said,
      It is plain, that in the course of our thinking, and in the constant revolu-




                                                                                     Chapter 15
      tion of our ideas, our imagination runs easily from one idea to any other
      that resembles it, and that this quality alone is to the fancy a sufficient
      bond and association. It is likewise evident that as the senses, in chang-
      ing their objects, are necessitated to change them regularly, and take
      them as they lie contiguous to each other, the imagination must by long
      custom acquire the same method of thinking, and run along the parts of
      space and time in conceiving its objects.2
    The frog’s eye famously filters out some visual events (moving
concave images) while triggering strong reactions to others, like
sticking out a tongue to capture moving convex objects. What it’s
like to be a frog depends then on some experiences that are never
recorded and thus not meaningful to the frog. Hume might say such
perceptions have no resemblance to anything in the mind of the
frog. The frog’s self is simply not conscious of any sensations that are
filtered out of its perceptions.
The Problem of Other Minds
   The problem of other minds is often posed as just one more
problem in epistemology, that is, how can we be certain about the
existence of other minds, since we can’t be certain about anything
in the external world. But it can also be seen as a problem about
meaningful communications and agreement about shared concepts
in two minds. This makes information philosophy an excellent tool
for approaching the problem.
                                         174
  2       A Treatise of Human Nature. 4.1, 2
             174   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                  For some philosophers, the problem of other minds is dis-solved
               by denying the existence of the mind in general - as merely an epi-
               phenomenon with no causal powers. Other philosophers identify
               the problem with Hume’s claim that when he looked inside he saw
               no self. Our positing the self as the immaterial information about
               stored past experiences clearly helps here.
                 Still others admit that they have perceptions and sensations, but
               how could they possibly know what another person is experiencing.
               For example, I know when I feel pain, but I don’t know what is really
               happening in another person who looks to be feeling pain.
                  The standard answer here is that other persons seem in most
               respect to be similar to ourselves, and so by analogy their experi-
               ences must be similar to ours. This analogical inference is weak
Chapter 15




               because of its literal superficiality, because we don’t get an inside
               view of the other mind.
                  For information philosophy, the problem of knowledge can
               solved by identifying partial isomorphisms in external information
               structures with the pure information in a mind. This suggests the
               solution of other minds. Looked at this way, the problem of other
               minds is easier to solve than the general epistemological problem.
               The general problem must compare different things, the pure infor-
               mation of mental ideas with the information abstracted from con-
               crete external information structures. The problem of other minds
               compares concepts in minds about similar things.
                  When, by interpersonal communications, we compare the pure
               information content in two different minds, we are reaching directly
               into the other mind in its innermost immaterial nature. To be sure,
               we have not felt the same sensations nor had identical experiences.
               We have not “felt the other’s pain.” But we can plant ideas in the other
               mind, and then watch those ideas alter the other person’s actions in
               a way totally identical to what that information, that knowledge, has
               been used for in our own actions.
                                                175
                                                         The Self 175

   This establishes the existence, behind the external bodily (mate-
rial) behaviors of the other person, of the same immaterial, meta-
physical mind model in the other mind, as the one in our own.
  Charles Sanders Peirce offered us a vision of an open “com-
munity of inquirers,” seeking “intersubjective agreement” to find
common ground, common ideas, and common information struc-
tures that are processing information in similar if not identical ways.
   The very first item of intersubjective agreement in that commu-
nity should be to accept the existence of minds in all the members
of the community.




                                                                          Chapter 15
