        38   My God, He Plays Dice!
Chapter 5




                               i s t i c a l
                         St at             c s
                              c h  a  n  i
                         M e
                                      Statistical Mechanics          39


Statistical Mechanics
   Statistical mechanics and thermodynamics are nineteenth-
century classical physics, but they contain the seeds of the ideas




                                                                      Chapter 5
that Albert Einstein would use to create quantum theory in
the twentieth, especially the work of his annus mirabilis of 1905.
   Einstein wrote three papers on statistical mechanics between
1902 and 1904 He put earlier ideas on a firmer basis. Einstein
claimed that although James Clerk Maxwell’s and Ludwig
Boltzmann’s theories had come close, they had not provided
a foundation for a general theory of heat based on their kinetic
theory of gases, which depend on the existence of microscopic
atoms and molecules. In his 1902 paper, Einstein did so, deriving
the equipartition theory of the distribution of energy among the
degrees of freedom of a system that is in equilibrium with a large
heat reservoir that maintains the system temperature.
   But, Einstein said in his second paper (1903), a general theory
of heat should be able to explain both thermal equilibrium and the
second law of thermodynamics independent of the kinetic theory.
The laws of macroscopic phenomenological thermodynamics
do not depend on the existence of microscopic atoms and
molecules. His second paper derived the second law based
solely on the probability of distributions of states, Boltzmann’s
entropy, S = k log W, which Einstein redefined, as the fraction
of time the system spends in each state. This work, he said, bases
thermodynamics on general principles like the impossibility of
building a perpetual motion machine.
   In his third paper (1904), Einstein again derived the second
law and the entropy, using the same statistical method used
by Boltzmann in his theory of the ideal gas and by Planck in
his derivation of the radiation law. Einstein investigated the
significance of what Planck had called Boltzmann’s constant
k. With the dimensions of ergs/degeree, as a multiplier of the
absolute temperature T, ½kT gives us a measure of the average
energy in each degree of freedom. But Einstein showed that k is
also a measure of the thermal stability of the system, how much it
departs from equilibrium in the form of energy fluctuations.
        40       My God, He Plays Dice!

             What Did Statistics Mean for Einstein?
                In 1904, Einstein was only 25 years old, but in two years he had
             independently derived or rederived the work of the previous three
             decades in the kinetic theory of gases and statistical mechanics.
Chapter 5




                As we saw in chapter 2 on chance, most scientists did not believe
             that the appearance of randomly distributed events is any proof that
             there is ontological chance in the universe. For them, regularities
             in the “normal” distribution implied underlying unknown laws
             determining events. And Einstein was no exception.
                The use of “statistical” methods is justified by the apparent
             impossibility of knowing the detailed paths of an incredibly large
             number of particles. One might think that increasing the number
             of particles would make their study increasingly complex, but
             the opposite is true. The regularities that appear when averaging
             over their large numbers gives us mean values for the important
             quantities of classical thermodynamics like energy and entropy.
                In principle, the motions of individual particles obey the laws of
             classical mechanics. They are deterministic, and time reversible. In
             1904, Einstein certainly subscribed to this view, until 1909 at least.
                So when Boltzmann’s H-theorem had shown in 1872 that the
             entropy in an isolated system can only increase, it was that the
             increase in entropy is only statistically irreversible.
                Before Boltzmann, we saw in chapter 3 it was Maxwell who
             first derived a mathematical expression for the distribution of gas
             particles among different velocities. He assumed the particles were
             distributed at random and used probabilities from the theory of
             errors to derive the shape of the distribution. There is some evidence
             that Maxwell was a skeptic about determinism and may thus have
             accepted that randomness as ontological chance.
                But Boltzmann clearly accepted that his macroscopic irrevers-
             ibility did not prove the existence of microscopic irreversibility. He
             had considered the possibility of some “molecular chaos.” But even
             without something microscopically random, Boltzmann’s statistical
             irreversibility does explain the increase in entropy, despite his critics
             Josef Loschmidt and Ernst Zermelo.
                                        Statistical Mechanics             41


What Then Are the Fluctuations?
   In the last of his papers on statistical mechanics, Einstein
derived expressions for expected fluctuations away from thermal
equilibrium. Fluctuations would be examples of entropy decreasing




                                                                           Chapter 5
slightly, proving that the second law is not an absolute law, but only
a statistical one, as both Maxwell and Boltzmann had accepted.
   Boltzmann had calculated the size of fluctuations and declared
them to be unobservable in normal gases. One year after his 1904
paper, Einstein would demonstrate that molecular fluctuations
are indirectly observable and can explain the Brownian motion.
Einstein’s prediction and its experimental confirmation by Jean
Perrin a few years later would prove the existence of atoms.
   Einstein also expressed the possibility in his 1904 paper that a
general theory of physical systems would apply equally to matter and
radiation. He thought fluctuations would be even more important
for radiation, especially for radiation with wavelengths comparable
to the size of their container. He showed that the largest fluctuations
in energy would be for particles of average energy.
   Einstein argued that the general principle of equipartition of
energy among all the degrees of freedom of a system should be
extended to radiation. But he was concerned that radiation, as a
continuous theory, might have infinite degrees of freedom. A system
of N gas particles has a finite number of degrees of freedom, which
determines the finite number of states W and the system’s entropy.
   Einstein’s speculation that the kinetic-molecular theory of
statistical mechanics should also apply to radiation shows us an
Einstein on the verge of discovering the particulate or “quantum”
nature of radiation, which most physicists would not accept for
another one or two decades at least.
   We saw in chapter 4 that the term “quantum” was introduced into
physics in 1900 by Max Planck, who hypothesized that the total
energy of the mechanical oscillators generating the radiation field
must be limited to integer multiples of a quantity hν, where ν is the
radiation frequency and h is a new constant with the dimensions
of action (energy x time or momentum x distance). Planck did
not think the radiation itself is quantized. But his quantizing the
        42         My God, He Plays Dice!

             energy states of the matter did allow him to avoid infinities and use
             Boltzmann’s definition of entropy as disorder and probability.
                Einstein saw that Planck had used Boltzmann’s probabilis-
             tic and statistical methods to arrive at an equation describing the
Chapter 5




             distribution of frequencies in blackbody radiation. 1
                But Einstein also saw that Planck did not think that the radiation
             field itself could be described as particles. Nevertheless, Planck
             clearly had found the right equation. His radiation law fit the
             experimental data perfectly. But Einstein thought Planck had luckily
             stumbled on his equation for the wrong physical reasons. Indeed, a
             proper derivation would not be given for two more decades, when
             Einstein himself finally explained it in 1925 as the result of quantum
             statistics that have no place in classical statistical mechanics. 2
             Had Gibbs Done Everything Before Einstein?
              Some historians and philosophers of science think that Josiah
             Willard Gibbs completed all the important work in statistical
             mechanics before Einstein. Gibbs had worked on statistical physics
             for many decades. Einstein had not read Gibbs, and when he finally
             did, he said his own work added little to Gibbs. But he was wrong.
                Gibbs earned the first American Ph.D. in Engineering from Yale
             in 1863. He went to France where he studied with the great Joseph
             Liouville, who formulated the theorem that the phase-space volume
             of a system evolving under a conservative Hamiltonian function is a
             constant along the system’s trajectory. This led to the conclusion that
             entropy is a conserved quantity, like mass, energy, momentum, etc.
                In his short text Principles in Statistical Mechanics, published the
             year before his death in 1903, Gibbs coined the English term phase
             space and the name for the new field - statistical mechanics. This
             book brought him his most fame. But it was not his first work. Gibbs
             had published many articles on thermodynamics and was well
             known in Europe, though not by Einstein. Einstein independently
             rederived much of Gibbs’s past work.
                Einstein, by comparison, was an unknown developing his first
             ideas about a molecular basis for thermodynamics. His readings
             were probably limited to Boltzmann’s Lectures on Gas Theory.
               1     See chapter 4.
               2     See chapter 22.
                                         Statistical Mechanics             43

   Gibbs transformed the earlier work in “kinetic gas theory” by
Boltzmann, making it more mathematically rigorous. Gibbs made
kinetic gas theory obsolete, but he lacked the deep physical insight
of either Boltzmann or Einstein.




                                                                            Chapter 5
   Perhaps inspired by the examples of other conservation laws
in physics discovered during his lifetime, Gibbs disagreed with
Boltzmann’s view that information is “lost” when the entropy
increases. For Gibbs, every particle is in principle distinguishable and
identifiable. For Boltzmann, two gases on either side of a partition
with particles distinguishable from one another, but otherwise iden-
tical, will increase their entropy when the partition is removed and
they are allowed to mix.
   For Gibbs, this suggested a paradox, what if the gases on both side
were identical? On Boltzmann’s view, the entropy would not go up,
because there would be no “mixing.” Entropy seems to depend on
what we know about the particles? For Gibbs, complete information
about every particle, their identities, their classical paths, would
give us a constant entropy, essentially zero.
   For Gibbs, information is conserved when macroscopic order
disappears because it simply changes into microscopic (thus
invisible) order as the path information of all the gas particles is
preserved. As Boltzmann’s mentor Josef Loschmidt had argued
in the early 1870’s, if the velocities of all the particles could be
reversed at an instant, the future evolution of the gas would move
in the direction of decreasing entropy. All the original order would
reappear.
   Nevertheless, Gibbs’s idea of the conservation of information
is still widely held today by mathematical physicists. And most
texts on statistical mechanics still claim that microscopic collisions
between particles are reversible. Some explicitly claim that quantum
mechanics changes nothing, because they limit themselves to the uni-
tary (conservative and deterministic) evolution of the Schrödinger
equation and ignore the collapse of the wave function.
   So if Gibbs does not calculate the permutations of molecules in
“microstates” and their combinations into the “complexions” of
Boltzmann’s “macrostates,” what exactly is his statistical thinking?
        44         My God, He Plays Dice!

             It is the statistics of a large number of identical thermodynamic
             systems that he calls “ensembles.” Boltzmann had also considered
             such large numbers of identical systems, averaging over them and
             assuming the averages give the same results as time averages over a
Chapter 5




             single system. Such systems are called ergodic.
                Maxwell thought that Boltzmann’s ergodic hypothesis requires
             that the time evolution of a system pass through every point
             consistent with the energy. If the system is continuous, there are an
             infinite number of such points.
                Boltzmann relaxed the ergodic requirement, dividing what Gibbs
             later called “phase space” into finite cells that Boltzmann described
             as “coarse graining.” Quantum mechanics would later find reasons
             for particles being confined to phase-space volumes equal to the
             cube of Planck’s quantum of action h3. This is not because space is
             quantized but because material particles cannot get closer together
             than Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle allows. Δp Δx = h.
                Both Boltzmann and Gibbs considered two kinds of ensembles.
             Boltzmann called his ensembles monodes. Boltzmann’s ergode is
             known since Gibbs as the microcanonical ensemble, in which
             energy is constant. In Gibbs’s canonical ensemble energy may
             change. Boltzmann called it a holode. Einstein’s focus was on the
             canonical ensemble. For him, the canonical is one where energy
             may be exchanged with a very large connected heat reservoir, which
             helped Einstein to define the absolute temperature T.
                Where Gibbs ignored the microscopic behavior of molecules,
             Einstein followed Boltzmann in considering the motions and
             behavior of molecules, atoms, even electrons, and then photons.
                Gibbs’ statistical mechanics provided a formal basis for all the
             classical results of thermodynamics. But he discovered nothing new
             in atomic and molecular physics.
                By contrast, Einstein’s statistical mechanics gave him insight
             into things previously thought to be unobservable - the motions
             of molecules that explain the Brownian motion, 3 the behavior
             of electrons in metals as electrical and thermal conductors, the
             existence of energy levels in solids that explains anomalies in their
             specific heat, 4 and even let him discover the particle nature of light.  5
               3     Chapter 7.
               4     Chapter 8.
               5     Chapter 6.
                                                 Statistical Mechanics                    45

   Einstein’s study of fluctuations let him see both the particle nature
and the wave nature of light as separate terms in his analysis of
entropy. In the final section of his 1904 paper, Einstein applied his
calculations to radiation.




                                                                                           Chapter 5
   He thought that energy fluctuations would be extreme if the
radiation is confined to a volume of space with dimensions of the
same order of magnitude as the wavelength of the radiation.
   While Einstein may or may not be correct about the maximum
of fluctuations, he did derive the wavelength of the maximum of
radiation λmax, showing it is inversely proportional to the absolute
temperature T. Einstein estimated theoretically that
   λmax = 0.42/T
   Wien had discovered this relationship ten years earlier empirically
as his displacement law. Wien had found
   λmax = 0.293/T.
   Einstein wrote
    One can see that both the kind of dependence on the temperature
    and the order of magnitude of λm can be correctly determined
    from the general molecular theory of heat, and considering the
    broad generality of our assumptions, I believe that this agreement
    must not be attributed to chance. 6
   Einstein’s work on statistical mechanics thus goes well beyond
that of Boltzmann and Gibbs. The work of Gibbs did not depend
on the existence of material particles and that of Boltzmann had
nothing to do with radiation.
   The tools Einstein developed in his three papers on statistical
mechanics, especially his ability to calculate microscopic
fluctuations, gave him profound insights into both matter and light.
   All this work may be largely forgotten today, especially in many
modern texts on quantum physics that prefer the conservative
Gibbs formalism to that of Einstein. But Einstein’s next three
papers, all published in just one year often called his annus mirabilis,
were all based on his young ability to see far beyond his older
colleagues.
   In particular, Einstein had a knack for seeing what goes on at the
microscopic level that he called an “objective reality.”
   6      On the General Molecular Theory of Heat, §5 Application to Radiation, Annalen
der Physik, 14 (1904) pp.354-362.
