         160      Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy



                                                   m inis        m
                                          De t e r

                                                            t i b i l i s m
                                                  Co    mpa                   ism
                                                                   rmin
                         ter  minism               Sof   t D e t e
                  De
             Hard                                                                   lism
                                                                          atibi
Chapter 12




                                                                    o m p
                                                              oft C
                        p a t i b ilism
                                  o d    e    l s           S
          nco         m
                             e M                                                           In
        11




        I
H a r d
                      St a g      ill
                   wo- FreSeemW     p a t i bilism
                 T             icom

  Ill u s i o n ism  of                       sm
                                                                 p atib ili
                                                        In c o m
                                                    w
                        sm                 Narro
   Impo         ssibili
                                                                 p atib   ilism
                                                      t In c o m
                                                 Sof                                        y
                         del                                                        Leewa
                   an Mo
             Valeri                                       p a t i b ilism            (Altern
                                                                                             a
                                          r c e I ncom nce)
                                      Sou          l S e que
                                        (Actu   a
                                                                             i m i t e d
                                                      e lw             ith L
                                                  o d
                                - S t      a ge M
                           Tw o                     This chapter on the web
                 informationphilosopher.com/freedom/two-stage_models.html
                           m inis          m
                  de t e r                                Two-Stage Models         161
             In
             Two-Stage Models
                         rianisof Free Will
                               m
                                           a
                                Libert
                                                                                usal
                In our history of the free will problem (Chapter 7), we found
                                                                          - C a
             several thinkers who developed two-stage solutions to thetclassical
             problem of free will, among them William James         en Henri
                                                                Ag(1884),
                                    C a  u s al
             Poincaré (about 1906), the physicist     Arthur Holly Compton
             (1931, 1955), the   t-
                          venphilosopher     Mortimer Adler (1961), the math-
             ematician EJacques Hadamard, the philosopher Karl Popper
             (1965, 1977), the physicist and philosopher Henry Margenau
                                                                             - C a u sal
             (1968, 1982), the philosophers Daniel Dennett N             on and
                                                                      (1978)




                                                                                               11
                                                                                       Chapter 12
             Robert Kane (1985), the classicists Anthony Long and David
                            m               SFA(1989), Julia Annas (1990),
        a t i b i lis
             Sedley (1987), Roger Penrose

    omp                                                                 lity
             Alfred Mele (1995), Benjamin Libet and Stephen Kosslyn
                                                                    s a
nc                                                      oft C
             (2004), John Searle (2007), and most recently,
             cist and biologist Martin Heisenberg    S(2009).
                                                               a  u
                                                                the neurogeneti-


                         a tibilism
                My own Cogito      two-stage model has been in development
                                                                                      m
             In c
             sinceo m
                   the p
                       1970’s, and  will be discussed in the next chapter.rtarianis
   Broad                                                   Soft L
                                                                     ibe
             William James (1884)
                                           m
                                     nistwo-stage model of free will is that James ibertaria
                                  iafirst
                 The geniustof
                          e r a r
                                the
            e s
            makest L  ib
                      indeterminism                                      g   S  o
                                         the source for what he calls “alternativeft L
     Mod possibilities” and “ambiguous futures.”               Darin
                 The chance generation ofo
                                          C  such o
                                              gitalternative possibilities for action
             t i b  is
            doesilnot   min any way   limit his choice to one of them. For James,
         p a
 Incom chance       c e  s) the
                      is not     direct cause of actions. James makes it clear that
                                                                              n is     m
         e qu
            it  e
               is n
                  his  choice that “grants consent” to one of them.
                                                                      e r m i
ativ e S
                                                   d In
                 As James biographer Robert Richardson puts it,
                                                 e                det
                                             i t
                                      nd Lim
                 “Accepting the possibility of chance does not mean accepting a

                     s m    a
                 world that is random. It means realizing that chance is another
                   i
      t e r      n
            mIni1884 James asked some Harvard Divinity School students to
                 word for freedom.” 1
  D e
             consider his choice for walking home after his talk.

             1       James (2010) p. 21.
         162     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     “What is meant by saying that my choice of which way to walk
                     home after the lecture is ambiguous and matter of chance?...It
                     means that both Divinity Avenue and Oxford Street are called
                     but only one, and that one either one, shall be chosen.” 2
                  With this simple example, James was the first thinker to enun-
               ciate clearly a two-stage decision process, with chance in a pres-
               ent time of random alternatives, leading to a choice which grants
               consent to one possibility and transforms an equivocal ambiguous
               future into an unalterable and simple past. There is a temporal
               sequence of undetermined alternative possibilities followed by an
               adequately determined choice where chance is no longer a factor.
Chapter 12




                  James also asked the students to imagine his actions repeated
               in exactly the same circumstances, a condition which is regarded
               today as one of the great challenges to libertarian free will. In the
        11




               following passage, James anticipates much of modern philosophi-
               cal modal reasoning and physical theories of multiple universes.
                     “Imagine that I first walk through Divinity Avenue, and then
                     imagine that the powers governing the universe annihilate ten
                     minutes of time with all that it contained, and set me back at
                     the door of this hall just as I was before the choice was made.
                     Imagine then that, everything else being the same, I now make
                     a different choice and traverse Oxford Street. You, as passive
                     spectators, look on and see the two alternative universes,--one
                     of them with me walking through Divinity Avenue in it, the
                     other with the same me walking through Oxford Street. Now,
                     if you are determinists you believe one of these universes to
                     have been from eternity impossible: you believe it to have been
                     impossible because of the intrinsic irrationality or accidental-
                     ity somewhere involved in it. But looking outwardly at these
                     universes, can you say which is the impossible and accidental
                     one, and which the rational and necessary one? I doubt if the
                     most ironclad determinist among you could have the slightest
                     glimmer of light on this point.” 3
                  James’s two-stage model effectively separates chance (the inde-
               terministic free element) from choice (an arguably determinate
               decision that follows causally from one’s character, values, and
                 2       James (1056) “The Dilemma of Determinism,” p. 149.
                 3       ibid., p. 155.
                                   Two-Stage Models of Free Will           163

especially feelings and desires at the moment of decision). In his
1890 book The Principles of Psychology, James said there were five
types of decision. In the first, the reasonable type,
        “arguments for and against a given course seem to settle them-
      selves in the mind and to end by leaving a clear balance in favor
      of one alternative…. In this easy transition from doubt to as-
      surance we seem to ourselves almost passive; the reasons which
      decide us appearing to flow in from the nature of things, and to
      owe nothing to our will. We have, however, a perfect sense of
      being free, in that we are devoid of any feeling of coercion….
      It may be said in general that a great part of every deliberation
      consists in the turning over of all the possible modes of con-




                                                                                     11
                                                                             Chapter 12
      ceiving the doing or not doing of the act in point. The moment
      we hit upon a conception which lets us apply some principle of
      action which is a fixed and stable part of our Ego, our state of
      doubt is at an end.” 4
   Where do the alternative possibilities for action come from?
From past experiences - initially involuntary and later from ob-
serving the experiences of others, all these the results of chance
- we build up a stock of possibilities in our memory.
      “We learn all our possibilities by the way of experience. When
      a particular movement, having once occurred in a random, re-
      flex, or involuntary way, has left an image of itself in the mem-
      ory, then the movement can be desired again, proposed as an
      end, and deliberately willed.
      “A supply of ideas of the various movements that are possible left
      in the memory by experiences of their involuntary performance is
      thus the first prerequisite of the voluntary life.” 5
   In the fifth kind of decision, James sees room for creativity that
allows us to do something beyond what the given reasons would
logically imply. Note that in a deterministic universe, there are
no genuinely new creative acts. Determinism is “information-
preserving.” There is “nothing new under the sun.”

  4       James (2007) p. 531
  5       James (2007) p. 487-8. The italics are in the original
         164     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                         “In the fifth and final type of decision, the feeling that the
                     evidence is all in, and that reason has balanced the books, may
                     be either present or absent. But in either case we feel, in decid-
                     ing, as if we ourselves by our own wilful act inclined the beam;
                     in the former case by adding our living effort to the weight of
                     the logical reason which, taken alone, seems powerless to make
                     the act discharge; in the latter by a kind of creative contribution
                     of something instead of a reason which does a reason’s work.” 6
                 James’ “mental evolution” was clearly inspired by Charles Dar-
               win’s biological evolution.
                     “A remarkable parallel, which I think has never been noticed,
Chapter 12




                     obtains between the facts of social evolution on the one hand,
                     and of zoölogical evolution as expounded by Mr. Darwin on
                     the other...
        11




                     [“In mental evolution], if anywhere, it would seem at first sight
                     as if that school must be right which makes the mind passively
                     plastic, and the environment actively productive of the form
                     and order of its conceptions; which, in a word, thinks that all
                     mental progress must result from a series of adaptive changes,
                     in the sense already defined of that word...It might, accordingly,
                     seem as if there were no room for any agency other than this;
                     as if the distinction we have found so useful between “spon-
                     taneous variation,” as the producer of changed forms, and the
                     environment, as their preserver and destroyer, did not hold in
                     the case of mental progress; as if, in a word, the parallel with
                     Darwinism might no longer obtain...
                     “But, in spite of all these facts, I have no hesitation whatever in
                     holding firm to the Darwinian distinction even here...
                     “And I can easily show...that as a matter of fact the new con-
                     ceptions, emotions, and active tendencies which evolve are
                     originally produced in the shape of random images, fancies,
                     accidental out-births of spontaneous variation in the functional
                     activity of the excessively instable human brain.” 7

                 6       James (2007) p. 534.
                 7       James (1880) p. 441.
                              Two-Stage Models of Free Will              165


Henri Poincaré (about 1906)
   Henri Poincaré was called the “last universalist” because he
was a great contributor to so many fields in mathematics, but his
work was also broad in physics, philosophy, and psychology. Wil-
liam James read Poincaré and the great thinker knew James work.
There is some sign of direct influence.
   Poincaré speculated on how his mind works when he is solving
mathematical problems. He had the critical insight that random
combinations and possibilities are generated, some in an uncon-
scious way with chance involved, then they are selected among,
perhaps initially also by an unconscious process, but then by a




                                                                                   11
                                                                           Chapter 12
definite conscious process of validation.
      “It is certain that the combinations which present themselves
      to the mind in a kind of sudden illumination after a somewhat
      prolonged period of unconscious work are generally useful and
      fruitful combinations… all the combinations are formed as a
      result of the automatic action of the subliminal ego, but those
      only which are interesting find their way into the field of con-
      sciousness… A few only are harmonious, and consequently at
      once useful and beautiful, and they will be capable of affecting
      the geometrician’s special sensibility I have been speaking of;
      which, once aroused, will direct our attention upon them, and
      will thus give them the opportunity of becoming conscious… In
      the subliminal ego, on the contrary, there reigns what I would
      call liberty, if one could give this name to the mere absence of
      discipline and to disorder born of chance.” 8
  Poincaré was thus the second thinker to propose the two-stage
process of random alternatives followed by selection of one choice.
Jacques Hadamard (1945)
   In his 1945 book Psychology of Invention in the Mathemati-
cal Field, Hadamard described the Synthèse conference in Paris
in 1936 organized to study creativity. The conference focused on
Henri Poincare’s two-stage approach to problem solving, in
which the unconscious generates random combinations. In his
book, Hadamard quoted the poet Valéry (as did Dennett later),
  8       Poincaré (2003)
         166     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               summarizing the conference opinion. For Hadamard, it captured
               Poincaré’s description of how the combination of random ideas is
               followed by a choice of the best combination. Chance alone is not
               enough.
                     “...it is obvious that invention or discovery, be it in mathematics
                     or anywhere else, takes place by combining ideas.
                     “However, to find these, it has been necessary to construct the
                     very numerous possible combinations, among which the useful
                     ones are to be found.
                     “It cannot be avoided that this first operation take place, to a
Chapter 12




                     certain extent, at random, so that the role of chance is hardly
                     doubtful in this first step of the mental process.
                     “It is obvious that this first process, this building up of numer-
        11




                     ous combinations, is only the beginning of creation, even, as we
                     should say, preliminary to it...Invention is discernment, choice.
                     “To Invent Is to Choose. This very remarkable conclusion appears
                     the more striking if we compare it with what Paul Valéry writes
                     in the Nouvelle Revue Française: “It takes two to invent any-
                     thing. The one makes up combinations; the other one chooses,
                     recognizes what he wishes and what is important to him in the
                     mass of the things which the former has imparted to him.”
                     “What we call genius is much less the work of the first one than
                     the readiness of the second one to grasp the value of what has
                     been laid before him and to choose it.” 9
                 Although Valéry describes two persons, this is clearly William
               James’ temporal sequence of random chance (“free”) followed by
               a determining choice (“will”). For James, chance and choice are
               part of a single mind.
               Arthur Holly Compton (1931, 1955)
                 In 1931, Nobel prize-winning physicist Compton championed
               the idea of human freedom based on quantum uncertainty and
               invented the notion of amplification of microscopic quantum
               events to bring chance into the macroscopic world. In his rather
                 9       Hadamard (1945) p. 30.
                               Two-Stage Models of Free Will                167

bizarre mechanism, he imagined sticks of dynamite attached to
his amplifier, anticipating the Schrödinger’s Cat paradox.
   Years later, Compton clarified the two-stage nature of his idea
in an Atlantic Monthly article in 1955.
      “A set of known physical conditions is not adequate to specify
    precisely what a forthcoming event will be. These conditions,
    insofar as they can be known, define instead a range of possible
    events from among which some particular event will occur.
    When one exercises freedom, by his act of choice he is himself
    adding a factor not supplied by the physical conditions and is
    thus himself determining what will occur. That he does so is
    known only to the person himself. From the outside one can see




                                                                                      11
                                                                              Chapter 12
    in his act only the working of physical law. It is the inner knowl-
    edge that he is in fact doing what he intends to do that tells the
    actor himself that he is free.” 10

Mortimer Adler (1961)
   In the second volume of his massive book The Idea of Freedom,
Adler revisits the idea of a natural freedom of self-determination,
which explicitly includes alternative possibilities and the self as
a cause so our actions are “up to us.” Note that the uncaused self
decides from prior alternative possibilities.
   “We have employed the following descriptive formula to sum-
marize the understanding of self-determination.” It is “only when
at least two of the three following points are affirmed:
       “(i) that the decision is intrinsically unpredictable, i.e., given
perfect knowledge of all relevant causes, the decision cannot be
foreseen or predicted with certitude;
        “(ii) that the decision is not necessitated, i.e., the decision
is always one of a number of alternative possible decisions any
one of which it was simultaneously within the power of the self
to cause, no matter what other antecedent or concurrent factors
exercise a causal influence on the making of the decision;
        “(iii) that the decision flows from the causal initiative of the
self, i.e., on the plane of natural or finite causes, the self is the un-
caused cause of the decision it makes.” 11
  10    Compton (1967)
  11    Adler (1961) p. 225.
         168     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               Karl Popper (1965, 1977)
                  Compton’s work was no doubt closely read by philosopher
               Karl Popper, especially when Popper was selected to give the
               first Arthur Holly Compton Memorial Lecture in 1965.
                  At first Popper dismissed quantum mechanics as being no help
               with free will, but later he describes a two-stage model that par-
               allels Darwinian evolution, with genetic mutations being proba-
               bilistic and involving quantum uncertainty. In his Compton lec-
               tures, he criticizes Compton’s amplifier idea
                  “The idea that the only alternative to determinism is just sheer
Chapter 12




                  chance was taken over by Schlick, together with many of his
                  views on the subject, from Hume, who asserted that
                         ‘the removal’ of what he called ‘physical necessity’ must
        11




                     always result in ‘the same thing with chance. As objects must
                     either be conjoin’d or not, . . . ‘tis impossible to admit of any
                     medium betwixt chance and an absolute necessity’.
                  “I shall later argue against this important doctrine according to
                  which the alternative to determinism is sheer chance. Yet I must
                  admit that the doctrine seems to hold good for the quantum-
                  theoretical models which have been designed to explain, or at
                  least to illustrate, the possibility of human freedom. This seems
                  to be the reason why these models are so very unsatisfactory.
                  “Compton himself designed such a model, though he did not
                  particularly like it. It uses quantum indeterminacy, and the
                  unpredictability of a quantum jump, as a model of a human
                  decision of great moment. It consists of an amplifier which
                  amplifies the effect of a single quantum jump in such a way that
                  it may either cause an explosion or destroy the relay necessary
                  for bringing the explosion about. In this way one single quan-
                  tum jump may be equivalent to a major decision. But in my
                  opinion the model has no similarity to any rational decision,
                  being probabilistic and involving quantum uncertainty.
                  “Hume’s and Schlick’s ontological thesis that there cannot exist
                  anything intermediate between chance and determinism seems
                  to me not only highly dogmatic (not to say doctrinaire) but
                  clearly absurd; and it is understandable only on the assumption
                                  Two-Stage Models of Free Will         169

   that they believed in a complete determinism in which chance
   has no status except as a symptom of our ignorance.” 12
  Popper called for a combination of randomness and control to
explain freedom, though not yet explicitly in two stages with ran-
dom chance before the controlled decision.
   “freedom is not just chance but, rather, the result of a subtle
   interplay between something almost random or haphazard, and
   something like a restrictive or selective control.” 13
  In his 1977 book with John Eccles, The Self and its Brain, Pop-
per finally formulates the two-stage model in a temporal sequence,
and makes the comparison with evolution and natural selection,




                                                                                  11
                                                                          Chapter 12
   “New ideas have a striking similarity to genetic mutations. Now,
   let us look for a moment at genetic mutations. Mutations are,
   it seems, brought about by quantum theoretical indeterminacy
   (including radiation effects). Accordingly, they are also probabi-
   listic and not in themselves originally selected or adequate, but
   on them there subsequently operates natural selection which
   eliminates inappropriate mutations. Now we could conceive of
   a similar process with respect to new ideas and to free-will deci-
   sions, and similar things.
   “That is to say, a range of possibilities is brought about by a
   probabilistic and quantum mechanically characterized set of
   proposals, as it were - of possibilities brought forward by the
   brain. On these there then operates a kind of selective proce-
   dure which eliminates those proposals and those possibilities
   which are not acceptable to the mind.”
   In 1977 Popper gave the first Darwin Lecture, at Darwin Col-
lege, Cambridge. He called it Natural Selection and the Emergence
of Mind. In it he said he had changed his mind (a rare admission
by a philosopher) about two things. First he now thought that nat-
ural selection was not a “tautology” that made it an unfalsifiable
theory. Second, he had come to accept the random variation and
selection of ideas as a model of free will.
   “The selection of a kind of behavior out of a randomly offered
   repertoire may be an act of choice, even an act of free will. I am
  12   Popper (1972) p. 227ff..
  13   ibid.
         170     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  an indeterminist; and in discussing indeterminism I have often
                  regretfully pointed out that quantum indeterminacy does not
                  seem to help us;1 for the amplification of something like, say,
                  radioactive disintegration processes would not lead to human
                  action or even animal action, but only to random movements.
                  “I have changed my mind on this issue.2 A choice process may
                  be a selection process, and the selection may be from some
                  repertoire of random events, without being random in its turn.
                  This seems to me to offer a promising solution to one of our
                  most vexing problems, and one by downward causation.”
                      1. Cf. my Objective Knowledge, chapter 6, pp. 226-29.
Chapter 12




                      2. See p. 540 of J. C. Eccles and K. R. Popper, The Self and Its Brain.

               Henry Margenau (1968, 1982)
                  In 1968, physicist Margenau was invited to give the Wimmer
        11




               Lecture at St. Vincent College in Pennsylvania. His topic was Sci-
               entific Indeterminism and Human Freedom. Margenau embraced
               indeterminism as the first step toward a solution of the problem
               of human freedom.
                  Then in 1982, with co-author Lawrence LeShan, Margenau
               called his model of free will a “solution” to what had heretofore
               had been seen as mere “paradox and illusion.” He very neatly sep-
               arates “free” and “will” in a temporal sequence, as William James
               had done, naming them simply “chance” followed by “choice.”
                  “Our thesis is that quantum mechanics leaves our body, our
                  brain, at any moment in a state with numerous (because of its
                  complexity we might say innumerable) possible futures, each
                  with a predetermined probability. Freedom involves two com-
                  ponents: chance (existence of a genuine set of alternatives) and
                  choice. Quantum mechanics provides the chance, and we shall
                  argue that only the mind can make the choice by selecting (not
                  energetically enforcing) among the possible future courses.” 14

               Daniel Dennett (1978)
                  While he is a confirmed compatibilist, in “On Giving Liber-
               tarians What They Say They Want,” chapter 15 of his 1978 book
                 14   Margenau and Leshan (1982) p. 240.
                               Two-Stage Models of Free Will             171

Brainstorms, Tufts philosopher Daniel Dennett articulated the
case for a two-stage model of free will better than any libertarian.
  Dennett named his model of decision-making “Valerian” after
the poet Paul Valéry, who took part in a 1936 conference in Paris
with Jacques Hadamard. He quotes Valéry,
      “It takes two to invent anything. The one makes up combina-
   tions; the other one chooses.” 15
   Dennett makes his version of a two-stage model very clear. And
he defends it with six excellent reasons. His arguments are more
persuasive than any other philosopher or scientist, including Wil-
liam James himself. Ironically, Dennett remains a firm believer in




                                                                                   11
                                                                           Chapter 12
determinism and calls himself a compatibilist.
      “The model of decision making I am proposing has the fol-
   lowing feature: when we are faced with an important decision,
   a consideration-generator whose output is to some degree
   undetermined produces a series of considerations, some of
   which may of course be immediately rejected as irrelevant by
   the agent (consciously or unconsciously). Those considerations
   that are selected by the agent as having a more than negligi-
   ble bearing on the decision then figure in a reasoning process,
   and if the agent is in the main reasonable, those considerations
   ultimately serve as predictors and explicators of the agent’s final
   decision.”16
  Dennett gives strong reasons why this is the kind of free will
that libertarians say they want.
       1. “First...The intelligent selection, rejection, and weighing
   of the considerations that do occur to the subject is a matter of
   intelligence making the difference.”
     2. “Second, I think it installs indeterminism in the right place
   for the libertarian, if there is a right place at all.”
      3. “Third...from the point of view of biological engineering, it
   is just more efficient and in the end more rational that decision
   making should occur in this way.”
  15   Dennett (1978) p. 293
  16   Dennett (1978) p. 295
         172     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                     4. “A fourth observation in favor of the model is that it per-
                  mits moral education to make a difference, without making all
                  of the difference.”
                    5. “Fifth - and I think this is perhaps the most important thing
                  to be said in favor of this model - it provides some account of
                  our important intuition that we are the authors of our moral
                  decisions.”
                     6. “Finally, the model I propose points to the multiplicity of
                  decisions that encircle our moral decisions and suggests that in
                  many cases our ultimate decision as to which way to act is less
                  important phenomenologically as a contributor to our sense of
Chapter 12




                  free will than the prior decisions affecting our deliberation pro-
                  cess itself: the decision, for instance, not to consider any further,
                  to terminate deliberation; or the decision to ignore certain lines
                  of inquiry.
        11




                     “These prior and subsidiary decisions contribute, I think, to
                  our sense of ourselves as responsible free agents, roughly in the
                  following way: I am faced with an important decision to make,
                  and after a certain amount of deliberation, I say to myself:
                  “That’s enough. I’ve considered this matter enough and now I’m
                  going to act,” in the full knowledge that I could have considered
                  further, in the full knowledge that the eventualities may prove
                  that I decided in error, but with the acceptance of responsibility
                  in any case.” 17

               Robert Kane (1985)
                  In his 1985 book Free Will and Values Kane carefully consid-
               ered the work of Compton, Popper, Eccles, and Dennett. He says
               he developed his own two-stage model before Dennett, but in the
               end he did not publish it or endorse Dennett because the two-
               stage model “did not go far enough.”
                  Kane was actually quite bleak about the possibilities for a
               satisfactory libertarian model. He felt,
                  “that any construction which escaped confusion and emptiness
                  was likely to fall short of some libertarian aspirations - aspira-
                  tions that I believe cannot ultimately be fulfilled.” 18
                 17   Dennett (1978) p. 295-7.
                 18   Kane (1985) p. 165.
                             Two-Stage Models of Free Will                173

  His first model was a choice between “relativistic alternatives.”
The choice was in part rational and in part indeterministic. It
could be explained by the agent giving his reasons. Even if the
choice is by chance,
    “the agent has agreed beforehand to accept the chance selected
    outcome and to endorse reasons for it in a special way. That
    is, the selection is going to be ‘willed to be so’ on a provisional
    basis by the agent, whichever way it goes.” 19
   Kane hoped to combine some rationality with some freedom in
this model, so both determinists and libertarians would be happy.
Unfortunately, neither was happy.




                                                                                    11
                                                                            Chapter 12
   Although the two-stage model of earlier thinkers is an “essen-
tial and important part” of any adequate libertarian conception
of free will, it does not go far enough for Kane because it does
not fully capture the notion of ultimate responsibility (UR) during
“self-forming actions” (SFAs) which depend on the agent’s efforts.
He has said that the two-stage model was merely a “significant
piece in the overall puzzle of a libertarian freedom.” 20
    “The reason is that the chance (“free”) part is not in the con-
    trol of the agent and the “will” part is fully determined by a
    combination of the chance part and other determining fac-
    tors, so the final choice is determined by factors, none of which
    the agent has control over at the time of choice. If all of our
    choices are determined at the time of choice that would not
    be libertarian freedom even if some chance events in the past
    were responsible for forming some of the determining factors
    that now determine our choice because however the determin-
    ing factors were formed in the past, all of our choices would be
    determined when they are made.” 21
   Kane agrees that these choices would not have been pre-
determined from before the chance events in the past (the gen-
eration of possibilities in the first stage), so are libertarian free.
   Kane had previously accepted that the two-stage model could
provide enough freedom for everyday practical decisions (vanilla
or chocolate), but did not play a role in moral or prudential “torn”
  19    Kane (1985) p. 96.
  20    Kane (1985) p. 104.
  21    Personal communication.
         174     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               decisions between what the agent believes ought to be done and
               what the agent wants or desires to do.
                  Today Kane sees that two-stage models may generate the
               alternatives of his SFAs, based on character and motives. So they
               may explain the agent’s conflicting motives in moral and pruden-
               tial choices. and they even explain the (reasons for the) agent’s
               efforts. Kane now agrees that the agent has libertarian freedom
               even when the two-stage model produces just one option and the
               agent can be described as “self-determined.”
                  But when the two-stage model does not narrow down the alter-
               natives to a single act of self-determination, and when the choice
Chapter 12




               is moral or prudential, Kane says that his introduction of indeter-
               minism into the decision itself provides “something more” than
               the two-stage model, and I now agree with him.
        11




                  “Now I believe these undetermined self-forming actions or
                  SFAs occur at those difficult times of life when we are torn
                  between competing visions of what we should do or become.
                  Perhaps we are torn between doing the moral thing or acting
                  from ambition, or between powerful present desires and long-
                  term goals, or we are faced with difficult tasks for which we have
                  aversions.” 22
                  “In all such cases, we are faced with competing motivations and
                  have to make an effort to overcome temptation to do something
                  else we also strongly want. There is tension and uncertainty
                  in our minds about what to do at such times, I suggest, that
                  is reflected in appropriate regions of our brains by movement
                  away from thermodynamic equilibrium — in short, a kind of
                  “stirring up of chaos” in the brain that makes it sensitive to
                  micro-indeterminacies at the neuronal level. The uncertainty
                  and inner tension we feel at such soul-searching moments of
                  self-formation is thus reflected in the indeterminacy of our
                  neural processes themselves. What we experience internally
                  as uncertainty about what to do on such occasions would then
                  correspond physically to the opening of a window of oppor-
                  tunity that temporarily screens off complete determination by
                  influences of the past. 23
                 22   “Libertarianism,” in Fischer (2007) p. 26.
                 23   ibid. p. 26.
                               Two-Stage Models of Free Will             175

  Kane agrees that the ever-present noise in the brain is enough
to provide the indeterminism. But he emphasizes that the
agent’s efforts are more the cause of the final decision than the
indeterminism involved.
   “If indeterminism is involved in a process so that its outcome
   is undetermined, one might argue that the outcome must
   merely happen and therefore cannot be somebody’s choice. But
   there is no reason to assume such a claim is true. A choice is
   the formation of an intention or purpose to do something. It
   resolves uncertainty and indecision in the mind about what
   to do. Nothing in such a description implies that there could
   not be some indeterminism in the deliberation and neural




                                                                                   11
                                                                           Chapter 12
   processes of an agent preceding choice corresponding to the
   agent’s prior uncertainty about what to do. Recall from the pre-
   ceding arguments that the presence of indeterminism does not
   mean the outcome happened merely by chance and not by the
   agent’s effort. Self-forming choices are undetermined, but not
   uncaused. They are caused by the agent’s efforts. 24
   To Kane’s critics, the SFA’s indeterminism raises the objection
of loss of control, but Kane says the agent can decide to assume
responsibility whichever way she chooses.
     “Suppose we were to say to such persons: ‘But look, you didn’t
   have sufficient or conclusive prior reasons for choosing as you
   did since you also had viable reasons for choosing the other
   way.’ They might reply. ‘True enough. But I did have good rea-
   sons for choosing as I did, which I’m willing to stand by and
   take responsibility for. If these reasons were not sufficient or
   conclusive reasons, that’s because, like the heroine of the novel,
   I was not a fully formed person before I chose (and still am not,
   for that matter). Like the author of the novel, I am in the process
   of writing an unfinished story and forming an unfinished char-
   acter who, in my case, is myself.’” 25

Anthony Long and David Sedley (1987)
  Anthony Long and David Sedley speculated in their master-
work The Hellenistic Philosophers that Epicurus’ swerve of the
  24   “Libertarianism,” in Fischer (2007) p. 33
  25   ibid, pp. 41-2.
         176     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

               atoms might be limited to providing undetermined alternative
               possibilities for action, from which the mind’s power of volition
               could choose in a way that reflects character and values, desires
               and feelings.
                  “Here at last a significant role for the swerve leaps to the eye.
                  For it is to answer just this question, according to Cicero, that
                  the swerve was introduced. The evident power of the self and
                  its volitions to intervene in the physical processes of soul and
                  body would be inexplicable if physical laws alone were suffi-
                  cient to determine the precise trajectory of every atom. There-
                  fore physical laws are not sufficient to determine the precise
                  trajectory of every atom. There is a minimal degree of physical
Chapter 12




                  indeterminism — the swerve. An unimpeded atom may at any
                  given moment continue its present trajectory, but equally may
                  `swerve’ into one of the adjacent parallel trajectories. 26
        11




                  Long and Sedley assume a non-physical (metaphysical) ability
               of the volition to affect the atoms, which is implausible. But the
               idea that a physical volition chooses - (consistent with and ad-
               equately determined by its character and values and its desires and
               feelings) from among alternative possibilities provided randomly
               by the atoms - is quite plausible.
                  “It does so, we may speculate, not by overriding the laws of
                  physics, but by choosing between the alternative possibilities
                  which the laws of physics leave open. In this way a large group of
                  soul atoms might simultaneously be diverted into a new pattern
                  of motion, and thus radically redirect the motion of the body.
                  Such an event, requiring as it does the coincidence of numer-
                  ous swerves, would be statistically most improbable according
                  to the laws of physics alone. But it is still, on the swerve theory,
                  an intrinsically possible one, which volition might therefore
                  be held to bring about..(It may be objected that swerves are
                  meant to be entirely uncaused; but...that was only an inference
                  by Epicurus’ critics, made plausible by concentrating on the
                  swerve’s cosmogonic function...for there it must indeed occur
                  at random and without the intervention of volition.)” 27


                 26   Long and Sedley (1987) p. 110.
                 27   Long and Sedley (1987) p. 110.
                                 Two-Stage Models of Free Will              177


Roger Penrose (1989)
   In his 1989 book The Emperor’s New Mind, Penrose suggests
a two-stage process but is skeptical of the value of randomness in
the first step. His thinking follows that of Jacques Hadamard
and Henri Poincaré, who he has discussed in the previous pages.
    “In relation to this, the question of what constitutes genuine
    originality should be raised. It seems to me that there are two
    factors involved, namely a ‘putting-up’ and a ‘shooting-down’
    process. I imagine that the putting-up could be largely uncon-
    scious and the shooting-down largely conscious. Without an
    effective putting-up process, one would have no new ideas at




                                                                                      11
                                                                              Chapter 12
    all. But, just by itself, this procedure would have little value. One
    needs an effective procedure for forming judgements, so that
    only those ideas with a reasonable chance of success will sur-
    vive. In dreams, for example, unusual ideas may easily come to
    mind, but only very rarely do they survive the critical judge-
    ments of the wakeful consciousness. In my opinion, it is the
    conscious shooting-down (judgement) process that is central to
    the issue of originality, rather than the unconscious putting-up
    process; but I am aware that many others might hold to a con-
    trary view.” 28

Julia Annas (1992)
   In her 1992 book, The Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind, Annas
finds it hard to see how random swerves can help to explain free
action. But she sees clearly that randomness can provide alterna-
tive possibilities for the will to choose from. She says, “there would
be no point in having free will if there were no genuinely open
possibilities between which to select,” anticipating the two-stage
model of free will.
   Perhaps influenced by her classicist colleagues Sedley and Long,
or maybe just coming to the same conclusions from reading the
ancients, especially Epicurus and his swerve, Annas says.
    “...since swerves are random, it is hard to see how they help to
    explain free action. We can scarcely expect there to be a random
    swerve before every free action...random swerves would seem

  28    Penrose (1989) p. 422.
         178     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  to produce, if anything, random actions; we still lack any clue as
                  to how they could produce actions which are free.
                  “An influential modern line of thought avoids these problems
                  by arguing that our evidence does not demand that there be a
                  swerve for each free action [Furley]. Rather, swerves explain the
                  fact that people have characters capable of change and reaction
                  that goes beyond mechanical response to stimuli. We act freely
                  because we have characters that are flexible and spontaneous,
                  and this is because we are composed of atoms which swerve
                  occasionally. On this account, swerves do not have to be fre-
                  quent, since they are not part of any mechanism of action; one
                  swerve in your soul is enough for the kind of character flex-
Chapter 12




                  ibility that is required. Such an account avoids the problems
                  attaching to any account that brings swerves into free action,
                  but at the cost of not answering very closely to the evidence; the
        11




                  Lucretius passage certainly suggests that swerves are in some
                  way relevant at the point of action.
                  “Another kind of suggestion is that swerves are not the causes of
                  free actions at all. Rather, they come into the process whereby
                  free actions are brought about. Swerves are supposed to explain
                  something about the nature of free agency and how it works,
                  but they do not cause free actions (by cutting across causal
                  chains, for example). This suggestion can be developed in sev-
                  eral ways...
                  “The role of swerves is to provide alternative possibilities for
                  volitions to choose between, for there would be no point in hav-
                  ing free will if there were no genuinely open possibilities be-
                  tween which to select.” 29

               Albert Mele (1995)
                  In 1995 Alfred Mele, clearly influenced by Daniel Dennett and
               Robert Kane, proposed his “Modest Libertarianism,” a two-stage
               process that combines an incompatibilist early phase followed by
               a compatibilist control phase.
                  “it might be worth exploring the possibility of combining a
                  compatibilist conception of the later parts of a process issuing
                  in full blown, deliberative, intentional action with an incom-
                 29   The Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind, pp. 184-88
                             Two-Stage Models of Free Will              179

   patibilist conception of the earlier parts. For example, it might
   be possible to gain “ultimate control” while preserving a consid-
   erable measure of nonultimate agential control by treating the
   process from proximal decisive better judgment through overt
   action in a compatibilist way and finding a theoretically useful
   place for indeterminacy in processes leading to proximal deci-
   sive better judgments.” 30
  Mele sees that chance need not be the direct cause of action.
   “That a consideration is indeterministically caused to come to
   mind does not entail that the agent has no control over how he
   responds to it.” 31




                                                                                  11
                                                                          Chapter 12
   Mele is very concerned about the location of any indetermin-
ism, the problem of where and when indeterminism could occur
in a way that helps and does not harm agent control.
The Problem of Luck
   Mele has written extensively about the question whether chance
events in our causal history mean that many of our actions are a
matter of luck. Since chance is very real, many things are the result
of good or bad luck. This is a not a problem for free will, but it is
one for moral responsibility.
John Martin Fischer (1995)
   Also in 1995, John Martin Fischer argued for a model based
on Daniel Dennett’s 1978 work. Fischer is best known for the
idea of semicompatibilism, the idea that moral responsibility is
compatible with determinism. Fischer is agnostic on whether free
will itself is compatible or incompatible with determinism.
   Fischer is most concerned to establish the control needed for
responsibility, especially given Frankfurt-style examples challeng-
ing control. In any case, Fischer uses the Dennett idea - that the
indeterminism comes at an early stage of the overall deliberation-
decision process - to locate a Frankfurt-style “prior sign” needed
by the hypothetical intervener at a place deterministically linked
to the decision and subsequent action.

  30   Mele (1995) p. 212.
  31   Mele (2006) p. 10..
         180     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  Fischer’s main criticism of alternative possibilities for action is
               that it is implausible to suppose that one’s moral responsibility is
               grounded on the possibility of forming a certain sort of judgment
               about what is best: a judgment on behalf of doing something there
               are no good reasons to do. The responsibility for doing good is
               not grounded in the possibility of doing bad. Note that free will
               is completely independent of, and merely a prerequisite to, moral
               responsibility. Otherwise it would be an ethical fallacy.
                  Fischer hopes to develop “another sort of libertarianism.” He
               says he does not have the space to lay out his “second family of
               libertarian accounts,” and gives us very little on how it differs from
Chapter 12




               Dennett. He says “Dennett argues that it is the only sort of lib-
               ertarianism that is plausible, and I believe that it is at least min-
               imally plausible. I also believe that it is libertarianism.” Fischer
        11




               may be simply constructing a libertarianism with a built-in place
               for the Frankfurt intervener, in order to support the absence of
               alternative possibilities and his own semicompatibilism. Here is
               Fischer’s sketch of his main idea.
                   “I wish to develop (in an extremely sketchy way) another sort
                   of libertarianism; on this kind of approach, the relationship
                   between the relevant “sign” or “signal” and the subsequent
                   choice is causally deterministic, but there is nevertheless a lack
                   of causal determination along the sequence that issues in the
                   decision (and action). And I shall point out that this approach
                   also seems to lead to the view that an agent can be morally
                   responsible for making a choice even though he could not have
                   (at any relevant time) made a different choice.
                   “I do not have the space here to lay out this second family of
                   libertarian accounts fully or carefully. But I shall simply sketch
                   the main ideas and hope that enough of the content of the
                   approach will emerge to convince the reader that this family
                   of views constitutes a minimally plausible, serious libertarian
                   approach - worth further elaboration and evaluation in the
                   context of the issues under discussion here. In his article, “On
                   Giving Libertarians What They Say They Want,” Daniel Dennett
                   has presented this family of approaches; he does not necessarily
                               Two-Stage Models of Free Will             181

   endorse the view, but presents it as the most plausible and ap-
   pealing version of libertarianism.
   “What is crucial to Dennett’s view is that indeterminacy be
   installed at the appropriate place, and Dennett argues that this
   is not between the judgment that a particular act is the best
   among one’s alternatives and the subsequent choice. He says,
   “Clearly, what the libertarian has in mind is indeterminism at
   some earlier point, prior to the ultimate decision or formation
   of intention....” Rather, Dennett argues that there can be lack
   of causal determinism (of a certain sort) within the process of
   deliberation that leads to the agent’s judgment as to what is the
   best option (under the circumstances).




                                                                                   11
                                                                           Chapter 12
   “So Dennett’s picture suggested on behalf of the libertarian
   involves some lack of causal determination in the process of
   deliberation, but no such lack in the link between the judgment
   as to what is best and the formation of an intention (or the mak-
   ing of a decision). Let me emphasize that I am not in a position
   here fully to lay out this view (or set of views) or to defend it.
   Dennett argues that it is the only sort of libertarianism that is
   plausible, and I believe that it is at least minimally plausible. I
   also believe that it is libertarianism.” 32

Benjamin Libet and Stephen Kosslyn (2004)
   In 2004, Stephen Kosslyn wrote a foreword to Benjamin
Libet’s book Mind Time. The book summarized Libet’s famous
experiments, in which he claimed a Readiness Potential (RP)
initiates an action well before the conscious will is aware of the
decision to act. See Chapter 17 for the details. At one point in
the book, Libet suggests the RP might include multiple initiatives,
implying multiple possible alternative actions. 33
   In a few brief paragraphs of the foreword, Kosslyn proposed a
two-stage model of alternative choices that are constructed in part
chaotically by nondeterministic processes, followed by decisions
that are based on our character and values - “what one is.” He sees
a role for a causa sui.
  32   Fischer (1995) p. 125
  33   Libet (2004), p. 148.
         182     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                  “The rationales and anticipated consequences — and even,
                  depending on the situation, the alternative courses of action
                  — are not simply “looked up” in memory, having been stashed
                  away like notes in a file after previous encounters.
                  Here Kosslyn considers a first stage of free creation of alterna-
               tive courses of action,
                  “Rather, one constructs rationales and anticipated consequenc-
                  es, as appropriate for the specific situation at hand. This con-
                  struction process may rely in part on chaotic processes. Such
                  processes are not entirely determined by one’s learning history
                  (even as filtered by one’s genes)... Depending on what one was
Chapter 12




                  just thinking about, the brain is in a different “start state” (i.e.,
                  different information is partially activated, different associa-
                  tions are primed) when one constructs rationales and anticipat-
                  ed consequences — which will affect how one decides. (Note
        11




                  that this idea does not simply move the problem back a step:
                  What one was just thinking itself was in part a result of nonde-
                  terministic processes.) Our thoughts, feelings and behavior are
                  not determined; we can have novel insights as well as “second
                  thoughts.”
                  “Given the choices, rationales, and anticipated consequences,
                  one decides what do on the basis of “what one is” (mentally
                  speaking, to use [Galen] Strawson’s term, which includes one’s
                  knowledge, goals, values, and beliefs).” 34
                 Here Kosslyn considers a second stage of willed decisions that
               are determined by our goals, values, and beliefs -
                  “What one is” consists in part of information in memory, which
                  plays a key role in the processes that construct the alternatives,
                  rationales, and anticipated consequences. In addition, “what
                  one is” governs how one actually makes the decisions. And
                  making that decision and experiencing the actual consequences
                  in turn modifies “what one is,” which then affects both how one
                  constructs alternatives, rationales and anticipated consequenc-
                  es and how one makes decisions in the future. Thus, with time
                  one’s decisions construct what one is.

                 34   Kosslyn, in Libet (2005) p. xii-xii.
                                Two-Stage Models of Free Will          183

   “We are not simply accumulators of environmental events, fil-
   tered by our genetic make-ups. We bring something novel and
   unique to each situation — ourselves. Nietzsche (1886, as quot-
   ed in Strawson, 1994, p. 15) commented, “The causa sui is the
   best self-contradiction that has been conceived so far.” Maybe
   not.” 35

John Searle (2007)
   John Searle has written extensively on the problem of con-
sciousness and almost always reflects on the problem of free will.
His position rarely changed over the decades, but in his recent
short book Freedom and Neurobiology he has tackled the problem




                                                                                 11
                                                                         Chapter 12
more directly and for the first time embraced indeterminism as a
positive factor. Indeed, he goes as far as to say that quantum inde-
terminism is a requirement for consciousness.
   In a breakthrough of sorts, Searle admits that he could never
see, until now, the point of introducing quantum mechanics into
discussions of consciousness and free will. Now he says we know
two things, which correspond to the two requirements for free
will:
     First we know that our experiences of free action contain both
   indeterminism and rationality...Second we know that quantum
   indeterminacy is the only form of indeterminism that is indis-
   putably established as a fact of nature...it follows that quantum
   mechanics must enter into the explanation of consciousness.” 36
  Searle describes “open” alternative courses of action. It is very
important to place the “gap” or causa sui before or during the
generation of these alternative possibilities for deliberation to
be followed by willed action. The result is a two-stage, temporal-
sequence model.
  Then in a 2007 lecture at Google (available on YouTube), Searle
describes his “Hypothesis 2” for free will.
  He says three things are necessary:
  35   ibid., p. xiii-xiv.
  36   Searle (2007) p. 74-75
         184     Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy

                    1. some quantum indeterminism must be involved, but at “a
                  lower level,”
                      2. a quantum explanation of consciousness is needed,
                   3. the higher-level of consciousness must inherit the indeter-
                  minism, but without inheriting the randomness.
                 Compare Karl Popper above,
                  “A choice process may be a selection process, and the selection
                  may be from some repertoire of random events, without being
                  random in its turn.” [Popper’s italics]
Chapter 12




               Martin Heisenberg (2009)
                  The most recent thinker to describe a two-stage model is
               Martin Heisenberg (son of physicist Werner), chair of the
        11




               University of Würzburg’s BioZentrum genetics and neurobiology
               section.
                  Since the indeterminacy principle was his father’s work,
               Heisenberg’s position that the physical universe is no longer de-
               termined and that nature is inherently unpredictable comes as
               no surprise. What is unusual is that Heisenberg finds evidence of
               free behavior in animals, including some very simple ones such as
               Drosophila, on which he is a world expert. Heisenberg argues for
               some randomness even in unicellular bacteria, followed by more
               lawful behaviors such as moving toward food.
                  “Evidence of randomly generated action — action that is dis-
                  tinct from reaction because it does not depend upon external
                  stimuli — can be found in unicellular organisms. Take the way
                  the bacterium Escherichia coli moves. It has a flagellum that
                  can rotate around its longitudinal axis in either direction: one
                  way drives the bacterium forward, the other causes it to tumble
                  at random so that it ends up facing in a new direction ready for
                  the next phase of forward motion. This ‘random walk’ can be
                  modulated by sensory receptors, enabling the bacterium to find
                  food and the right temperature.” 37
                 37     Heisenberg (2009) p. 164
                              Two-Stage Models of Free Will            185

   In higher organisms, the brain still may include elements that
do a random walk creating options for action. The capability to
generate new and unpredictable behaviors would have great sur-
vival value, and would likely be incorporated in higher organisms.
   “the activation of behavioural modules is based on the inter-
   play between chance and lawfulness in the brain. Insufficiently
   equipped, insufficiently informed and short of time, animals
   have to find a module that is adaptive. Their brains, in a kind
   of random walk, continuously preactivate, discard and recon-
   figure their options, and evaluate their possible short-term and
   long-term consequences.




                                                                                 11
                                                                         Chapter 12
      “The physiology of how this happens has been little investi-
   gated. But there is plenty of evidence that an animal’s behaviour
   cannot be reduced to responses. For example, my lab has dem-
   onstrated that fruit flies, in situations they have never encoun-
   tered, can modify their expectations about the consequences of
   their actions. They can solve problems that no individual fly in
   the evolutionary history of the species has solved before. Our
   experiments show that they actively initiate behaviour.” 38
  Heisenberg’s combination of some randomness followed by
some “lawful” behavior looks very much like William James’
two-stage model, but now we have evidence for it in many animals.
James would have been pleased.

   In the next chapter, I will explain how my Cogito two-stage
model solves some of the problems that have been raised about
earlier two-stage models of free will.
   I also show how the model can be extended to include
undetermined liberties and the Self-Forming Actions of the
libertarian Robert Kane.



  38   Heisenberg (2009) p. 165.
