        118   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 9




                                     r s a l s
                             U  nive




                                                                This chapter on the web
                                       informationphilosopher.com/problems/one-many
                                                       Universals         119


Universals
   A “universal” in metaphysics is a property or attribute that is
shared by many particular objects (or concepts). It has a subtle
relationship to the problem of the one and the many.
  It is also the question of ontology.1 What exists in the world?
Ontology is intimately connected with epistemology - how can we
know what exists in the world?
   Knowledge about objects consists in describing the objects




                                                                            Chapter 9
with properties and attributes, including their relations to other
objects. Rarely are individual properties unique to an individual
object. Although a “bundle of properties” may uniquely charac-
terize a particular individual, most properties are shared with
many individuals.
  The “problem of universals” is the existential status of a given
shared property. Does the one universal property exist apart from
the many instances in particular objects? Plato thought it does.
Aristotle thought it does not.
  Consider the property having the color red. Is there an abstract
concept of redness or “being red?” Granted the idea of a concept of
redness, in what way and where in particular does it exist? Nomi-
nalists (sometimes called anti-realists) say that it exists only in the
particular instances, and that redness is the name of this property.
Conceptualists say that the concept of redness exists only in the
minds of those persons who have grasped the concept of redness.
They might exclude color-blind persons who cannot perceive red.
   Realism is the view that a “reality” of physical objects, and pos-
sibly of abstract concepts like redness, exists in an external world
independently of our minds and perceptions.
  Platonic Realism is the view that abstract things like numbers,
perfect geometric figures, and other things that Plato called the
Forms or the Ideas, have a real and independent existence, though
they are not material objects.
  1     See chapter 3.
        120     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 But for his student, Aristotle, these “universals” exist only in the
              concrete objects which share some property. For him, the univer-
              sal idea of a perfect circle is a shared property of the many actual
              circles in nature.
                  Naive realists think that we can access concrete physical objects
              directly and fully with our perceptual sense data. This is some-
              times called the “copy theory.” Our perceptions are fully appre-
              hending the physical objects, so that the content of a perception
              is the same as the object of perception. In information philosophy
Chapter 9




              terms, naive realism mistakenly assumes that the information in
              the perceived sense data (or the representation in the mind) is
              (quantitatively) equal to (a copy of) the information in the physi-
              cal object. In the case of the abstract concept of redness, it may
              be that the copy-theory is most tenable. The perception of a red
              object may in a strong sense bring the concept of redness into
              existence (at least in the observer’s mind).
                  Historically, realism is a metaphysical claim about this indepen-
              dently existing world where redness might be found. Since Aristo-
              tle’s Metaphysics, two kinds of metaphysical questions (ontologi-
              cal and epistemological ) are raised - what exists, and how can we
              know what exists.
                 The ontological status of abstract concepts is a completely dif-
              ferent question from the ontology of concrete material objects,
              though these questions have often been confounded in the history
              of philosophy.
                 Information philosophy provides distinct answers to these two
              ontological questions. Material objects exist in the world of space
              and time. They are information structures embodied in matter
              and interacting with energy. Abstract concepts (like redness) are
              pure information, neither matter nor energy, although they need
              matter for their embodiment and energy for their communica-
              tion.
                The contrast between physical objects and abstract concepts can
              be illustrated by the difference between invention and discovery.
                                                        Universals         121

   We discover physical objects through our perceptions of them.
To be sure, we invent our ideas about these objects, their descrip-
tions, their names, theories of how they are structured and how
they interact energetically - with one another and with us. But
we cannot arbitrarily invent the natural world. We must test our
theories with experiment. The experimental results select those
theories that best fit the data, the information coming to us from
the world. This makes our knowledge of an independent external
world scientific knowledge.




                                                                             Chapter 9
   By contrast, we humans invent abstract concepts like redness.
We know that these cultural constructs exist nowhere in nature as
physical structures. We create them. Cultural knowledge is rela-
tive to and dependent on the society that creates it.
   However, some of our invented abstract concepts seem to
clearly have an existence that is independent of us, like the num-
bers and the force of gravity.
   Critical realists, like scientists, start with observations and sense
data, but they add hypotheses and experiments to develop theo-
ries about the physical objects and the abstract concepts in the
external world. Nevertheless, the abstract representation in the
mind is (quantitatively) much less information than the informa-
tion in the physical object represented.
  The idea of an independent reality claims that the reality known
exists independently of the knowledge of it.
   The British empiricists John Locke and David Hume argued
that what we were “given” in our perceptions of sense data is lim-
ited to so-called “secondary qualities.” These are properties that
produce the sensations in the observer’s senses - color, taste, smell,
sound, and touch. Knowledge that comes from secondary quali-
ties does not provide objective facts about things “in themselves.”
   Immanuel Kant described these secondary qualities as “phe-
nomena” that could tell us nothing about the “noumena,” which
the empiricists called the “primary qualities.” These are proper-
ties the objects have that are independent of any observer, such
as solidity, extension, motion, number and figure. These quali-
ties exist in the thing itself (Kant’s “Ding an sich”). Kant thought
        122       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

              that some of these qualities can be determined with certainty, as
              “synthetic a priori” truths. Some of these qualities are analytic truths,
              defined by the logical meanings of linguistic terms. For example, a
              round circle cannot be a square.
              The One and the Many
                Some philosophers are monists, arguing that the world must
              be a unity, one unchanging thing, and that all the multiplicity and
              change that we see is mere illusion.
Chapter 9




                 Some are dualists, puzzled how the immaterial One (usually Mind
              or the Ideal) can possibly interact with the material Many (the Body
              or the World). There are other kinds of dualists, but the idealism/
              materialism divide has a long history in philosophy under dozens of
              different names through the ages.
                 Some philosophers prefer triads, triplicities, or trinities as their
              fundamental structures, and in these we may find the most sensi-
              ble way to divide the world as we know it into “worlds,” realms, or
              orders.
                 Those who divide their philosophy into four usually arrange it
              two by two (Schopenhauer, Heidegger, Derrida - who did it in jest,
              and against Christian trinities). There are a few who think a pentad
              has explanatory power. Another handful look to the mystical seven
              (the number of planets and thus days of the week) for understand-
              ing.
                 Since the Pythagoreans drew their triangular diagram of the tet-
              ractus, ten has been a divine number for some. Aristotle found ten
              categories. The neo-Platonist Kabalists have ten sephiroth. In string
              theory, there are ten dimensions reflecting the components of Ein-
              stein’s general relativity equations.
                 The most important philosopher since Aristotle, Kant, structured
              his architectonic into twelve categories, arranged four by three.
                We will scrutinize these architectures to see if the thinkers divide
              their worlds the same way, whatever names they call their divisions.
              There is a surprising amount of agreement among them, consider-
              ing their disagreements on terminology.
                                                           Universals        123

   Over the centuries many philosophers have seen a fundamental
dualism. Most have invented their own names for this dualism. Not
all have meant the very same things, but the great similarities allow
us to collect all these dualisms into a quasi-chronological table,
where similarities and slight differences become more clear.
   Of course many have claimed to be monists. “All is One,” they
said, as they generally reduce the physical world to the ideal world,
or vice versa. “Neutral monists” argue that the ideal and physical
worlds are somehow both something else. But the underlying dual-
ism remains in these monistic claims.




                                                                               Chapter 9
  Many philosophers saw the need for the two sides to work
together.
  Immanuel Kant wrote,
   Gedanken ohne Inhalt sind leer.
   Anschauungen ohne Begriffe sind blind.
  Charles Sanders Peirce rewrote this as,
   If Materialism without Idealism is blind,
   Idealism without Materialism is void.
  With a nod to Kant and Peirce, we can say,
   Concepts without Percepts are empty.
   Percepts without Concepts are blind.
  And although freedom and values are not a dualism, they too
require one another and we can observe
   Freedom without Values is Absurd (as Continental Existentialists like
   Jean-Paul Sartre thought).
   Values without Freedom are Worthless (as British Utilitarians and later
   Positivists may have thought).
  The founder of quantum mechanics. Niels Bohr, saw the wave-
particle dual nature of quantum mechanics as connected to many
other “complementary” philosophical dualisms.
        124       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 We have compiled a semi-chronological list of various philosoph-
              ical terms used through the ages that seem highly correlated with
              the fundamental ideal-material duality.

              The ONE                                               The MANY
                          Monism                               Pluralism
              IDEALISM                                          MATERIALISM
                            Being                       Becoming
Chapter 9




                                  Necessity Contingency
                                   Plato’s Divided Line
              Theories (noesis)                           Techniques (pistis)
              Hypotheses (dianoia)                           Stories (eikasia)
                          Eternal                       Ephemeral
              ESSENCE                                               EXISTENCE
                         Universals                Accidentals / Particulars
                                  Aristotle’s Four Causes
                 Final Cause Formal Cause      Efficient Cause Material Cause
              Realism                                             Nominalism
                         Intelligible                          Sensible
                                             Form Content
                          Universal                           Particular
              Absolute                                                     Relative
              RATIONALISM                                          EMPIRICISM
                                        MIND BODY
              a priori                                                 a posteriori
              Certainty                                                Probability
                       Intellect - Innate              Tabula Rasa - Learned
                                            Nature Nurture
                          Analytic                           Synthetic
                                                     Universals          125


                 Kant’s Transcendental Critique
Noumena                                              Phenomena
    Concepts/Thoughts                      Percepts/Senses
        Freedom                             Determinism
                    Subject Object
    Dialectical IDEALISM    Dialectical MATERIALISM
                 Superstructure Base




                                                                           Chapter 9
Romanticism                                                Positivism
Transcendentalism                                        Pragmatism
       Supernaturalism                       Naturalism
Phenomenology                    Behaviorism/Existentialism
                    Linguistic Analysis
Ideal Language                            Ordinary Language
          Intension                      Extension
              Sense/Semantic Meaning/Pragmatic
Autonomy                                             Mimesis
                   Deduction Induction
           Theory                       Experiment
Consistency                                 Correspondence
                Quantum Complementarity
WAVE                                                      PARTICLE
             Possible                           Actual
Thought                                                       Action
   Intension and Extension describe two ways of indicating the
meaning of a word or name. Intension assumes the word has an
intrinsic, essential meaning, perhaps simply by definition and thus
“analytic.”
   Extension is the set of existing objects in the world to which the
word corresponds. There is a special kind of definition called “osten-
sive” which defines a word by pointing to those objects. Because
extension involves things in the world it is called “synthetic.”
        126       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                 The mathematician Gottlob Frege distinguished intension and
              extension by the German words Sinn und Bedeutung (which usually
              translate as Sense and Reference, though Denotation is better).
                 Vienna Circle philosophers, notably Rudolf Carnap, described
              intension and extension as semantisch and pragmatisch (semantic
              and pragmatic).
                 Willard van Orman Quine used the terms Meaning and Ref-
              erence for intension and extension, conflicting with Frege’s terms.
              But note that Frege conflicts with the ancient intelligible/sensible
Chapter 9




              distinction. Words are ambiguous tools to describe objects. And
              language should therefore not be the primary tool for philosophical
              analysis.
              Philosophical Triads
                After dualisms, the next most popular philosophical architec-
              tonic structures are triads, triplicities, or trinities.
                Some philosophers describe their triads as three “worlds,” just as
              dualism is often described in terms of an Ideal World and a Material
              World. The deep philosophical (and scientific) question is - do these
              divisions “carve nature at the joints,” as Plato put it in the Phaedrus,
              (265e)?
                 We analyze examples, and find that the three worlds are most
              often simply the canonical Ideal/Material dualism with an interpo-
              lated third world corresponding to a human world (or more broadly,
              the biological world), with its obvious connection to the world of
              “subjective?” ideas above and the “objective” material world below.
                Gottlob Frege’s Three Realms
                  An External Realm of Public Physical Things and Events
                  An Internal Subjective Realm of Private Thoughts
                  An “Objective” Platonic Realm of Ideal “Senses” (to which sentences
                  refer, providing their meaning)
                Karl Popper’s Three Worlds (clearly influenced by Frege)
                  World I - “the realm of physical things and processes”
                  World II - “the realm of subjective human experience”
                  World III - “the realm of culture and objective knowledge” - of human
                  artifacts (our Sum)
                                                   Universals         127

  Charles Sanders Peirce’s triad of Objects - Percepts - Con-
cepts is in the same order as Frege and Popper.
   In information philosophy, we divide the world into three funda-
mental parts, the material, the ideal (ideas are the same kind of
abstraction as pure information), and the biological/human, a
middle world that combines ideality and materiality. In these three
worlds, information emerges in different ways. They are symbolized
in our tri-color I-Phi logo.
  •The Physical/Material World (lower/green) - Ilya




                                                                        Chapter 9
Prigogine’s “order out of chaos,” when the matter in
the universe spontaneously forms information struc-
tures.
   •The Biological/Material World (middle/red) -
Erwin Schrödinger’s “order out of order,” when the biological
information structures form purposeful (“teleonomic”) self-repli-
cating organisms that depend on or “feed on” a negative entropy
stream from the sun.
  •The Mental/Immaterial/Ideal World (upper/blue) - Bob Doyle’s
abstract “information out of order,” when organisms with minds
process and externalize information, communicating it to other
minds and storing it in the environment.
  Merlin Donald’s three levels of Culture Emergence.
  •Mimetic: the “copycat” or “monkey see, monkey do” ability of
primates facilitated transfer of learning, ritual
  •Mythic: language in humans, mental/brain development is influ-
enced by social network of speakers generating symbols for ideas
  •Informatic: External storage of knowledge - writing, printing,
computers, Internet
        128       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

              Three Sources for Authoritative Knowledge
                •The Tradition - Knowledge is inherited, handed down, from
              the great thinkers of the past (compare Frege’s “Objective” Platonic
              Realm of Ideal “Senses” to which sentences “refer,” providing their
              meaning)
                 •The Modern - Knowledge is created by Reason, by providing a
              rational account (logos) of how things are, augmented by modern
              empirical science since the Enlightenment
Chapter 9




                 •The Post-Modern - all knowledge is “relative” to the culture that
              invented it. For conservative post-moderns, science can establish
              knowledge about an objective external world. For radical post-
              moderns, “anything goes”, even science “invents or creates reality.”
              There are no grounds/foundations for cultural knowledge that can
              “justify true beliefs.”
              Types of Triads
                Levels: Material - Biological/Human - Ideal
                (physis - bios/nomos - logos)
                Inner Levels: Body - Brain - Mind/Spirit
                Plato: Truth - Goodness - Beauty
                Aristotle/Kant: Epistemology - Ethics - Aesthetics
                 Number: One - Two/Many - All (unity - duality/plurality -
              totality)
                Person: I - You - We (self - other - society/community)
                Truth: Correspondence - Coherence - Consistency
                (empirical - conventional/pragmatic - logical)
                Time: Past - Present - Future
                Family: Father - Mother (chauvinists changed to Spirit) - Son
                Dialectic: Thesis - Antithesis - Synthesis (Aufhebung new Thesis)
                Hume’s Relations: Similarity - Contiguity - Causality
                (form - space - time)
                                                         Universals      129

  Medieval Trivium: Grammar - Rhetoric - Logic
  Rhetoric: Simile - Metonym - Metaphor
  Language - Syntax - Semantics - Pragmatics
  Peirce: Objects - Percepts - Concepts
  Peirce’s Semiotics: Icon - Index - Symbol
  Peirce’s Symbol: Ground - Object - Interpretant
  Peirce’s Science: Abduction (hypothesis) - Induction - Deduction




                                                                           Chapter 9
  Grounds: Tradition - Modern - Postmodern
  Beliefs: Naturalism - Humanism - Spiritualism
  Matter: Solid - Liquid - Gas (earth - water - air)
  Time: Beginning - Middle - End (archos - physis/nomos - telos)
  Journey: Eden - Fall - Atonement (home - travels - homecoming)
  Life: Birth - Life - Death
A Few Tetrads
  Classical kinds of matter: Earth - Water - Air - Fire
  (anticipating today’s solid - liquid - gas - plasma)
   Plato’s Divided Line: Stories - Techniques - Hypotheses - Theories
(eikasia - pistis - dianoia - noesis)
   Aristotle’s Causes: Material cause - Efficient cause - Formal cause
- Final cause (He considered chance to be a possible fifth cause.)
  Graeco-Roman Four Temperaments (or humors): Choleric
(yellow bile), Melancholic (black bile), Sanguine (blood), and Phleg-
matic (phlegm)
  Medieval cosmology: Earth (below us) - Water (with us) - Air
(above us) - Stars (beyond us)
  The medieval scholastic Quadrivium: Math - Geometry - Music -
Astronomy (number - space - time - motion)
  Schopenhauer’s Fourfold Root of Sufficient Reason
  Heidegger’s Geviert (2x2): Earth - Mortals - Heavens - Gods
  Derrida’s Jeu des Cartes
