        78   Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?
Chapter 5




                             Value




                                                         This chapter on the web
                                               informationphilosopher.com/value
                                                              Value        79


Value
   Is the Good something that exists in the world? Existentialists
thought not. They thought we have freedom, but saw freedom
as absurd, because there are no values to help choose. Without
values, no evaluations. Most religions place the origin of good in




                                                                            Chapter 5
a supernatural Being. Existentialists denied that Being. “God is
dead,” they said, and thus denied any essential objective Good.
   The traditional source of normative values, of morality, of ethics,
of what one “ought to do,” has been religion. It is often said that
science, the empirical study of the natural world, cannot possibly
help us to define the good. David Hume is often cited as saying
we cannot derive “Ought” from “Is.” This is sometimes called the
“fact/value” dichotomy. Science, it is said, can help us to do what
we decide to do. It can help with prudential or instrumental deci-
sions about “means,” but not with moral decisions that depend on
the intrinsic value of “ends.”
  It is difficult to generalize about the thousands of religions
invented over the ages by their prophets and founders, but most
include a code of moral behavior. Some founders told their fol-
lowers that they had simply discovered the correct moral codes.
Some prophets claim to have been explicitly told the “truth” about
good and evil in a conversation with God, or by a mystical vision.
With founders and prophets mostly long gone today, moral codes
are typically handed down by various traditions.
   The power of the institutions that has grown up around world
religions lies entirely in their ability to limit the knowledge of their
members to their beliefs about the “truth.” Where these traditions
vary in their beliefs, and they do disagree in fundamental ways,
they cannot possibly all be right, unless all cultural beliefs are rela-
tive, which they may well be at the present time.
  Humanists think that good and evil are human inventions, that
value systems are relative to a local community or society. “Man is
the measure of all things.” Comparative ethics is the study of dis-
parate value systems in the hope of finding come commonly held
        80     Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             rules, for which one can claim some universal or objective sig-
             nificance, for example, the golden rule, “Do unto others” or com-
             mandments like “Thou shall not kill.” Some philosophers make
             human life an objective good. Some make one own’s life the ulti-
             mate good. Some think the good is the maximization of pleasure,
             or happiness, or well-being, for all humans (or maybe just one
Chapter 5




             own’s family, tribe, community, or nation?),
                Modern bioethicists hope to avoid all this relativism by situat-
             ing value in all life, seeing humanism as short-sighted, if general-
             ized, self-interest. A variety of ancient religions looked to the Sun
             as the sustainer of all life and thus found an objective good outside
             of human life. They anthropomorphized the sun or the “bright
             sky” as God. Dark and night were stigmatized as evil and “fallen.”
             Echoes of these ancient views persist in our metaphors of light, of
             enlightenment, as good.
                Philosophers have ever longed to discover a cosmic good. The
             ideal source of a cosmic good is perhaps as remote as possible
             from the Earth in space and as distant in time. Many theologians
             and philosophers think it must be “outside space and time.” For
             Plato, it was a timeless Good to be found in Being itself. For his
             student Aristotle, it was a property of the first principles that
             set the world in motion. For Kant, it was a transcendental and
             “noumenal” God outside the everyday “phenomenal” world of
             experience.
               Information philosophy has found that the story of human
             evolution does not start with Darwin and DNA. It starts much,
             much earlier, at the very beginning of the universe. For those of
             you thinking that your origins and place in the universe might be
             found outside of animal evolution, beyond a mere material expla-
             nation, you might be happy to learn that your most distant begin-
             ning was in the primeval formation of immaterial, abstract infor-
             mation, a kind of metaphysical spirituality you can tie directly to
             the information content of your innermost thoughts.
                Has information philosophy discovered the cosmic good? Does
             it at least identify the prerequisite source of anything resembling
                                                               Value        81

the Good? Yes, it does. Does it resemble the Good anthropo-
morphized as a God personally concerned about our individual
goods? No, it does not. But it has one outstanding characteristic of
such a God. It is Providence. Information philosophy has discov-
ered the fundamental process in the universe that provides for our
well-being. It provides the light, it provides life, it provides intelli-




                                                                             Chapter 5
gence. For all of these things, should we not be thankful and rever-
ent toward such a creative process, attitudes humans normally feel
towards a providential god?
   Information philosophy replaces the difficult problem of “Does
God exist?” with the more tractable problem “Does Goodness
exist?” Humanists situate values in reason or human nature. Bio-
ethicists seek to move the source of goodness to the biosphere. Life
becomes the summum bonum. Information philosophers look out
to the universe as a whole, beyond the obviously beneficent Sun to
find a cosmos that grew from a chaos. The growth of that cosmos
continues today, in a cosmic creative process that formed the gal-
axies, stars, and planets, that led to life and then to the evolution
of the information-processing minds that created language and
logic. It is this process that we propose creates objective value.
   Exactly how that is possible requires a subtle understanding
of the second law of thermodynamics in an expanding and open
universe. The second law is the tendency of isolated systems to
become more disorderly, to increase the “entropy,” a quantitative
measure of disorder. When entropy increases in a closed system,
information is destroyed irreversibly.1
   A very small number of processes that we call ergodic can
reduce the entropy locally to create macroscopic information
structures like stars and planets as well as microscopic ones like
atoms and molecules. And most important to human beings, this
creative process is not only responsible for our existence, it has
made us creative individuals in its own image! In what sense? It
is that we are creative beings. We are co-creators of the world we
live in, wielding a power to create, for better or for worse, that is
unparalleled in the history of the world.
  1     See appendix B for entropy flows in the universe.
        82         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                Every living thing is an information processor and communica-
             tor. But the handling of information suggests four different levels
             of processing among the animals - instinctive, learning, predictive,
             and normative (reflective).
                • The lowest organisms are created with a fixed amount of infor-
             mation that is essentially constant their entire lives. Their behav-
Chapter 5




             ioral repertoire is almost completely instinctive. They have little or
             no learning capability. Their automatic reactions to environmental
             conditions are “built in,” transmitted genetically. Information about
             past experiences (by prior generations of the organism) is only pres-
             ent implicitly in those inherited reactions.
                • Animals with a learning capability can acquire new informa-
             tion during their lifetimes. Their past experiences condition their
             current choices. Mostly habitual reactions are developed through
             experience, including instruction by parents and peers.
                • The ability to predict the future evolved in animals with an expe-
             rience recorder and reproducer (ERR) that can play back beyond the
             current situation. These animals have foresight and imagination
             that help them evaluate the future consequences of their choices.
             They can generate alternative possibilities for future actions, based
             on the playback of multiple past experiences in similar situations.
                • Normative information appears in human societies that have
             externalized and codified their past social experiences. Future
             actions are evaluated based in part on ideas about the past, in addi-
             tion to the individual’s actual experiences. Conscious deliberation
             about community and universal values influences the choice of
             behaviors.
                All four levels are emergent,2 in the sense that they did not exist
             in the lower, earlier levels of biological evolution. The emergence of
             human beings also marks the emergence of information and infor-
             mation processing that is going on outside of biological organisms.
             The storage and retrieval of information in the form of writing, then
             printing, and now the world-wide web, has enabled the transmis-
             sion of knowledge to leap over vast distances in space and time.
               2     See chapter 27 on emergence.
                                                          Value         83

   Francis Bacon saw clearly that knowledge is power. Information
philosophy defines knowledge as information that has meaning3 for
humans, in the sense that it expands the possible alternative actions
to let us choose the best means to achieve our ends. The power of
this knowledge is shown in the exponential growth of humanity on
the planet. A mere ten thousand years ago the biomass of humans
and their domesticated animals was less than one percent of the




                                                                         Chapter 5
biomass of terrestrial vertebrates. Today it is near ninety percent.
Humans have taken over the planet.
   The Sum of human knowledge will soon be accessible to anyone
in the world with a tablet computer or smartphone. We estimate
this will be nearly the entire human population by the year 2020. If
this comes to be the case, there is an opportunity to expose young
children to the most universal of human values, perhaps before they
have been indoctrinated by their local cultural values.
  This will be vehemently opposed by conservative governments
and fundamentalist religious forces whose hold on power depends
on keeping young minds closed to “outside” ideas.
   A battle rages between cosmic ergodic processes and chaotic
entropic processes that destroy structure and information. Anthro-
pomorphizing these processes as good and evil gives us a dualist
image that nicely solves the monotheistic problem of evil.” If God
is the Good, God is not responsible for the Evil. Instead, we can
clearly see an impersonal Ergod behind Providence – the cosmic
source without which we would not exist and so a proper object
of our reverence. And Entropy is the “devil incarnate,” as Norbert
Wiener described it.
   The fundamental moral guide to action found in information
philosophy is then very simple – when faced with a moral dilemma,
we ought to choose to preserve information structures against the
entropy. Beyond moral standards, the discovery of a cosmic source
of value suggests a basis for societal and legal norms.
  Celebrating the first modern philosopher, René Descartes,
we call our model for value the Ergo. For those who might want to
anthropomorphize on the slender thread of discovering a natural
  3    See chapter 11 on meaning.
        84       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

             Providence, call it Ergod. No God can be God without being Ergo-
             dic, standing in opposition to forces of darkness and destruction.
                Ergodic processes are those that resist the terrible and universal
             Second Law of Thermodynamics, which commands the increase
             of chaos and entropy (disorder). Without violating the inviolable
             second law overall, ergodic processes reduce the entropy locally,
Chapter 5




             producing pockets of cosmos and negative entropy (order and
             information-rich structures). Ergo is the ultimate sine qua non.
                The idea of a moral science has a long history. John Stuart Mill’s
             Logic of the Moral Sciences was a major influence. Translated into
             German as Geisteswissenschaft, or science of the spirit, Mill’s “moral
             science” was then back-translated into English as the Human Sci-
             ences or what has become the humanities in today’s universities. Of
             course, David Hume and his great English colleague, Adam Smith,
             a hundred years before Mill, had given us great insights into what
             they saw as “natural” moral sentiments or feelings. Hume thought
             he could make a science of human nature based on laws as definite
             as Isaac Newton’s laws of motion. But this was to be a failure.
                Maybe so, but we believe a moral society should be and can be
             informed by the best scientific knowledge about human origins,
             human capacities, and our current status in the universe.
             An Information-based Moral Code?
                The first rule of an information-based morality is that all choices
             should be made so as to minimize the destruction of abstract
             information and concrete information structures. All natural pro-
             cesses increase the entropy. A very few (life, gravitation) decrease
             the entropy locally. These we call ergodic. In principle, one should
             calculate the entropy increase and the negative entropy gain for each
             choice and maximize production and preservation of information.
                Because abstract information can be duplicated and disseminated
             at near-zero cost in the information age (“information wants to be
             free”), our second rule is that we should share all information (our
             knowledge Sum) to the maximum possible extent. Practically, this
             means nourishing and educating all the world’s children, especially
                                                            Value         85

the females, who are more likely to assist in this project of nourish-
ing and education than are the males.
  By contrast, a concrete “information structure,” or “wealth” in
the form of low-entropy information-rich matter and energy, is
subject to the laws of economic scarcity. The natural distribution of
wealth and income among individuals follows statistics like Pareto’s




                                                                           Chapter 5
“80/20” rule, where the largest percentage of wealth is “normally”
concentrated in a minority of the population.
   Some inequality is the unavoidable consequence of the “normal”
distribution of human intelligence and capability due to chance. It is
also the avoidable consequence of the historically random distribu-
tion of opportunity, including the inheritance of material property.
Redistribution of wealth through a progressive taxation system is
the means to regulate income and wealth inequality to a societally
acceptable norm that allows even the least capable humans to exer-
cise their creative freedom to their limits.
A Minimum Moral/Political Message?
   Information philosophy has established that every human being
is uniquely capable of creating new information. This includes the
abstract ideas of our ancestors that have become the Sum of human
knowledge. It also includes the creation of concrete information
structures which add to the stock of material wealth, although
material objects are subject to the laws of economic scarcity. From
this, we can formulate our basic insight into human freedom and
creativity,
  Thoughts Are Free, Actions Are Willed, Self-Determined,
  Limited Only by Creative Control Over Matter and Energy.
  Everything we know and much of the material value that we enjoy
today is the product of past and present creative human beings. It is
therefore of vital interest, a core value, for human society to protect
that free creative power for everyone.
   We can say it is in the interest of future society that every human
being should have the right to exercise their ergodic freedom to
create new ideas to the maximum of their individual potential.
        86         Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

               This right requires a minimum standard of well-being and edu-
             cation, and a minimum of constraints on self-expression so society
             can hear those new ideas.
                The right to exercise this creative freedom comes with a respon-
             sibility, an obligation to protect that freedom and opportunity for
             others, and to see that the fruits of that creativity are distributed as
Chapter 5




             fairly as possible to all humanity, while preserving adequate prop-
             erty rights for the creator.
                This is a kind of freedom that some philosophers have only
             dreamed of. Sadly, many more have denied this creative freedom
             as logically or physically impossible. We are finite beings, they say,
             compared to the infinite powers that they mistakenly imagine are in
             charge. It is their own limited imaginations that have sadly embraced
             the idea of such infinite powers.
                The fact is that human beings are the universe’s highest form
             of pure information creator, a natural outgrowth of the universe’s
             cosmic creative process. Humans are inferior to the cosmic process
             in its power over useful matter and energy. That is the providential
             gift of the negative entropy or Ergo in the form of incoming solar
             radiation. But humans are superior to the cosmic process as the cre-
             ators of ideas. Ideas are immaterial, potentially immortal if added to
             the Sum of human knowledge.
                Additions to human knowledge mean that the lives of our descen-
             dants will almost always be richer and fuller than those of our ances-
             tors, both materially and spiritually. As Albert Einstein knew, it
             is our ideas that let us comprehend the almost incomprehensible
             nature of the universe.
                Unfortunately, as the material wealth and overall well-being of
             humanity has greatly increased, and world poverty is nearing elimi-
             nation, there is also an increase in anomie. As agricultural and
             industrial productivity has soared, without the need to struggle
             every day to provide our livelihood, we may face the danger of a life
             of leisure that lacks a sense of meaningful purpose.
               Beyond individual, family, tribe, and nation, can we develop the
             sense of a universal telos, understanding why we live, love, and die?4
               4     See the end of chapter 28 on the origins of information and life.
                                                           Value         87


An Information-based Social Contract?
   With reference to past declarations of human rights, the discov-
ery of a universal and objective standard of value by information
philosophy suggests the following elements of a universal social
contract, to be accepted by individuals reaching the age of consent,
in order to have full participation in society.




                                                                          Chapter 5
  As a person coming of age in human society, I freely consent to
the following limits on my natural free agency, in order to preserve
a more perfect society.
  As I seek maximum freedom and opportunity for myself, I will
protect equal freedom and opportunity for all other human beings.
   As I am free to think whatever thoughts come to my mind, my
self-determined actions will be responsible, limited only by the
equal rights of others.
  As I seek to gain my maximum allowable share of economic
wealth and personal well-being, I will do my best to help others earn
their own maximal shares.
   As I seek to acquire the knowledge that will ensure my own future
well-being, I will help disseminate that knowledge to the world,
insofar as knowledge is our common human creation and inher-
itance from our ancestors, and since the cosmic creation process
provides more than enough negative entropy for everyone.
  I will do nothing to others, nor advocate such things, that I do not
expect would be done to me in similar circumstances, according to
the laws of society. Liberty consists of doing anything which does
not harm others.
   I respect the limited protection of an individual’s right to their
created intellectual and material property, but eventually some ideas
become common property. These include the laws that govern our
social behaviors. Laws should forbid only actions harmful to society.
Anything which is not forbidden by law should not be prevented.
   All persons can contribute personally or through their represen-
tatives to the formation of the laws. Laws must be the same for all,
either as they protect, or as they punish.
        88       Great Problems in Philosophy and Physics - Solved?

                All persons, being equal in the eyes of the law, are equally admis-
             sible to all public places and employments, according to their capac-
             ity and without distinction other than that of their virtues and of
             their talents.
                Since the laws are our common property, I will not use my finan-
             cial or political power to change those laws in order to advance my
Chapter 5




             own personal cause, or that of my family, my business, my commu-
             nity, not even my nation. My power to change the laws I will limit
             to my powers of persuasion and my power through the ballot box to
             approve legislation.
                I will respect the right of others to hold and to express conflicting
             beliefs. But I will not impose my beliefs on others, for example, by
             insisting they be encoded as laws of society. I will not allow others
             to impose their own beliefs on me, other than by their powers of
             public persuasion.
               My right to think freely and to determine my own actions means
             that I take responsibility for them, and will accept punishment for
             my illegal acts which harm others.
                No one can be punished except under a law approved by the leg-
             islature, with information about the law published before the fact of
             any particular offending action.
                Punishment may include incarceration to prevent further physi-
             cal harm to others. Government has a monopoly on the use of force
             to prevent illegal behavior, because it is necessary for the common
             good. But that force must be only that necessary and must minimize
             harm to the offending person.
                A person is presumed innocent until proven guilty, but if arrested
             for cause, does not have the right to resist arrest by authorities.
             Resistance is itself illegal. However, if the arrest is found to have
             been unjustifiable, a person is deserving of appropriate compensa-
             tion for the harm, the loss of abstract freedom, and possibly loss of
             material value such as wages.
                No one should face arrest for an act that does no physical harm
             or dangerously threaten such harm to others. No law should prevent
             behavior simply because others find that behavior objectionable.
               No form of speech expressing unpopular opinions, however
             harmful to the feelings of others, shall be cause for arrest.
                                                                   Value    89


Information and Negative Entropy as Objective Values
   Perhaps the most radical suggestion of information philosophy
is the idea that the negative entropy flows in the universe - which
make possible the creation of all passive information structures as
well as dynamic, interactive, purposeful living things - should be
considered as an objective basis for the concept of value.




                                                                             Chapter 5
   The Nobel-prize-winning economist Nicolas Georgescu-
Roegen once proposed negative entropy as the ultimate source of
all economic value.5 Information philosophy agrees.
   Critics may complain that there can be no single criterion for the
good, that any tool can be both harmful and helpful, we ask them
to look deeper.
   A knife in the hands of a surgeon can save a life, in the hands of
a killer take one. But just look at the information implications to
judge the moral value of this example. Consider the evil in a single
thermonuclear weapon, which can destroy information structures
faster and more thoroughly than any other human invention. How
can we have built and maintain thousands of these devices, each one
capable of destroying all the lives in one of the world’s largest cities?
   Imagine a panel of ethicists choosing the better alternative in
cases of moral dilemmas. Then imagine a panel of scientists calcu-
lating the increase in entropy (destructive disorder) versus the pres-
ervation of information (negative entropy) in each case. We suggest
there would be a high correlation between moralists and scientists
on the better alternative.
  For centuries, values were considered a theological question,
something given to humanity. Then humanists began to make
human life the ultimate basis. Some philosophers assign infinite
worth to each life, to block any comparative worth analysis.
  In recent decades, bioethics has shifted the locus of values to the
earth’s biosphere and beyond to the overall environment.
   Information philosophy hopes to enlarge the sphere of ethics to
the cosmos itself, where the process of information creation appears
as a sort of divine providence.

  5     The Entropy Law and the Economic Process, Harvard, 1971.
