Why We are Free
         Why We
          are Free
Consciousness, Free Will and Creativity in
    A Unified Scientific Worldview




         DAVID LAYZER
          Author of Cosmogenesis:
     The Growth of Order in the Universe
         First Donald H. Menzel
        Professor of Astrophysics
           Harvard University

           Anthony Aguirre and Bob Doyle, Editors
                                                                         v




                        First edition, 2021
                       © 2019, David Layzer

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form by electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying,
 recording, or information storage and retrieval) without the prior
            permission of The Information Philosopher.

            Publisher’s Cataloging-in-Publication Data
             (Prepared by The Donohue Group, Inc.)

           Names: Layzer, David, 1925-2019, author. |
    Aguirre, Anthony, 1973- editor. | Doyle, Bob, 1936- editor.

 Title: Why we are free : consciousness, free will and creativity in a
unified scientific worldview / David Layzer, first Donald H. Menzel
 Professor of Astrophysics, Harvard University ; Anthony Aguirre,
     UC San Diego and Bob Doyle, Harvard University, editors.

  Description: First edition. | Cambridge, MA, USA : I-Phi Press,
      2021. | Includes bibliographical references and index.

           Identifiers: ISBN 9780983580256 (paperback)
                    ASIN B08XNZR3FF (Kindle)

           Subjects: LCSH: Free will and determinism. |
              Cosmology. | Philosophy and science.

     Classification: LCC BJ1461 .L39 2021 | DDC 123.5--dc23
          1. Free Will. 2. Cosmology. 3.Philosophy. I. Title.

                           I-Phi Press
                       Cambridge, MA, USA
vi




     For my undergraduate and graduate students,
            from whom, over many decades,
       I learnt more than they learned from me
Preface   vii
viii                              Why We are Free




                                    Preface

          David Layzer was an astrophysicist and cosmologist at Harvard
       who from the 1960s onward generated key insights into the evolu-
       tion and structure of the universe, many of which arguably remain
       under-appreciated. He was among the first to carefully and incisively
       analyze the arrow of time in cosmology, he formulated a subtle, dis-
       tinct, and fascinating version of the “cosmological principle,” and
       he provided key insights into the growth of both entropy and order
       through cosmic evolution. In his later career he focused on the con-
       nection between cosmic foundations of randomness, the growth of
       order, and the creativity and freedom inherent in biological evolu-
       tion and mental processes. Why We are Free ties all of these threads
       together. The work speaks for itself, but readers may find some his-
       torical and scientific contextualization of each of them useful.
          Layzer’s cosmological work began at a time when our view of
       cosmic history was far less settled. In the early 1960’s he was invited
       to a conference on the nature of time at Cornell University organized
       by the founders of the steady-state theory of the universe, Hermann
       Bondi, Tommy Gold, and Fred Hoyle.
          The steady-state founders went beyond Newton’s “cosmological
       principle” that space is homogeneous and isotropic, the same in all
       places and in all directions. They added their “perfect cosmological
       principle,” claiming the universe is eternal and appears the same at
       all times. This appeared to eliminate what Arthur Stanley Eddington
       in 1928 called “Time’s Arrow,” which Eddington had associated with
                                          Preface                                             ix

the apparently irreversible increase in entropy demanded by the
second law of thermodynamics.
   At the Cornell conference Layzer proposed his “strong cosmologi-
cal principle,” that the homogeneity and isotropy of matter and space
applies both statistically and exactly. The subtle but foundational
implication of this assumption is that the cosmological principle
is not just a convenient approximation to a more precisely know-
able cosmic state, but that the statistical description is complete and
cannot be improved upon. This enormously reduces, for example,
the information required to specify the initial cosmic state.
   Subsequently, Layzer argued that the strong cosmological princi-
ple implies a fundamental uncertainty inherent in any finite physical
system: because the statistical description of the universe is complete,
the precision with which any subsystem can be described is limited.
He called this implication “primordial randomness.” He later came
to believe that this very uncertainty is at the root of quantum uncer-
tainty. Sketched in his book Cosmogenesis, this idea was revisited
by Layzer1, and by Max Tegmark and one of us2, eventually split-
ting into two versions of a “Cosmological interpretation of quantum
mechanics, ” similar in spirit but different in details and context.
   Layzer also showed in detail (particularly in the Journal article) the
different types of arrows of time, and some of their relations: along-
side Eddington’s identification of increasing entropy as the funda-
mental time’s arrow, Layzer now added another arrow he called the
“historical arrow of time; this was in addition to the so-called “radi-
ation arrow” or “electromagnetic arrow” (the asymmetry between
emission and absorption processes) and the so-called “cosmological
arrow” (the expansion of the universe).
  The strand of Layzer’s work addressing the “arrow of time” also
began early in the origins of modern cosmology. The two most
important publications were in Scientific American in 1975 and the
Astrophysical Journal in 1976. In the former article, Layzer intro-
duced his famous example of the perfume bottle being opened and
the perfume dispersing into the room.
    1     See https://arxiv.org/abs/1008.1229 for Layzer’s elegant and detailed exposition.
    2     Aguirre, Anthony, and Max Tegmark. “Born in an infinite universe: a cosmological
interpretation of quantum mechanics.” Physical Review D 84.10 (2011): 105002.
x                              Why We are Free

       Layzer likened the time-reversed process to a movie played back-
    wards. If the “initial” state contained “hidden” microscopic informa-
    tion corresponding to a reversal of the momentum of each perfume
                                                  molecule at a certain
                                                  time, classical dynam-
                                                  ics says that the per-
                                                  fume will make its way
                                                  back into the bottle.
                                                  This is a powerful
                                                  visual image illustrat-
                                                  ing Josef Loschmidt’s
                                                  reversibility objection
                                                  to Ludwig Boltzmann’s
                                                  H-Theorem.
                                                      In Layzer’s view, pri-
                                                   mordial randomness
                                                   precludes just the sort
                                                   of “hidden information”
                                                   that would allow such a
                                                   reversal.
       Source: “The Arrow of Time” Scientific
       American, December, p.57 (1975)
                                                     Beyond its clarity,
                                                  what most distinguished
                                                  Layzer’s thinking about
    time’s arrow in cosmology was his resolution of a very basic para-
    dox: the universe appears to start in a dense, high-energy, equilib-
    rium state. Yet the second thermodynamic law implies that entropy
    increases. So how does the universe ever leave equilibrium and so
    generate all of the ordered and highly non-equilibrium structures
    it clearly contains? Layzer’s resolution, in his words from the 1975
    article:
       Suppose that at some early moment local thermodynamic equilib-
       rium prevailed in the universe. The entropy of any region would
       then be as large as possible for the prevailing values of the mean
       temperature and density. As the universe expanded from that hypo-
       thetical state the local values of the mean density and temperature
       would change, and so would the entropy of the region. For the
       entropy to remain at its maximum value (and thus for equilibrium
       to be maintained) the distribution of energies allotted to matter
       and to radiation must change, and so must the concentrations of
       the various kinds of particles. The physical processes that mediate
                                        Preface                               xi

      these changes proceed at finite rates; if these “equilibration” rates
      are all much greater than the rate of cosmic expansion, approxi-
      mate local thermodynamic equilibrium will be maintained; if they
      are not, the expansion will give rise to significant local departures
      from equilibrium. These departures represent macroscopic infor-
      mation; the quantity of macroscopic information generated by the
      expansion is the difference between the actual value of the entropy
      and the theoretical maximum entropy at the mean temperature
      and density.3
   This core and clear insight — that information is the gap between
realized and possible entropy, and that the latter increases in an
expanding universe — has even now not fully penetrated the think-
ing of many working in the field. Going further, Layzer persua-
sively argues that this dynamic, in which would-be equilibrating
interactions fail to maintain equilibrium, pervades and underlies
the growth of order in the universe. For Layzer, this along with the




strong cosmological principle provided a clear explanation of the
arrows of time, with the cosmological principle ensuring statistical
equilibrium at the earliest time, and the time-varying rates of vari-
ous processes during cosmic evolution doing the rest. Again in his
words:
      As a result the big bang is an exceedingly gentle process; local
      equilibration processes easily keep pace with the changing mac-
      roscopic conditions of temperature and density during the first
      fraction of a microsecond. It is only for this brief initial phase in

  3       “The Arrow of Time” Scientific American, December, p.68 (1975).
xii                                    Why We are Free

            the evolution of the universe that local thermodynamic equilib-
            rium can be assumed, but from that assumption it follows that the
            expansion of the universe has generated both macroscopic infor-
            mation and entropy. Thus the cosmological arrow, the historical
            arrow and the thermodynamic arrow all emerge as consequences
            of the strong cosmological principle and the assumption that local
            thermodynamic equilibrium prevailed at or near the initial singu-
            larity. Remarkably, neither of these assumptions refers directly to
            time or temporal processes.4
         For Layzer, these cosmological considerations tied directly to
      basic issues about the nature of complex systems including biolog-
      ical ones. He explored these ties in detail in his 1990 book, Cosmo-
      genesis, which lays out a full vision for how the enormous amount
      and quality of structure comes into being, first through cosmic pro-
      cesses and then via life and evolution that can “utilize” cosmic and
      astrophysical order. That book also began Layzer’s study of free will,
      which through his arguments he connected to randomness in the
      earliest time.
         In his later years, Layzer developed through a series of talks and
      unpublished papers a compelling view of how the freedom and cre-
      ativity of living and mental systems can coexist with the (seemingly)
      rigid determinism of natural law. It has been argued in many places
      that randomness — quantum or otherwise — does not bear upon
      free will. Layzer forcefully disputes this, arguing that the same ran-
      domness and growth of order that pervades the universe underlies
      living phenomena, with the randomness providing the fuel (but not
      in itself an explanation) for genuine novelty and choice.
         In Why We Are Free, his last work (especially chapter VII and the
      following four sections), we see Layzer ’s concise telling of this entire
      story.
                                                  Anthony Aguirre, UC Santa Cruz
                                                     Bob Doyle, Harvard University
                                                                           January, 2021




        4       “The Arrow of Time” Scientific American, December 1975, p.57.
Preface   xiii
xiv                                  Why We are Free

                                        Contents




      Preface                                                            vii
      What This Book Is About                                             1
      I. Physics, Biology, and Physicalism                                3
      II. Cosmological Assumptions                                       13
      III. The Universe’s Large-Scale Structure                          21
        “The Realm of the Nebulae” 24
        Astronomical Spectroscopy 27
        The Early Universe 29
        The Strong Cosmological Principle 33
      IV. Entropy and Its Law                                            37
        Heat as a Form of Energy 37
        The Second Law 39
        Carnot’s Theorem 40
        From Carnot’s Theorem to the Second Law 43
        Thermodynamic Temperature 46
        Entropy and the Law of Entropy Change 47
        Clausius’s Argument 49
        Defining Entropy for Systems Not in Thermal Equilibrium 52
      V. Atomism                                                         57
        Atomism Becomes a Testable Hypothesis 64
        Atoms and Molecules 67
        Maxwell’s Statistical Interpretation of Thermal Equilibrium 69
        Entropy of an Ideal-gas Sample 75
        Boltzmann’s Formula for the Randomness of a Gas Sample 76
        Boltzmann’s Transport Equation and His H Theorem 79
        Criticism of the H Theorem 80
        Gibbs’s Statistical Mechanics 82
        Conditional Randomness and Correlation Information 89
        Boltzmann and Gibbs 93
        Gibbs’s Theorem and Clausius’s Law 94
        Toward a Resolution 96
                                     Contents                               xv

VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                           101
  The Measurement Problem 101
  The Classical World and the Quantum World 103
  Von Neumann’s Collapse Hypothesis and Attempts to Avoid It 113
  Poincaré’s “Chance” 116
  Poincaré’s Cone in Light of the Strong Cosmological Principle 120
  Quantum Indeterminacy and Quantum Measurement 121
  Special Relativity and Quantum Mechanics 124
VII. Living World                                                     129
  Biological Complexity 129
  Chance and Order 131
  Randomness and Information Have a Hierarchical Structure 131
  What Is Life? 133
  Creativity 135
  How I Write a Poem 135
  Free Will 138
  Appendix, Chapter VII 139
Afterword                                                             141
Bibliography                                                          145
Index                                                                 148
                                                                             1




              What This Book Is About
   No biological capacity is more distinctively human than our ability
to shape future events in ways that accord with our needs, wants, and
desires. Yet many mainstream scientists and philosophers deny the
existence of such a capacity. They subscribe to a scientific worldview
called physicalism, or materialism, according to which reality com-
prises just those objects and relations that figure in our strongly
confirmed physical laws. Francis Crick, co-discoverer with James
Watson of DNA’s double helix, summarized this idea in the open-
ing paragraph of his book The Astonishing Hypothesis, the Scientific
Search for the Soul:. It is the alien idea that each person is no more
than a vast assembly of nerve cells and their molecules, that we are
“nothing but a pack of neurons.
   This book describes an alternative to physicalism in which our
joys and our sorrows, our memories and our ambitions, our sense of
personal identity and free will, are just as real as the objects and rela-
tions of the world physics describes. Like physicalism, the proposed
worldview rests on our strongly confirmed physical laws. I argue
that these laws don’t need to be supplemented by additional laws
that expand the domain of natural science to include consciousness
and subjectivity. Physicalism, I argue, rests on Newton’s assumption
in The Principia that place is absolute. This assumption implies, for
instance, that the present value of the mass per unit volume at the
Sun’s position has a definite value (though one we can’t know with
infinite precision).
   This book proposes to replace the assumption that place is abso-
lute by a pair of less obvious cosmological assumptions: The first
of these, the strong cosmological principle, says that a complete
description of the Universe doesn’t privilege any position or direc-
tion in space. It implies that a complete description of the Uni-
verse wouldn’t tell us the values of macroscopic quantities. Instead
2                           Why We are Free

    it would specify probability distributions of the possible values of
    macroscopic quantities. It would interpret the probability of any
    given range of possible values of a macroscopic quantity as the rel-
    ative frequency of that range in an infinitely extended sample of the
    Universe. The second assumption, the assumption of primordial
    randomness, says that the probability distributions that character-
    ize the Universe’s initial state were maximally random. Randomness
    in this context is synonymous with statistical entropy, a property of
    probability distributions introduced in 1872 by Ludwig Boltzmann
    as the counterpart in the atomic theory of gases to Rudolf Clausius’s
    thermodynamic entropy. The assumption of primordial randomness
    implies that the Universe has evolved from a state of complete disor-
    der, so it contradicts the widely believed claim that the entropy of the
    Universe never decreases. This book argue that this generalization of
    the strongly confirmed law of entropy non-decrease for undisturbed
    macroscopic systems is untenable.
      Chance and the openness of the future are pervasive features of
    prescientific views of the natural world. Physicalism tells us that they
    are illusory. In a scientific worldview that incorporates the strong
    cosmological principle and the assumption of primordial random-
    ness chance is indeed pervasive and the future is indeed largely open.
    But how do physics and biology themselves fare under the new sci-
    entific dispensation?
       I will argue that the two cosmological hypotheses allow a more
    unified view of macrophysics, microphysics, and statistical physics
    (which links macrophysics to microphysics). The implications of the
    two cosmological hypotheses for biology are more striking. Physical-
    ism purports to reduce biology to physics. But physicalism attributes
    macroscopic chance to human ignorance. By contrast, macroscopic
    chance plays a central role in evolution, both in genetic variation
    (for example in genetic recombination) and natural selection (think
    of extinction events). Consequently, although biological processes
    are governed by physical laws, biology doesn’t reduce to physics. I
    will argue that the strong cosmological principle and the assumption
    of primordial randomness together with our strongly confirmed
    physical laws provide a framework for modern evolutionary theory.
    They also provide a framework for understanding consciousness,
    creativity, and free will as biological phenomena.
                                                                               3




                                      I
      Physics, Biology, and Physicalism
   A physical theory needn’t be intuitively plausible, but it must make
testable predictions that agree with experiment or observation. For
example, quantum mechanics describes electrons as mathematical
points endowed with mass and electric charge. It assigns these points
spatial coordinates and asserts that when an electron is in a defi-
nite physical state its coordinates don’t have definite values. None
of this makes intuitive sense. How could a mathematical point have
a finite mass? How could a point’s coordinates not have definite
values? Nevertheless, unambiguous rules link quantum mechanics’
abstract mathematical laws to the outcomes of a wide range of exper-
iments, and the close agreement between the observed and pre-
dicted outcomes of these experiments leaves no room for doubt that
the laws are, at least, very nearly correct. Experience isn’t just the
arbiter of scientific theories, though. It is itself a subject of scientific
investigation. Neuroscientists investigate how perception, memory,
cognition, and other mental states and processes are linked to physi-
cal structures and processes in the brain. Such studies have produced
convincing evidence that the mathematical laws that govern physi-
cal phenomena also govern the biological processes that accompany
mental processes.
  But mental processes seem to be more than the physical processes
that accompany them. All experience is someone’s experience. My
experience of seeing a red ball is distinct from your experience of
seeing what we both believe to be the same ball. It may seem obvious
4                                   Why We are Free

    that this aspect of experience – consciousness – is as much a part of
    the natural world as matter and energy. Yet there is no scientific or
    philosophical consensus about how – or even whether – conscious-
    ness fits into a scientific picture of the world.
       Some scientists and philosophers argue that the subjective aspect
    of consciousness – the aspect that makes your consciousness differ-
    ent from mine – isn’t part of a scientific picture of the world. Fran-
    cis Crick, co-discoverer with James Watson of DNA’s double helix,
    summarized this position in the opening paragraph of his book The
    Astonishing Hypothesis, the Scientific Search for the Soul:
            The Astonishing Hypothesis is that “You,” your joys and your sor-
            rows, your memories and your ambitions, your sense of personal
            identity and free will, are in fact no more than the behavior of a
            vast assembly of nerve cells and their associated molecules. As
            Lewis Carroll’s Alice might have phrased it: “You’re nothing but a
            pack of neurons.” This hypothesis is so alien to the ideas of most
            people alive today that it can truly be called astonishing.1

       Crick’s astonishing hypothesis implies that biology not only rests
    on physics – something few if any contemporary biologists would
    dispute – but also reduces to physics: the natural world contains just
    those entities mentioned in our strongly confirmed physical theories,
    nothing more. I’ll refer to this scientific worldview as physicalism.
       Among the features of conscious life that physicalism reduces to
    the behavior of assemblies of brain cells is free will: our felt abil-
    ity to alter the course of events through our deliberate acts. Though
    habits and deep-seated preferences dictate many of the choices we
    make in our daily lives, we take it for granted that the actions that
    flow from decisions we have thought about long and hard help shape
    the future. We think the world would have been different in ways
    that matter to us if we had decided and acted differently. Law, ethics,
    and widely held opinions about the aims of education all presup-
    pose that our deliberate actions spring from a kind of freedom other
    animals don’t enjoy. Our laws punish theft, but we don’t regard a
    dog that steals another dog’s bone as a lawbreaker. We think tor-
    ture is wrong, but we don’t think a cat is acting unethically when it
    tortures a mouse. We train our pets, but we believe children should
        1       Crick, Francis. The Astonishing Hypothesis (New York: Simon and Schuster 1994)
    p. 3.
                     I. Physics, Biology, and Physicalism                            5

be brought up not just to behave in certain ways but also to make
good decisions. None of these beliefs and attitudes would be tenable
if we weren’t capable of making choices and decisions that affect the
future course of events. Yet decision-making is a biological process,
and biological processes are also physical processes, governed by the
physical laws that prevail in physics and chemistry laboratories and
in stars and galaxies. These laws are deterministic in the following
sense: They connect a complete description of the present physical
state of an isolated, or undisturbed, physical system to a complete
description of any of the system’s past and future states. The laws of
quantum physics are just as deterministic in this sense as those of
classical, or pre-quantum, physical theories – theories that deal with
macroscopic and astronomical phenomena. Quantum mechanics’
law of change, like its classical counterparts, links the present state of
an undisturbed physical system to each of the system’s future states.
    Unlike classical states, quantum states of undisturbed systems
aren’t directly observable. The standard formulation of quantum
mechanics links them to measurement outcomes by a rule that Paul
Dirac in The Principles of Quantum Mechanics called a “general
assumption.” Given a system’s quantum state, this rule (discussed
in more detail below) enables one to calculate not only the possible
outcomes of a measurement of any of the system’s physical proper-
ties, such as position or momentum or energy, but also the relative
frequency of each possible outcome in a long series (or large collec-
tion) of identical measurements. This feature of quantum mechanics
– the unpredictability of individual measurement outcomes, along
with the predictability of possible measurement outcomes and their
relative frequencies in long series of identical measurements – is
what physicists mean by “quantum indeterminism.”
    The philosopher John Searle assumes, as do many or perhaps
most physicists, that “all indeterminism in nature is quantum inde-
terminism.”2 He then argues that “consciousness is a feature of nature
that manifests indeterminism” and concludes that quantum indeter-
minism must underpin free will. While I agree with Searle that free
will requires “indeterminism in nature,” I think the conclusion that
quantum indeterminism underpins free will is untenable, for two
reasons. First, as far as I know, nothing in neuroscience suggests that
   2       Searle, John R. Freedom and Neurobiology (New York, Columbia University
Press, 2004) p. 74.
6                                 Why We are Free

    the neural processes accompanying decision-making are, or resem-
    ble, quantum measurements. Second, quantum measurements,
    unlike free acts, never have novel and unpredictable outcomes; their
    possible outcomes are entirely predictable. Yet if we have the abil-
    ity to help shape future events through our deliberate actions, as I
    believe we do, the future must in some ways be open. Either free will
    is an illusion or determinism is false.
      Like Crick, the evolutionary biologist Edward O. Wilson has
    embraced the first alternative:
          The self, an actor in a perpetually changing drama, lacks full
          command of its own actions. It does not make decisions solely
          by conscious, purely rational choice. Much of the computation
          in decision-making is unconscious – strings dancing the puppet
          ego. Circuits and determining molecular processes exist outside
          conscious thought. They consolidate certain memories and delete
          others, bias connections and analogies, and reinforce the neu-
          rohormonal loops that regulate subsequent emotional response.
          Before the curtain is drawn and the play unfolds, the stage has
          already been partly set and much of the script written.
          The hidden preparation of mental activity gives the illusion of
          will. We make decisions for reasons we often sense only vaguely,
          and seldom if ever understand fully. Ignorance of this kind is
          conceived by the conscious mind as uncertainty to be resolved;
          hence freedom of choice is ensured. An omniscient mind with
          total commitment to reason and fixed goals would lack free will.

      But if free will is illusory, why is the illusion so strong? Wilson
    explains:
          …Confidence in free will is biologically adaptive. Without it the
          mind, imprisoned by fatalism, would slow and deteriorate. Thus in
          organismic time and space, in every operational sense that applies
          to the knowable self, the mind does have free will.3

       Psychologist Daniel Wegner agrees with Wilson that free will is an
    illusion. He argues that the neural processes underlying voluntary
    actions have two distinct outcomes: the action itself and awareness
    of willing the action. Is this awareness the cause of the action? From
    a thorough examination of the evidence bearing on this question,
    Wegner concludes the answer is no:

      3       Wilson, E.O. Consilience, (New York, Knopf: 1998) p. 130.
                        I. Physics, Biology, and Physicalism                                 7

    It usually seems that we consciously will our voluntary actions,
    but this is an illusion. ... Conscious will arises from processes that
    are psychologically and anatomically distinct from the processes
    whereby mind creates action. (pages1-2) … If a team of scientific
    psychologists … somehow had access to all the information they
    could ever want, … they could uncover the mechanisms that give
    rise to all your behaviors …. 4

  Behind this thought is the image of a complex physical system,
such as the solar system, whose physical states are completely deter-
mined by physical laws and antecedent conditions. Indeed Wegner
ends his book with a quotation from Einstein:
    If the moon, in the act of completing its eternal way around the
    earth were gifted with self-consciousness, it would feel thoroughly
    convinced that it was traveling its way of its own accord. ...So
    would a Being, endowed with higher insight and more perfect
    intelligence, watching man and his doings, smile about man’s illu-
    sion that he was acting according to his own free will.5

  The philosopher Thomas Nagel has argued that physicalism can’t
be reconciled with the existence of consciousness:
    The existence of consciousness seems to imply that the physical
    description of the universe, in spite of its richness and explanatory
    power, is only part of the truth, and that the natural order is far
    less austere than it would be if physics and chemistry accounted
    for everything. If we take this problem seriously, and follow out its
    implications, it threatens to unravel the entire naturalistic world
    picture. Yet it is very difficult to imagine viable alternatives.”6

  The subtitle of Mind and Cosmos states that “the materialist
neo-Darwinian conception of nature is almost certainly false.”
   If evolutionary theory is a purely physical theory, then it might
in principle provide the framework for a physical explanation of the
appearance of behaviorally complex animal organisms with central
nervous system. But subjective consciousness, if it is not reducible to
something physical, would not be part of this story; it would be left
completely unexplained by physical evolution – even if the physical
    4     Wegner, D.M. The Illusion of Conscious Will. (Cambridge: MIT Press 2002) p. 29.
    5     Einstein, A. 1995. Quoted in Home, D. and A. Robinson, “Einstein and Tagore:
Man, nature and mysticism”, Journal of Consciousness Studies 2, pp.167-169.
    6     Nagel, Thomas, Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception
of Nature Is Almost Certainly False (Cambridge, Belknap Press of Harvard University) p. 35
8                                Why We are Free

    evolution of such organisms is in fact a causally necessary and suffi-
    cient reason for consciousness.
       Yet Nagel doesn’t argue that consciousness lies outside the scope
    of natural science. Rather, he suggests, “[i]t makes sense to seek an
    expanded form of understanding that includes the mental but that is
    still scientific – i.e. still a theory of the immanent order of nature.”7
      Ernst Mayr, an architect of contemporary evolutionary theory,
    would have agreed. He wrote that “living systems ... have numerous
    properties that are simply not found in the inanimate world.”8
        ...I believe that a unification of science is indeed possible if we
        are willing to expand the concept of science to include the basic
        principle and concepts of not only the physical but also the
        biological sciences. Such a new philosophy of science will need
        to adopt a greatly enlarged vocabulary – one that includes such
        words as biopopulation, teleonomy, and progress. It will have to
        abandon its loyalty to a rigid essentialism and determinism in
        favor of a broader recognition of stochastic processes, a plural-
        ism of causes and effect, the hierarchical organization of much
        of nature, the emergence of unanticipated properties at higher
        hierarchical levels, the internal cohesion of complex systems, and
        many other concepts absent from – or at least neglected by – the
        classical philosophy of science.9

       Mayr emphasized the role of chance in evolution:
        Evolutionary change in every generation is a two-step process:
        the production of genetically new individuals and the selection
        of the progenitors of the next generation. The important role of
        chance at the first step, the production of variability is universally
        acknowledged, but the second step, natural selection, is on the
        whole viewed rather deterministically: Selection is a non-chance
        process. What is usually forgotten is the important role chance
        plays even during the process of selection. In a group of sibs it
        is by no means necessarily only those with the most superior
        genotypes that will reproduce. Predators mostly take weak or
        sick prey individuals, but not exclusively, nor do localized nat-
        ural catastrophes (storms, avalanches, floods) kill only inferior
        individuals. Every founder population [the parent population of
       7      Nagel, Thomas, “The Core of ‘Mind and Cosmos,” New York Times, August 18,
    2013
       8      Mayr, E., Toward a New Philosophy of Biology. (Cambridge: Harvard University
    Press, 1988) p. 1.
       9      ibid, p. 21.
                      I. Physics, Biology, and Physicalism                               9

    a new species] is largely a chance aggregate of individuals, and the
    outcome of genetic revolutions, initiating new evolutionary depar-
    tures, may depend on chance constellations of genetic factors.
    There is a large element of chance in every successful colonization.
    When multiple pathways toward the acquisition of a new adaptive
    trait are possible, it is often a matter of a momentary constellation
    of chance factors as to which one will be taken.10

  Physicalism’s picture of the natural order has no room for the
kinds of pervasive and objective randomness that evolution requires,
according to Mayr and other evolutionary biologists.
   Physicalist views of evolution characterize it as a mechanical pro-
cess – a process whose outcomes are predictable, at least in principle.
Some evolutionary biologists argue that evolution is a creative pro-
cess – one that brings into being novel and unpredictable forms of
organized complexity. This was the central theme of the philosopher
Henri Bergson’s masterwork, L’Évolution créatrice (Creative Evolu-
tion, 1907). Bergson’s books combined philosophical and scientific
erudition with an engaging and persuasive literary style. They won
him a wide and enthusiastic readership. In 1927 he was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Literature. But Bergson didn’t believe that creative
biological processes are consistent with well-established physical
laws. He argued that physical laws couldn’t govern either evolution
or consciousness because they rest on an oversimplified character-
ization of time. Physics represents time by a line and moments in
time by points on the line. In his doctoral dissertation Time and Free
Will Bergson argued that this static representation deprives time of
its essential dynamic character. As time manifests itself in creative
biological contexts, including evolution and free human acts, it is
a dynamic process, “pure becoming.” Evolution, Bergson argued,
transcends scientific description. It is driven by an élan vital or vital
impulse. Because that impulse informs all living organisms, Bergson
argued, in Introduction to Metaphysics, that we can grasp it through
an effort of intuition even if we can’t describe it in the language of
science.
   The élan vital didn’t survive twentieth-century advances in our
understanding of biology. Experimental and observational evidence
leaves little room, if any, for doubting that physical laws apply across
the board – to living organisms and physical systems alike. Biology’s
   10    Mayr, E. 1983. The American Naturalist 121: 324-33; reprinted in Toward a New
Philosophy of Biology. pp. 148-159.
10                                  Why We are Free

     current picture of the living world also dispenses with “biotonic”
     laws – laws that apply only to living organisms.
        But while Bergson’s interpretation of evolution is no longer
     tenable, his description of it as a creative process remains compelling.
     Embracing that description while rejecting Bergson’s metaphysics,
     Theodosius Dobzhansky, like Mayr a principal architect of current
     evolutionary theory, argued that evolution is indeed “a creative pro-
     cess, in exactly the same sense in which composing a poem or a sym-
     phony, carving a statue, or painting a picture are creative acts”:
          Can the word ‘creative’ be validly applied to a process that has no
          foresight and no ability to devise means to a chosen goal? …Evolu-
          tion [like artistic creation] not only brings novelties into being, but
          these novelties present embodximents of new ways of life. …Every
          new form of life that appears in evolution can, with only moderate
          semantic license, be regarded as an artistic embodiment of a new
          conception of living.11

        Like artistic creativity, evolutionary creativity requires randomness,
     or indeterminism, to be an objective feature of the natural world.
     Quantum indeterminism isn’t enough. If Mayr’s and Dobzhansky’s
     views of evolution are correct, macroscopic indeterminism – the
     prevalence of chance at macroscopic levels of description – must be a
     pervasive and objective feature of the macroscopic world, as it seems
     to be of the world of experience. But it has no place in physical-
     ism’s deterministic picture of physical reality, as described by Pierre
     Simon Laplace in 1814:
          We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of
          its past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at a certain
          moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all
          positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect
          were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would
          embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies
          of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect
          nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would
          be present before its eyes.12
        11     Dobzhansky, Theodosius.. “Chance and Creativity in Evolution” in Studies in
     the Philosophy of Biology, edited by F.J. Ayala and T. Dobzhansky. (Berkeley: University of
     California Press 1974) p. 329.
        12     Laplace, Pierre Simon, A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities, translated into
     English from the original French 6th ed. by Truscott, F.W. and Emory, F.L., (New York,
     Dover Publications 1951) p.4.
                  I. Physics, Biology, and Physicalism                    11

  In his essay “Chance” (1908) the mathematician, physicist, and
philosopher Henri Poincaré reaffirmed this worldview:
   Every phenomenon, however trifling it be, has a cause, and a mind
   infinitely powerful and informed concerning the laws of nature
   could have foreseen it from the beginning of the ages. If a being
   with such a mind existed, we could play no game of chance with
   him; we should always lose.

   Yet in Mayr’s and Dobzhansky’s views of evolution, all living
organisms are winners in games of chance whose outcomes not even
“a mind infinitely powerful and informed concerning the laws of
nature” could have foreseen.” Physicalism equates chance to imper-
fect human knowledge of laws or initial conditions. By contrast,
Mayr’s and Dobzhansky’s views of evolution require chance events to
be unpredictable in principle. Physical laws allow us to predict future
states of complex systems if we know enough about their present
state. By contrast, evolution gives rise to forms of complex order that
aren’t prefigured or implicit in earlier states of the universe.
   Randomness is synonymous with disorder. Its antithesis, in bio-
logical contexts, is organized complexity. Because physicalism’s
account of physical reality doesn’t accommodate macroscopic ran-
domness, neither does it accommodate organized complexity and
the processes that give rise to it (creative processes). A scientific
worldview that accommodated consciousness and evolution, as con-
ceived by Mayr, Dobzhansky, and other contemporary evolutionary
biologists, would also allow us to characterize randomness and orga-
nized complexity in an expanded language of physics.
  This book describes such a worldview and its underpinnings.
12   Why We are Free
                                                                         13




                                  II
            Cosmological Assumptions

   Natural science’s account of the world combines a small set of
strongly confirmed physical laws with supplementary conditions
that characterize more or less idealized models of physical systems
to which the laws apply. Supplementary conditions are of two kinds:
initial conditions characterize a system at a particular moment;
boundary conditions describe the system’s interaction or absence of
interaction with its environment. Each of our strongly confirmed
laws applies to many possible systems and processes. For exam-
ple, astronomers apply Newton’s law of gravitation and his laws of
motion to idealized models of astronomical systems ranging from
the Earth-Moon system to clusters of galaxies. A handful of deep,
abstract, and strongly confirmed physical laws govern an unlimited
variety of models of system and processes characterized by freely
chosen initial and boundary conditions. A theory’s testable predic-
tions serve to test both its laws and its initial conditions.
   The most fundamental supplementary conditions are cosmological
assumptions – assumptions about both the physical universe and the
laws. Physicalism assumes that our strongly confirmed physical laws
are correct – or at least excellent approximations to still deeper and
more highly unified laws. But physicalism isn’t a consequence of this
14                              Why We are Free

     assumption alone. It depends also on the assumption that at each
     moment the physical universe is in a definite physical state:
        Physicalism’s underlying assumption. A complete description of
     the physical universe assigns definite values to the physical quan-
     tities that characterize macroscopic systems. Thus it fully describes
     and individuates every macroscopic physical system.
        Together with the fact that our strongly confirmed physical laws
     link a description of any given state of an undisturbed system to
     which the laws apply to descriptions of the system’s earlier and later
     states, this assumption, implies that the outcomes of nearly all phys-
     ical processes – indeed all processes other than quantum measure-
     ments – are predictable in principle. In other words, the assump-
     tion allows us to pass from the (uncontested) proposition that our
     strongly confirmed physical laws are deterministic – that they link
     the present state of any undisturbed system to which the laws apply to
     any of the system’s past or future states – to the proposition that these
     laws plus initial and boundary conditions that conform to physical-
     ism’s underlying assumption determine future states of undisturbed
     systems, including the universe itself. It allows us to pass from the
     determinism of physical laws to cosmic determinism.
        Of course, experiments and observations don’t provide the exact
     values of physical quantities that have continuous ranges of possi-
     ble values, like position, mass, and temperature. Random measure-
     ment errors – a consequence of human ignorance – locate the values
     of such quantities within small subranges. Improved experiments
     and observations reduce these subranges. And since measurement
     errors can’t be eliminated entirely, the measured values of physical
     quantities can’t distinguish the Sun from other suns or the Galaxy
     from other galaxies. Which is why both Laplace’s and Poincaré’s defi-
     nitions of determinism, quoted above, refer to an imaginary being
     that knows the precise values of all relevant physical quantities.
        The universe envisaged by Newton, Laplace, and Poincaré is made
     up of particles of various sizes and shapes, moving and interacting
     in ways governed by Newton’s laws of motion. In such a universe
     every particle (or its center of mass) has a definite position at each
     moment, defined by a set of three real numbers – the particle’s rect-
     angular coordinates in a fixed but arbitrary coordinate system. But
     cosmologists now agree that the early universe wasn’t a sea of classi-
                    II. Cosmological Assumptions                            15

cal particles. It was a sea of particles governed by quantum laws. One
strongly confirmed prediction of these laws is that two particles of
the same kind, such as a pair of electrons or neutrinos or photons,
are indistinguishable in a way that has no classical counterpart. Two
classical particles may have identical intrinsic properties, such as
mass, electric charge, and spin. Yet they are nevertheless distinguish-
able: one is here, the other is there. By contrast, the laws of quantum
physics don’t assign each member of an assembly of elementary par-
ticles of the same kind its own position or, more generally, its own
single-particle state. The assembly has distinct quantum states, but
the individual particles that compose it do not. As a result, states of
the early universe could be fully described in ways that don’t privi-
lege any spatial position or direction. For example, a state of the early
universe could be a state fully characterized by its temperature and
the relative concentrations of elementary particles.
  If the initial conditions that characterize the early universe don’t
privilege any point or direction in space, the same will be true of
the conditions that characterize the universe at later times, because
the laws that link earlier to later states don’t introduce a privileged
position or direction. So a complete description of the physical uni-
verse can’t contain descriptions of this star or that galaxy. Instead it
describes what I’ll call cosmological ensembles – infinite collections of
near-replicas uniformly and isotropically distributed in space. Thus
geophysics isn’t just about Earth; it is about an infinitely dispersed
collection of planets whose observable properties are indistinguish-
able from those of Earth.
   I’ll refer to the assumption that a complete description of the uni-
verse doesn’t privilege any spatial position or direction as the strong
cosmological principle. It is a strengthened version of an assumption
that underlies most contemporary theories (and observations) of the
astronomical universe:

     The cosmological principle. There are coordinate systems
     relative to which a statistical description of the distribu-
     tion of matter and motion in the universe at any given
     moment doesn’t privilege any spatial position or direc-
     tion.
16                               Why We are Free

       The strong version of this assumption replaces the word statistical
     by the word complete:

          The strong cosmological principle. There are coordinate
          systems relative to which a complete description of the
          distribution of matter and motion in the universe at any
          given moment doesn’t privilege any spatial position or
          direction.
        The strong cosmological principle implies that, contrary to the
     assumption underlying physicalism, a complete description of the
     physical universe doesn’t describe individual physical systems such
     as the Sun and Earth. Instead it describes infinite collections of repli-
     cas – cosmological ensembles. The systems that make up an ensemble
     are uniformly and isotropically distributed in space. The ensemble
     itself is fully characterized by a set of probabilities, or probability dis-
     tribution, of its members’ physical attributes. The probability that an
     attribute has a given value or a value that lies in a given range of
     values has an objective interpretation: it is the fraction of replicas in
     a cosmological ensemble in which the attribute has that value or a
     value in the given range.
        The strong cosmological principle relies on quantum physics. It
     couldn’t hold in a universe made up of particles governed by the laws
     of classical physics. Consider the simplest model of such a universe:
     a random, statistically uniform distribution of identical particles. In
     such a universe the distance between any given particle and (say) its
     nearest neighbor, measured in a fixed unit of length, is a real number
     – a number represented by a point on the number line. This number
     characterizes the particle uniquely, because the probability that a
     second particle has the same distance from its nearest neighbor is
     zero. (As the mathematician Georg Cantor showed in 1891, there
     are infinitely more real numbers in any real-number interval than
     there are particles in the universe.) The picture of the natural world
     described in this book rests on a pair of related cosmological assump-
     tions. The first is the strong cosmological principle. The second is the
     assumption of primordial randomness:

          Primordial randomness. The probability distributions that
          characterize the earliest state of the astronomical universe
                    II. Cosmological Assumptions                          17

     to which our present physical laws apply are maximally
     random.
  What does randomness mean in this context? As discussed in
more detail below, every probability distribution has two comple-
mentary attributes: randomness and information.
   Randomness is closely related to – but not identical with – entropy.
Between 1850 and 1865 Rudolf Clausius discovered a previously
unnoticed property of effectively isolated macroscopic systems that
have relaxed into a macroscopically uniform, unchanging state called
thermal equilibrium. He named this property entropy and proved
that the second law of thermodynamics (the science of heat and its
transformations) is equivalent to the statement that the entropy of a
closed, or isolated, system never decreases.
  Although randomness is a property of any probability distribution,
Ludwig Boltzmann introduced it, in 1872, in a particular physical
context. He showed that it is the counterpart of Clausius’s entropy in
the molecular theory of gases – a theory that seeks to found thermo-
dynamics on what was then the speculative assumption that a gas is a
collection of particles whose motions and interactions are governed
by Newton’s laws of motion. Boltzmann’s H theorem states that the
randomness of an isolated sample of an ideal gas never decreases.
   In wider contexts randomness is a measure of disorder. Its com-
plementary property, information, is the amount by which a prob-
ability distribution’s information falls short of its largest possible
value. It is a measure of order.
   The assumption of primordial randomness contradicts a proposi-
tion advanced by Rudolf Clausius in 1865: “The entropy of the world
tends toward a maximum.” This statement has been widely accepted.
As astrophysicist Arthur S. Eddington explained in an influential
book, The Nature of the Physical World,
   The practical measure of the random element which can increase
   in the universe but never decrease is called entropy. …Entropy
   continually increases. …The law that entropy always increases –
   the second law of thermodynamics – holds, I think, the supreme
   position among the laws of Nature. If someone points out to you that
   your pet theory of the universe is in disagreement with Maxwell’s
   equations – then so much for Maxwell’s equations. If it is found to
   be contradicted by observation – well, these experimentalists do
18                                    Why We are Free

         bungle things sometimes. But if your theory is found to be against
         the second law of thermodynamics I can give you no hope; there is
         nothing for it but to collapse in the deepest humiliation.1

        More recently the mathematician Roger Penrose likewise endorsed
     Clausius’ formulation of the law, arguing that the universe began to
     expand from a highly organized state of exceedingly low entropy
     and has been becoming progressively more disorganized.2 But let’s
     take a closer look. The first of thermodynamics’ two main laws says
     that heat and mechanical energy, or work, are interconvertible at a
     fixed rate of exchange. The second law imposes restrictions on the
     conversion of heat into work. In one of its forms it states that no
     cyclic heat engine can convert heat drawn from a heat reservoir at a
     fixed temperature entirely into work. Clausius defined the entropy
     of a macroscopic system in terms of its changes when a macroscopic
     system accepts heat from or delivers heat to an external heat reser-
     voir. He showed that the Second Law is equivalent to the statement
     that the entropy of a closed (or undisturbed or isolated) system never
     decreases. The two laws underpin predictions about all macroscopic
     processes involving heat flow, including the life-sustaining energy
     transactions between living organisms and their environments.
        Both have been strongly confirmed.
         At first sight it may seem easy to generalize the definition of
     entropy and the law of entropy change from macroscopic systems
     to the universe. Seemingly, we can represent the universe as a col-
     lection of weakly interacting macroscopic systems for each of which
     entropy is a well-defined quantity that never decreases. To calculate
     the entropy of the universe we simply add up these contributions.
     The resulting quantity, the “entropy of the universe”, never decreases.
     But, as Enrico Fermi emphasized in his Lectures on Thermodynamics
     and as we’ll discuss in more detail below, this recipe works “only if
     the energy of the system is the sum of the energies of all the parts and
     if the work performed by the system during a transformation is equal
     to the sum of the amounts of work performed by all the parts.”3 The
     systems experimental physical scientists and biologists study usually
       1      Eddington, Arthur S. The Nature of the Physical World, (Ann Arbor: University of
     Michigan Press 1958) p. 74
       2      Penrose, Roger. The Emperor’s New Mind. (Oxford: Oxford University Press 1989)
     Chapters 7, 8
       3      Fermi, Enrico. Thermodynamics, (New York: Prentice-Hall 1937) p. 53
                    II. Cosmological Assumptions                            19

satisfy these conditions. But astronomical systems don’t satisfy the
first condition because the gravitational potential energy of a system
held together by the mutual gravitational attraction of its parts isn’t
equal to the sum of the parts’ gravitational potential energies. For
example, the gravitational potential energy of a uniform gas sphere
of given mass density is proportional not to its mass but to the square
of its mass.
    That Clausius’s generalization of his law doesn’t apply to self-grav-
itating systems shows up in the fact that self-gravitating systems have
negative heat capacity: the mean temperature of a self-gravitating
gas cloud increases when heat, in the form of radiation, leaves the
cloud. The law of entropy growth implies, however, that any system
to which the law applies has positive heat capacity: its mean tem-
perature increases when heat flows into it.
   Since the universe is made up of self-gravitating systems, it doesn’t
satisfy the additivity condition. So we can’t extend the law of entropy
non-decrease to the universe as a whole.
    By contrast, any probability distribution that characterizes the
state of the universe has a well-defined randomness. So it does make
sense to postulate that the randomness of a statistical description of
the universe tends toward a maximum. I think this assumption is
implicit in the physicalist picture of the natural world, which con-
tains only the entities mentioned in physical theories, and I think
that may be how Eddington and Penrose interpreted Clausius’s
dictum about the entropy of the universe.
   This book argues that a picture of the natural world based (in
part) on the alternative assumption that the universe has expanded
from a primordial state of zero information or maximum random-
ness is more inclusive than physicalism’s world picture. I’ll argue that
it accommodates not only consciousness but also creative processes,
including free will and biological evolution itself.
   The case for the two cosmological assumptions rests in part on
the claim that they characterize the physical universe as simply as
possible. I argue below that these assumptions throw light on three
longstanding problems in physics: the problem of time’s arrow – the
apparent conflict between the irreversibility of macroscopic pro-
cesses involving heat flow and the fact that the underlying micro-
20                             Why We are Free

     scopic laws do not distinguish between the direction of the past and
     the direction of the future; the measurement problem of quantum
     mechanics – the apparent conflict between the indeterminacy of
     quantum measurement outcomes and the determinacy of the phys-
     ical laws that govern the physical processes involved in measure-
     ments; and the interpretation of probabilities in the statistical theo-
     ries that link macrophysics and microphysics.
                                                                            21




                                    III
  The Universe’s Large-Scale Structure
   Isaac Newton envisioned the universe as an infinitely extended
assembly of particles, each of which is in a definite place at each
moment. Replying to a question from the theologian Nicholas Bent-
ley, who was preparing a set of lectures intended to defend religion
from atheism, Newton, a devout theist, wrote, in 1692:
   As to your first query, it seems to me that if the matter of our sun
   and planets and all the matter in the universe were evenly scat-
   tered throughout all the heavens, and every particle had an innate
   gravity toward all the rest, and the whole space throughout which
   this matter was scattered was but finite, the matter on the outside
   of the space would, by its gravity, tend toward all the matter on
   the inside, and by consequence, fall down into the middle of the
   whole space and there compose one great spherical mass. But if the
   matter was evenly disposed throughout an infinite space, it could
   never convene into one mass; but some of it would convene into
   one mass and some into another, so as to make an infinite number
   of great masses, scattered at great distances from one to another
   throughout all that infinite space. And thus might the sun and
   fixed stars be formed, supposing the matter were of a lucid nature.
   But how the matter should divide itself into two sorts, and that
   part of it which is fit to compose a shining body should fall down
   into one mass and make a sun and the rest which is fit to compose
   an opaque body should coalesce, not into one great body, like the
   shining matter, but into many little ones; or if the sun at first were
   an opaque body like the planets, or the planets lucid bodies like the
   sun, how he alone would be changed into a shining body whilst
   all they continue opaque, or all they be changed into opaque ones
   whilst he remains unchanged, I do not think explicable by mere
   natural causes, but am forced to ascribe it to the counsel and con-
   trivance of a voluntary Agent.
22                                      Why We are Free

        Newton doesn’t mention this cosmogonic hypothesis in his
     masterwork, The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (the
     Principia), which had appeared five years earlier. In Relativity, the
     Special and the General Theory, a popular exposition of relativity,
     Einstein points out that Newton’s model of the astronomical uni-
     verse, in which matter is distributed more or less uniformly through-
     out infinite Euclidean space, is inconsistent with his (Newton’s) law
     of gravitation:
          [Newton’s theory] requires that the universe should have a kind of
          center in which the density of stars is a maximum, and that as we
          proceed outwards from this center the group density of the stars
          should diminish, until finally, at great distances, it is succeeded by
          an infinite region of emptiness. The stellar universe ought to be a
          finite island in the infinite ocean of space.1

        Einstein appends a proof of this claim:
        The proof rests on the fact that Newton’s law of gravitation can
     be expressed as a picture of “lines of gravitational force.” Every par-
     ticle is the terminus of such lines. Their number is a fixed multiple
     of the particle’s mass. If mass were uniformly distributed in infinite
     Euclidean space, the number of lines of force passing through unit
     area of any given sphere – and hence the magnitude of the gravita-
     tional force at any point on the sphere – would be proportional to
     the sphere’s radius and would therefore increase without limit as the
     radius increased, “which [Einstein writes] is impossible.”
        Einstein hoped that his own theory of spacetime structure and
     gravitation would apply to Newton’s simplified model of the physi-
     cal universe – an infinitely extended, uniform distribution of mass/
     energy. In 1917, two years after his account of the general theory of
     relativity appeared in print, he summarized his efforts to construct
     a description of the universe based on that model. He concluded
     that the equations that link the structure of spacetime to its con-
     tents – the theory’s “field equations” – do not have a solution that
     describes a motionless, infinitely extended, uniform distribution of
     mass/energy.
        Einstein searched for a way to reconcile general relativity with
     his preferred model of the astronomical universe. General relativity
       1     Einstein, A., Relativity, the Special and the General Theory, 15th edition, (Crown,
     New York, 1952) p. 106.
                III. The Universe’s Large-scale Structure                 23

incorporates Bernhard Riemann’s mathematical theory of curved
n-dimensional continuums. That theory allows a three-dimensional
space to be curved both globally and locally, like a model of Earth’s
surface. If physical space had constant positive curvature it would
be the three-dimensional “surface” of a four-dimensional ball. Like
a sphere (the two-dimensional surface of a three-dimensional ball),
such a space is unbounded – it has no edge – yet finite. Disappoint-
ingly, the field equations seemed to have no solution that describes
a finite quantity of matter spread evenly throughout a finite space
of constant positive curvature. Convinced that a plausible model of
the universe must be uniform and isotropic apart from local irregu-
larities, Einstein now took a step he later regretted. He modified the
field equations of his 1915 theory in a way that would allow them to
have such solutions. The 1915 theory links the structure of space-
time to the distribution of mass/energy in a way that involves only a
single physical constant – the constant that appears in Newton’s law
of gravitation. The field equations of the modified theory contain an
additional term, whose coefficient is a second constant, the cosmo-
logical constant.
   Five years later, in 1922, the mathematician Alexander Friedmann
wrote a paper claiming that Einstein’s original field equations do in
fact have solutions that describe uniform, unbounded distributions
of mass – solutions Einstein had overlooked. Einstein’s mistake,
Friedmann claimed, had been to assume that such a distribution
must be static. True, there was as yet no observational evidence that
the distribution of matter was not static on large scales, though there
soon would be. But Friedmann was a mathematician, not a physi-
cist or astronomer. So he asked himself: Do Einstein’s original field
equations have solutions that describe a uniform, unbounded, but
non-static distribution of mass? He found that they do. The mass
distribution may be infinitely extended or, if space has positive cur-
vature, it may occupy a finite volume. If the medium is infinitely
extended, a solution of the field equations describes a universe that
expands forever from a state of nominally infinite density in the
finite past. If the distribution of mass/energy and the space it occu-
pies are finite, a solution (of the same field equations) cycles end-
lessly through alternate periods of expansion and contraction. These
solutions of Einstein’s 1915 field equations describe models of the
physical universe that, so far as I know, no astronomer, philosopher,
24                               Why We are Free

     or writer of science fiction had previously described. At first Einstein
     rejected Friedmann’s reasoning, but on reflection he admitted he had
     been mistaken. He wholeheartedly embraced Friedmann’s solution
     of the cosmological problem and urged the editors of the journal
     to which Friedmann had submitted his paper to accept it (which,
     of course, they did). Einstein also decided that it had been a mis-
     take to add an extra term to his original field equations. Ironically,
     most contemporary cosmologists believe the extra term is needed to
     account for astronomical evidence.
                     “The Realm of the Nebulae”
        Using a telescope he himself had designed and built, Galileo
     discovered in 1610 that the Milky Way, a diffuse band of light that
     encloses a great circle on the dome of the sky, is made up of myriad
     “suns” too faint for the naked eye to resolve.
        In 1750 Thomas Wright, an instrument maker, suggested that just
     as the Earth’s orbit lies near the central plane of a flattened system of
     planets circling the Sun, the stars that make up the Milky Way belong
     to a flattened system of Sun-like objects whose members, including
     the Sun, circle a distant center.
        Immanuel Kant embraced Wright’s hypothesis and, in his 1755
     book Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heaven, greatly
     extended it. Kant suggested that the stars are suns, many of them
     surrounded by flattened systems of planets, which, like Jupiter and
     Saturn, are themselves surrounded by flattened systems of satellites;
     that not only the Milky Way but also the “nebulae” – elliptical cloud-
     like objects scattered among the stars – are very distant stellar sys-
     tems with the same structure as planetary systems – a massive cen-
     tral object surrounded by a disc-like family of satellites, all revolving
     about the central object in the same sense; and that these stellar sys-
     tems themselves belong to still larger unbounded system with the
     same structure.
        Kant argued that all these systems could have formed by a single
     process: a cloud of dispersed matter collapses under the combined
     action of Newton’s gravitational attraction and a hypothetical repul-
     sive force. (Curiously, because he was an admirer and expounder
     of Newtonian physics, Kant didn’t recognize that Newton’s theory
     makes a repulsive force superfluous. As the mathematician Pierre
                     III. The Universe’s Large-scale Structure                      25

Simon Laplace (1749 – 1827) later showed, unless a cloud has zero
angular momentum, or spin, it collapses into a flattened system in
which the centrifugal, or radially outward, acceleration of a particle
circling the central mass balances the radially inward gravitational
acceleration of the particle produced by matter inside the particle’s
orbit.) Astronomers disagreed about whether the “nebulae” are rel-
atively nearby gas clouds or distant stellar systems. In 1920 astron-
omers Harlow Shapley and Heber Curtis held a famous debate on
this question. Curtis defended Kant’s view that the nebulae are stel-
lar systems comparable in all respects to our own system, the Milky
Way. Shapley argued that they are gas clouds in the Milky Way.
   In the 1920s the astronomer Edwin Hubble and his colleagues,
using what was then the world’s most powerful telescope, the recently
completed 100-inch reflecting telescope at the Mount Wilson
Observatory in southern California, made systematic observations
of the nebulae that resolved the debate. Longexposure photographs
resolved bright stars in the largest and brightest of the nebulae, the
Andromeda Nebula, and analyses of photographic and spectro-
scopic data confirmed that it was a stellar system comparable in size
and stellar composition with our own stellar system, thus confirm-
ing Kant’s hypothesis. The nebulae were indeed galaxies (a term sug-
gested by Shapley). In The Realm of the Nebulae Hubble wrote:
      Investigations of the observable region as a whole have led to two
      results of major importance. One is the homogeneity of the region
      – the uniformity of the large-scale distribution of the nebulae. The
      other is the velocity-distance relation. 2

   The first result depended on a discovery by the astronomer
Henrietta Swan Leavitt (1868-1921). Some stars are close enough to
have measurably different directions when the Earth is on opposite
sides of the Sun. From measurements of this difference, the star’s
parallax, one can deduce its distance, much as Thales deduced the
distance of a ship at sea from measurements of its parallax and the
measured distance between the two points of observation. Astron-
omers then deduce the star’s true brightness, or luminosity, from its
apparent brightness and the fact that an object’s apparent brightness
diminishes like the reciprocal of the square of its distance. Conversely,
if an astronomer knew a celestial object’s luminosity she could infer
  2       Hubble, Edwin, The Realm of the Nebulae, (Yale University Press, 1936).
26                              Why We are Free

     its distance from a measurement of its (apparent) brightness. Leavitt
     studied 1777 variable stars in the Magellanic Clouds, a pair of dwarf
     galaxies that orbit our own galaxy. Among these variable stars were
     Cepheids, pulsating stars whose brightness varies periodically. She
     found that the mean brightnesses of the Cepheids she studied were
     tightly correlated with their periods. Since stars in the Magellanic
     Clouds are all at nearly the same distance from Earth, Leavitt’s dis-
     covery meant that the luminosities of the Cepheids she studied were
     tightly correlated with their periods.
        To calibrate Leavitt’s period-luminosity relation astronomers use
     Cepheids that are close enough to have measurable parallaxes. They
     then use the calibrated relation between distance and luminosity
     to infer the distances of more distant Cepheids from their (appar-
     ent) brightnesses. In 1923, two years after Leavitt’s death, Hubble
     discovered the first of several Cepheids in the Andromeda Nebula,
     the brightest of the external galaxies. Its measured brightness and
     Leavitt’s period-luminosity relation played the decisive role in estab-
     lishing that the Andromeda Nebula is a stellar system comparable in
     size and stellar composition with our own galaxy.
        Hubble’s assumption that Cepheid-like variables in external gal-
     axies satisfy the same relation between true brightnesses and period
     of variation as Cepheids in our own galaxy exemplifies an assump-
     tion he called “the principle of uniformity.” Using that assumption
     to interpret measurements of the brightnesses of galaxy images on
     photographs made with the 100-inch reflector, Hubble concluded:
        There is no evidence of a thinning-out, no trace of a physical
        boundary. There is not the slightest suggestion of a supersystem of
        nebulae isolated in a larger world. Thus, for the purposes of spec-
        ulation, we may apply the principle of uniformity, and suppose
        that any other equal portion of the universe, selected at random,
        is much the same as the observable region. We may assume that
        the realm of the nebulae is the universe and that the observable
        universe is a fair sample. (emphasis added)

        In Hubble’s hands the assumption that “any other equal portion of
     the universe, selected at random, is much the same as the observable
     region” proved to be an invaluable research tool. As he understood,
     “much the same” doesn’t mean “exactly the same.” Hubble’s succes-
     sors have devoted much time, effort, and ingenuity to refining and
                III. The Universe’s Large-scale Structure                27

extending the principle of uniformity. For example, they have dis-
covered that there are different kinds of Cepheids, with slightly but
significantly different period-luminosity relations, and that some of
the differences depend on systematic differences in chemical com-
position between different stellar populations. Such differences,
however, are consistent with a more general cosmological assump-
tion, mentioned earlier: the cosmological principle:
     Relative to a suitably defined system of spacetime
     coordinates, the average properties of galaxies and their
     distribution in space at any given moment are the same
     everywhere and in all directions.
  Or more briefly:
     The astronomical universe is statistically homogeneous
     and isotropic.
   The second of Hubble’s “two results of major importance” was the
velocity-distance relation. Whereas the first result (that the “exter-
nal nebulae”, or galaxies, are stellar systems comparable to our own)
depended on brightness measurements, the second depended on
measurements of the displacements of absorption lines in the spec-
tra of distant galaxies.
                   Astronomical Spectroscopy
   By passing a beam of sunlight through a glass prism, Newton
separated it into what he called “colored rays.” He found that dif-
ferently colored rays were deflected through different angles when
they passed through the prism. Newton’s successors established that
the colored rays are electromagnetic waves with definite frequencies,
ranging from 430×1012 cycles per second at the red end of the spec-
trum to 770×1012 cycles per second at the violet end.
   The spectrum of sunlight is crossed by thousands of dark lines,
each of which results from the absorption and subsequent isotropic
reemission of light by a specific kind of atom or molecule. The lines
produced by a single atom or molecule are very narrow, but those
produced by a macroscopic gas sample – a portion of the solar atmo-
sphere, for example – are broadened in wavelength by the Doppler
effect associated with the relative line-of-sight motions of the atoms
or molecules in the sample. (The Doppler effect increases the fre-
28                               Why We are Free

     quency of monochromatic light emitted by an approaching source
     and decreases the frequency of light emitted by a receding source.
     The fractional change in frequency is proportional to the velocity of
     approach or recession.)
        The spectrum of a distant galaxy superimposes contributions
     from the galaxy’s stars (and other emitters of light). The breadth of an
     absorption line measures the dispersion of the relative line-of-sight
     velocities of the stars. The displacement of the line’s center from its
     rest-value measures the line-of-sight velocity of the galaxy’s center of
     mass (or, more accurately, “center of light”), relative to the telescope.
        Extending pioneering measurements of galaxy redshifts by Vesto
     Slipher, Hubble and his colleague Milton Humason found that the
     absorption lines in the spectra of very distant galaxies were always
     displaced toward the red end of the spectrum. Moreover, this dis-
     placement, or red shift, had a systematic component, proportional
     to the galaxy’s distance: the points on a graph of measured redshift
     against estimated distance hugged a straight line. And because the
     amount of scatter didn’t increase systematically with estimated dis-
     tance, Hubble could attribute deviations from the straight-line rela-
     tion to gravitational accelerations arising from local non-uniformi-
     ties in the spatial distribution of galaxies – nonuniformities whose
     average properties didn’t depend on distance from the observer.
        The cosmological principle implies that there’s nothing special
     about our galaxy’s place in the universe of galaxies. It also implies
     that the population of galaxies extends indefinitely in all direction.
     The proportionality between the average line-of-sight velocity of a
     galaxy and its distance from the observer then has a straightforward
     interpretation:

          The unbounded distribution of galaxies is undergoing a
          uniform expansion – an expansion that looks the same
          from every vantage point.
         Hubble announced the velocity-distance relation in 1929. At
     the time, he didn’t know that his discovery confirmed Alexander
     Friedmann’s seven-year-old prediction, based on the general theory
     of relativity and the assumption that matter is more or less evenly
     distributed in an unbounded universe.
                 III. The Universe’s Large-scale Structure                 29

                        The Early Universe
   In an expanding universe the mass density, averaged over scales
greater than the largest scales on which the mass distribution is
non-uniform, decreases steadily with time. So as we look back in
time, we see the average mass density steadily increasing. Eventually
it becomes equal to, and then surpasses, the average mass density of
galaxy clusters. At these and earlier times galaxy clusters couldn’t yet
have existed. As we look back still further in time, we reach epochs
in which galaxies themselves couldn’t have existed. Still earlier, the
average cosmic mass density exceeded stellar densities. Even earlier,
the average mass density would have been so high that atoms and
molecules couldn’t have existed. Finally, at the earliest times at which
our current physical theories apply, the universe would have been a
more or less uniform distribution of elementary particles and pho-
tons. This conclusion seems inescapable if we assume that the aver-
age properties of the astronomical universe are the same everywhere
and that quantum theory and Einstein’s theory of gravitation apply
in their respective domains.
   In 1964 physicists Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson at the Craw-
ford Hill location of Bell Telephone Laboratories discovered what
came to be called the cosmic microwave background. With a radio
telescope they had built to observe electromagnetic radiation emit-
ted by astronomical objects with wavelengths ranging from tenths of
a centimeter to a few centimeters, they detected a diffuse radiation
field whose intensity never varied and was the same in all directions.
The spectrum of the radiation was indistinguishable from that of
radiation in a cavity whose walls are maintained at a temperature
around three degrees above absolute zero (on the Kelvin scale). Later
more accurate measurements confirmed this conclusion and placed
the temperature at 2.725 K.
   In the most widely accepted model for the origin of the cosmic
microwave background, the temperature of the background radia-
tion has steadily decreased from very high values near the beginning
of the cosmic expansion:
   At the time when [the temperature] T ≈1012, the universe con-
   tained photons, muons, antimuons, electrons, positrons, neutrinos
   and antineutrinos. In addition, there was a very small nucleonic
30                                    Why We are Free

           contamination, with neutrons and protons in equal numbers. All
           of these particles were in thermal equilibrium.3

       In other models the primordial universe was cold, and the cosmic
     microwave background came into being later.4
                           Quantum Indistinguishability
        Elementary particles and photons come under the jurisdiction of
     quantum mechanics. A statistically uniform distribution of elemen-
     tary particles and photons in thermal equilibrium differs profoundly
     from a statistically uniform and random distribution of particles
     governed by the laws of classical, or non-quantum, physics. A sta-
     tistically uniform and random distribution of classical particles with
     given mass density and temperature has infinitely many microscop-
     ically distinct realizations, or microstates. But a statistically uniform
     distribution of identical particles governed by quantum mechanics
     is fully characterized by the distribution’s mass density and its tem-
     perature. It has a single microstate. This conclusion follows from
     a deep, consequential, and non-intuitive feature of the quantum
     world: quantum indistinguishability. I’ll argue shortly that quantum
     indistinguishability underpins this essay’s main argument – that ran-
     domness is an objective and pervasive feature of the physical universe.
        What is quantum indistinguishability? Two classical particles may
     have identical properties, such as mass, electric charge, and spin. Yet
     they are nevertheless distinguishable: one is here, the other is there.
     Now consider a statistically uniform assembly of identical classical
     particles. At any given moment the distance between a given particle
     (or its center of mass) and the particle’s nearest neighbor, expressed
     as a multiple of a fixed unit of distance, is a real number – a number
     represented by a point on the number line or by a non-terminat-
     ing decimal. The probability that any other particle in the assem-
     bly has the same distance from its nearest neighbor is zero. For the
     probability that the first n digits in the decimal expansions of two
     randomly selected real numbers coincide is 1/10n , which approaches
     zero as n increases without limit. So each member of an infinitely
     extended, statistically uniform and random distribution of identical
     particles is distinguishable in principle from all other members by
     the relative positions of its neighboring particles (or even of one of
       3      Weinberg, S. 1972. Gravitation and Cosmology. New York: Wiley, p. 528.
       4      Aguirre, A. 1999. Astrophysical Journal, 521, pp. 17-29.
                 III. The Universe’s Large-scale Structure                   31

them). Such an assembly is in a definite microstate at each moment;
and the number of possible microstates is infinite in the same way
that the number of real numbers in an interval of the number line is
infinite.
   Like classical particles of the same kind, quantum particles of the
same kind have identical intrinsic properties – mass, electric charge,
spin, and magnetic moment. But they are also indistinguishable in
a more radical way that depends on a feature of the mathematical
description of quantum states that has no counterpart in experience
or in pre-quantum physics. This new kind of indistinguishability –
quantum indistinguishability – strongly influences observable, mac-
roscopic properties of matter and light. For example, it is behind the
fact that atoms in the same column of the periodic table of chemical
elements (such as hydrogen, lithium, sodium, and potassium) have
similar chemical properties (for example, the named elements are all
monovalent). It is also behind the fact that the distribution of photon
energies in a box whose walls are maintained at a fixed temperature
differs from the distribution of the kinetic energies of gas particles
in the same box.
   To understand quantum indistinguishability you need to know
two things about the grammar of state vectors, the mathematical
objects that represent quantum states. (1) Two state vectors that
differ only in sign represent the same quantum state. (2) Exchanging
the labels of two particles in a state vector that represents the state of
an assembly of identical particles must either leave the state vector
unaltered or change its sign (that is, multiply it by –1). These are the
only possibilities the rules of quantum mechanics allow. They define
two classes of elementary particles, called fermions (after Enrico
Fermi) and bosons (after Satyendra Nath Bose). Electrons, protons,
and neutrinos are fermions – the joint state vector of an assembly of
fermions changes sign when you exchange the labels of two particles
in the assembly. Helium atoms in their states of lowest energy and
photons are bosons. The joint state vector of an assembly of bosons
doesn’t change when you exchange the labels of two particles in the
assembly. Which of the two classes an elementary particle belongs
to depends on its spin. Particles of spin 1/2, 3/2, ... in units of h/2π
are fermions, particles of spin 0, 1, 2, ... in the same unit are bosons.
32                             Why We are Free

       An assembly of fermions has different observable properties from
     an assembly of bosons, and both collections have different observ-
     able properties from an assembly of identical classical particles.
     Some examples:

         — From plausible but then-controversial statistical
         assumptions James Clerk Maxwell, in 1860, deduced the
         distribution of molecular kinetic energies in a gas sam-
         ple in thermal equilibrium. He found that each molec-
         ular-velocity component has a “normal distribution,”
         represented by the bell-shaped curve that represents the
         distribution of random measurement errors, and that the
         width of the distribution is proportional to the tempera-
         ture of the gas sample. Much later, experiments con-
         firmed his prediction.
         — In 1900 Max Planck devised a formula that closely
         fitted recently improved measurements of the spectrum
         (frequency distribution) of thermal radiation (light in a
         box whose walls are maintained at a fixed temperature).
         In view of Einstein’s photon hypothesis (now a firmly
         entrenched feature of quantum physics) we can think of
         Planck’s law as describing the equilibrium distribution of
         photon energies. It differs markedly from Maxwell’s law
         for the distribution of the energies of classical particles in
         thermal equilibrium.
         — Two fermions can’t occupy the same single-particle
         state. Wolfgang Pauli discovered an instance of this rule
         in 1925. To explain the periodic structure of the periodic
         table of chemical elements he made two proposals. He
         suggested that four, rather than three, quantum numbers
         characterize the state of an electron in an atom. (The first
         three quantum numbers correspond to the fact that we
         need three numbers to specify a classical particle’s orbit.
         The fourth quantum number, which had two possible
         values, turned out to characterize the component of the
         electron’s spin along a fixed direction.) Pauli’s second pro-
         posal was the rule, known as Pauli’s exclusion principle:
         two electrons can’t occupy the same quantum state.
                 III. The Universe’s Large-scale Structure                  33

     — Because several bosons can occupy the same
     single-particle states, the members of a collection of
     bosons in thermal equilibrium (a dilute gas of helium
     atoms, for example) crowd into the single-particle state of
     lowest energy at temperatures close to absolute zero.

               The Strong Cosmological Principle
   The cosmological principle is an assumption about the large-scale
structure of the physical universe. It says that there are spacetime
coordinate systems in which a description of the universe phrased
entirely in terms of probability distributions and average values
doesn’t discriminate between positions in space or between direc-
tions in space. For example, at each moment the mass density, aver-
aged over a sufficiently large region, has the same value everywhere.
So too does the average value of the squared difference between the
mass density at a point and its (position-independent) average value.
   All coordinate systems in which a statistical description of the
universe doesn’t discriminate between spatial positions or directions
have a common time coordinate. In this respect the cosmological
principle may seem to reinstate Newton’s universal time. In Newton’s
physics time, and with it the notion of rest, are “absolute” because his
laws of motion hold in, and only in, particular spacetime coordinate
systems all of which are at rest relative to one another. Einstein’s spe-
cial theory of relativity (1905) abolished absolute time and absolute
rest. It demanded that physical laws in no way discriminate between
a spacetime coordinate system in which Newton’s laws hold and
any other coordinate system whose motion is unvarying in speed
and direction relative to the first system. Coordinate systems in
which Newton’s laws hold are called inertial systems. The principle
of special relativity requires physical laws to take the same form in
all inertial coordinate systems if they are written in a mathematical
language devised by Einstein’s former teacher, Hermann Minkow-
ski. Minkowski spacetime replaces the Euclidean space plus absolute
time of Newton’s theory. Newtonian physics becomes a limiting case
of special-relativity physics, approximately valid for particle speeds
much smaller than the speed of light in empty space. Beginning in
34                                       Why We are Free

     1928 with P.A.M. Dirac’s relativistic generalization of Schrödinger’s
     equation, discussed in more detail below, special relativity became a
     pillar of quantum theory.
         The general principle of relativity revokes the privileged status
     of inertial spacetime coordinate systems. It requires physical laws
     to take the same form in all coordinate systems that assign the
     same squared spacetime interval (the squared time interval minus
     the squared distance interval) to every pair of neighboring point
     events. As Einstein explains in his popular exposition Relativity, the
     Special and the General Theory,5in his more technical lectures The
     Meaning of Relativity,6 and in his comprehensive journal article The
     Foundations of the General Theory of Relativity,7a consistent work-
     ing-out of the general principle of relativity leads to a unique theory
     of gravitation and spacetime structure. (The path wasn’t easy, though,
     even for Einstein. One wrong turn, known as the “hole problem” put
     him off course for two years.8)
        The existence of a preferred family of spacetime coordinate sys-
     tems for the universe as a whole doesn’t clash with the general prin-
     ciple of relativity. The latter constrains the laws governing spacetime
     structure and gravitation; the cosmological principle characterizes a
     particular system to which the laws apply: the astronomical universe.
        The assumption that there exists a system of spacetime coordinates
     relative to which no statistical property of the physical universe
     defines a preferred position or direction in space is often viewed as
     defining an idealized model of the universe, like the assumptions
     that define idealized models of stars and galaxies. Unlike those
     assumptions, however, it could hold exactly. If the early universe
     is statistically uniform and isotropic, quantum indistinguishability
     implies that its complete description – and hence a complete descrip-
     tion of all subsequent states – doesn’t privilege any spatial position
         5      Einstein, Albert, Relativity, the Special and the General Theory, 15th edition, ,
     (Crown Publishers, New York, 1952).
         6      Einstein, Albert, The Meaning of Relativity, 5th edition, (Princeton, NJ, Princeton
     University Press, 1953).
         7      Einstein, Albert, The Foundations of the General Theory of Relativity, in The Prin-
     ciple of Relativity, (Methuen and Company 1923, reprinted by Dover Publications 1952).
         8      Norton, John D., “The Hole Argument”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
     (Fall 2015 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
     fall2015/entries/spacetime-holearg/>
                 III. The Universe’s Large-scale Structure                  35

or direction. I will refer to the hypothesis that it does hold exactly as
the strong cosmological principle. This book argues that it is the miss-
ing element in a picture of the natural world that incorporates our
strongly confirmed physical laws. It draws support from (at least)
three arguments.
   First, precise and extensive observations of the cosmic microwave
background and of the spatial distribution and line-of-sight veloc-
ities of galaxies have so far produced no compelling evidence of
deviations from statistical homogeneity and isotropy, now or in the
past. Astronomical observations provide little support if any for the
view that the cosmological principle is merely an approximation or
an idealization, like the initial conditions that define models of stars
and galaxies.
   Second, the initial conditions that define the universe don’t have
the same function as those that define models of astronomical sys-
tems. A theory of stellar structure must apply to a range of stellar
models because stars have a wide range of masses, chemical com-
positions, spins, and ages. But there’s only one universe. The strong
cosmological principle defines its simplest models. In that respect it
is more like a law than an initial condition.
    Finally, the strong cosmological principle accounts for what is
sometimes called “Mach’s principle”: local inertial reference frames
– frames in which Newton’s and Maxwell’s laws as well as their spe-
cial-relativistic generalizations hold – are unaccelerated relative to
a frame defined by the cosmic microwave background and the dis-
tribution and motions of distant galaxies. Einstein’s theory of grav-
itation predicts this coincidence provided the cosmological principle
holds exactly. Astronomical evidence supports this prediction. It
indicates that local inertial reference frames are indeed unaccelerated
relative to a coordinate system in which the cosmic microwave back-
ground is equally bright, on average, in all directions and the spatial
distribution of galaxies is statistically homogeneous and isotropic.
If the distribution of energy and momentum on cosmological scales
were not statistically homogeneous and isotropic, there would be no
preferred cosmological frame and hence no obvious explanation for
the observed relation between local inertial frames and the frame
36                                   Why We are Free

     defined by the cosmic microwave background and the spatial distri-
     bution and line-of-sight velocities of galaxies. If the cosmic medium
     was in thermal equilibrium at very early times, it lacked structure on
     all macroscopic scales. Its state was maximally random. (As discussed
     below, thermal equilibrium is a state of maximum randomness.) But
     as the universe expanded, structure emerged. I have discussed one
     possible scenario for this process elsewhere.9 The cosmic distribution
     of mass/energy became progressively less random, more orderly.




        9      Layzer, David, Cosmogenesis: The Growth of Order in the Universe, (Oxford
     University Press, 1990).
                                                                          37




                                 IV
                  Entropy and Its Law

                     Heat as a Form of Energy
   From the middle of the eighteenth century to the middle of the
nineteenth century scientists who invented and used devices for
measuring the heat released or absorbed in chemical reactions and
in the compression and expansion of gas samples disagreed about the
nature of what they were measuring. Some held that heat is a con-
served substance, “caloric,” analogous to mass. When a body gains
caloric its temperature rises; when it gives up caloric its temperature
falls. And in a heat engine, such as James Watt’s steam engine, caloric
does work on a movable piston – for example, by raising a weight –
when the engine’s working substance expands and heat “falls” from a
higher to a lower temperature.          Newton, late in the seven-
teenth century, had championed a different view. It rested on what
many scientists, then and until the opening years of the twentieth
century, regarded as a speculative hypothesis: that the universe is
made up of invisible, indivisible particles moving and interacting in
otherwise empty space. Put forward by Leucippus in the fifth century
BCE and elaborated by his pupil Democritus, the atomic hypothesis
was made the basis of a comprehensive naturalistic philosophy by
Epicurus (341 – 270 BCE). In the first century BCE it became the
subject of a long poem, On the Nature of Things, by the Roman poet
38                                Why We are Free

     and philosopher Lucretius. Stephen Greenblatt, in The Swerve,1 has
     argued that this widely read poem played an important role in the
     emergence of the modern world.
         The atomic hypothesis suggested that a flow of heat into an other-
     wise undisturbed system, measured in an appropriate unit, produces
     an equal change in the sum of the kinetic energy associated with
     the motions of the system’s hypothetical atoms and the potential
     energy associated with the forces the atoms exert on one another.
     Newton’s laws of motion imply that the sum of these two kinds of
     energy is constant in time; an increase of one of them is accompa-
     nied by an equal decrease in the other. Inflows of heat increase an
     otherwise undisturbed system’s internal energy; outflows diminish
     it. In the early 1840s Robert von Mayer (in Germany), James Joule
     (in England), and Ludwig Colding (in Denmark) independently
     advocated this hypothesis. In 1843 James Joule described experi-
     ments that lent it strong support. Using a calorimeter, he measured
     the quantity of heat generated by the viscous (internal frictional)
     dissipation of internal motions created by a paddle wheel immersed
     in water and driven by a descending weight. He found that the heat
     generated in this process, measured by a rise in temperature of the
     water, was consistently and accurately proportional to the quantity
     of mechanical energy that disappeared, measured by the decrease in
     the height of a weight whose descent drove the paddle wheel. And
     the constant of proportionality between the heat generated and the
     mechanical energy (in this case, gravitational potential energy) that
     disappeared always had the same value up to experimental error. In
     short, Joule concluded, heat has a fixed “mechanical equivalent.” It is
     a kind of energy.
         This proposition became the first of the two most basic laws of
     the new science of thermodynamics. It allowed scientists to extend
     the definition of energy from its original domain, mechanics, to
     include the domain of thermodynamics. They could now attribute
     a new property – internal energy –to an undisturbed macroscopic
     system that has relaxed into a macroscopically unchanging equilib-
     rium state, and extend the scope of Newtonian mechanics’ principle
     of conservation of energy, which up until then had applied only to
     systems whose internal motions don’t generate heat, to any undis-
     turbed system.
       1    Greenblatt, Stephen , The Swerve, (New York: Norton and Company 2009).
                      IV. Entropy and Its Law                            39

                         The Second Law
   The second of thermodynamics’ two mains laws imposes a lim-
itation on devices that, like the steam engine and the internal com-
bustion engine, convert heat into mechanical energy. Its first version
was a theorem stated and proved by the engineer and physicist Sadi
Carnot (1796 - 1832) in an essay entitled “Reflections on the Motive
Power of Heat” published in 1824. The essay opens:

     Everyone knows that heat can produce motion. That
     it possesses vast motive-power no one can doubt, in
     these days when the steam engine is everywhere so well
     known.
  But despite its ubiquity in nature and its importance in industry,

     [t]he phenomenon of the production of motion by heat
     has not been considered from a sufficiently general point
     of view. We have considered it only in machines the na-
     ture and mode of action of which have not allowed us to
     take in the whole extent of application of which it is sus-
     ceptible. In such machines the phenomenon is, in a way,
     incomplete. It becomes difficult to recognize its princi-
     ples and study its laws. In order to consider in the most
     general way the principle of the production of motion by
     heat, it must be considered independently of any mech-
     anism or any particular agent. It is necessary to establish
     principles applicable not only to steam engines but to all
     imaginable heat engines, whatever the working substance
     and whatever the method by which it is operated.
   To understand “the production of motion by heat,” Carnot argues,
it isn’t enough to study heat engines experimentally. The principle
underlying heat engines isn’t an empirical generalization; it’s an
exact mathematical law. Carnot’s essay lays bare this principle. It is
known as Carnot’s theorem.
   A quarter of a century later, William Thomson (who became Lord
Kelvin) and Rudolf Clausius independently deduced the second of
thermodynamics’ two main laws from a slightly but significantly
emended version of Carnot’s theorem. Thomson based his ther-
mometer-independent definition of temperature (thermodynamic
40                                     Why We are Free

     temperature) on Carnot’s theorem, and Clausius based his definition
     of entropy and his derivation of the law of entropy change on Car-
     not’s theorem and Thomson’s definition.
        In the following paragraphs I argue that the argument that led
     Clausius from Carnot’s theorem to the conclusion that the entropy of
     the universe tends toward a maximum over-generalizes and over-ex-
     tends a series of correct inferences. I conclude that his law of entropy
     change applies in an important but limited domain but doesn’t apply
     to systems held together by the mutual gravitational attraction of
     their particles (self-gravitating systems). In particular, it doesn’t
     apply to stars, galaxies, and the physical universe.
        Neither Clausius’s deduction of his law nor the argument that it
     doesn’t apply to the physical universe involves mathematics beyond
     elementary algebra. Since that argument plays a pivotal role in the
     following discussion, I’ll try to describe both Clausius’s route to
     entropy and its law and my critique of the law’s most general form
     in enough detail to allow readers with a modest mathematical back-
     ground to make an informed judgment about the critique’s validity.

                                     Carnot’s Theorem
        Carnot’s derivation of the theorem from which William Thomson
     and Rudolf Clausius deduced the second law of thermodynamics
     rests on two solid empirical notions – temperature and heat-gain (or
     heat-loss), both of which are unambiguously measurable (though in
     arbitrary units).2 It also rests on two mistaken theoretical assump-
     tions – that heat is a conserved substance and that it does work by
     “falling” from a higher to a lower temperature, just as water in a
     watermill does work when it falls from a higher to a lower elevation.
         Carnot imagined an ideal cyclic heat engine, an engine that con-
     verts heat into work and whose working substance – the analogue
     of the steam in a steam engine – returns to its initial state at the end
     of each cycle. The engine’s working substance is a gas enclosed in
         2     Carnot’s contemporaries measured a body’s temperature by the volume of a
     sample of air or mercury in thermal contact with the body at a given pressure. Experi-
     menters discovered that different “thermometric substances” yielded different but inter-
     convertible temperature measures. Heat gain. When heat flows into (or out of) a body, its
     temperature rises (or falls) – or else it undergoes a change of state, as when ice melts or
     water turns into steam. Experimenters discovered that different “calorimetric substances”
     yielded different but interconvertible measures of heat gain.
                      IV. Entropy and Its Law                           41

a cylindrical cavity bounded at one end by a movable piston. The
working substance is intermittently in contact with two heat reser-
voirs: a source of heat, analogous to the boiler in a steam engine,
and a sink of heat, analogous to the condenser in a heat engine. As
the piston moves back and forth, the gas in the cylinder alternately
expands and contracts. When it expands it does work on the out-
side world – for example, by raising a weight. When it contracts, the
descending weight does work on the gas.




       Figure 1       The Carnot Cycle
     A point whose vertical coordinate is the working sub-
     stance’s temperature and whose horizontal coordinate is
     its volume represents the state of the working substance.
     At the beginning of a cycle the working substance is in
     the state represented by point A. Its temperature is equal
     to that of the hot reservoir (H), with which it remains in
     contact as its volume increases to the value represented
     by the horizontal coordinate of point B. As the working
     substance expands from state A to state B it does work
     on the piston and draws heat from the hot reservoir.
     Between states B and C the working substance neither
     gains nor loses heat but continues to expand and do work
     on the piston. Between states C and D it is in contact
     with and delivers heat to the cold reservoir (C) while the
42                              Why We are Free

           piston does work on it. In the final phase of the cycle,
           DA, the working substance neither gains nor loses heat as
           the piston does work on it. State D is chosen so that the
           fourth phase returns the working substance to its initial
           state. In the reverse cycle, ADCBA, the working sub-
           stance expands, doing work on the piston while thermally
           isolated (AD), continues to expand while accepting heat
           from the cold reservoir (DC), contracts, having work
           done on it by the piston while thermally isolated (CB),
           and contracts further to its initial state while delivering
           heat to the hot reservoir (BA).
         Carnot made his imaginary engine as efficient as possible by pos-
     tulating not only that no mechanical energy is wasted by friction
     between the engine’s moving parts but also that when heat flows
     between a heat reservoir and the working substance the two are at
     exactly the same temperature, thus ensuring that all of the heat with-
     drawn from the hot reservoir is transferred to the cold reservoir. He
     also assumed that when the working substance is thermally isolated
     it expands so slowly that at each moment it is in an equilibrium state
     characterized by definite values of its temperature and volume.
        These idealizations not only make Carnot’s ideal engine as effi-
     cient as possible. Crucially, they also make it reversible. Operating
     in its reverse mode, a Carnot engine acts as a refrigerator: it absorbs
     mechanical energy from the alternately falling and rising weight,
     extracts heat from the cold reservoir, and delivers heat to the hot
     reservoir.
         Because he accepted the caloric hypothesis Carnot assumed that
     in the course of a cycle his ideal engine transfers all the heat it with-
     draws from the hot reservoir to the cold reservoir. Operating in its
     reverse mode, it transfers all the heat it withdraws from the cold res-
     ervoir to the hot reservoir.
        Carnot defined the engine’s efficiency as its mechanical-energy
     output during a cycle divided by the quantity of caloric transferred
     from the hot reservoir to the working substance (and eventually to
     the cold reservoir). He then asked and answered the question on
     which his fame rests: Can two ideal heat engines operating between
     the same pair of heat reservoirs have different values of this ratio?
                        IV. Entropy and Its Law                              43

   Suppose this were possible. Let the more efficient engine trans-
fer a quantity Q of caloric from the hot to the cold reservoir while
doing a quantity of work W on its surroundings. We can then use the
less efficient engine, operating in its reverse, or refrigerator, mode, to
transfer the same amount of caloric Q from the cold reservoir back to
the hot reservoir while doing a smaller quantity of work, W´. At the
end of a cycle the composite engine is back in its initial state. Neither
reservoir has gained or lost heat. But a quantity W – W´ of mechan-
ical energy has appeared; the weight that rises during the expansion
phase and falls during the compression phase is higher at the end
of a cycle of the composite engine than it was at the beginning of
the cycle. So if we could find two Carnot engines with different effi-
ciencies we could build a perpetual-motion machine, a machine that
creates mechanical energy out of nothing.
   Carnot assumed that a perpetual-motion machine can’t exist and
concluded that all ideal heat engines operating between two heat res-
ervoirs have the same efficiency. This conclusion is called Carnot’s
theorem.
    Of course, the idealizations that define an ideal Carnot engine
can’t be realized in practice. Friction can’t be entirely eliminated, heat
doesn’t flow between bodies at precisely the same temperature, and
while a thermally insulated gas sample is expanding or contracting
it is never in a state of equilibrium; it doesn’t literally pass through
a sequence of equilibrium states. Yet, as Carnot argued, actual heat
engines can be made to resemble an ideal Carnot engine so closely
that they would indeed create mechanical energy out of nothing if
that were possible. So while Carnot’s theorem rests on assumptions
that can’t be realized in practice, it is experimentally testable. And
those assumptions allowed Carnot to discover the principle behind
the motive power of heat – that all Carnot cycles operating between
two heat reservoirs at given temperatures have the same efficiency.

            From Carnot’s Theorem to the Second Law
   Carnot’s theorem rests on the false assumption that heat is a con-
served substance, like mass or energy in Newtonian physics. Having
been convinced by Joule’s experiments that heat and mechani-
cal energy are interconvertible at a fixed rate of exchange, William
Thomson and Rudolf Clausius independently set out to discover
44                              Why We are Free

     what became of Carnot’s argument when they replaced the false
     caloric assumption with the newly established interpretation of heat
     as a form of energy and the assumption that energy, in its new inclu-
     sive form, is conserved.
         Carnot’s conclusion that ideal Carnot engines working between
     a given pair of heat reservoirs all have the same efficiency survived
     this replacement. So did the idea behind Carnot’s proof – hooking
     up ideal engines with different efficiencies, one operating in its direct
     mode, the other in its reverse mode. But Thomson and Clausius
     could not now deduce from Carnot’s argument that if two Carnot
     engines had different efficiencies they could be coupled to make an
     engine that created mechanical energy, for the First Law implies that
     if in the course of a cycle the gas in the cylinder withdraws a quantity
     of heat Q2 from the hot reservoir and delivers a quantity of mechani-
     cal energy, or work, W to its environment, it must transfer a quantity
     of heat Q1 = Q2 – W to the cold reservoir; in the course of a cycle
     the engine does an amount of work on its environment equal to the
     difference between the heat it extracts from the hot reservoir and the
     heat it delivers to the cold reservoir:

                     W = Q2 – Q1
       We can continue to define an engine’s efficiency as the ratio W/ Q2,
     but that ratio now becomes

                     W/ Q2 = 1 – Q1/ Q2 ,
        Suppose now that two ideal Carnot engines working between a
     given pair of heat reservoirs had different efficiencies. As in Carnot’s
     argument, we could then build a composite engine in which the first,
     more efficient, engine operates in its direct mode and the second,
     less efficient, engine in its reverse mode. The second engine accepts
     a quantity of heat Q1* from the cold reservoir, delivers a quantity of
     heat Q2* to the hot reservoir, and absorbs a quantity of mechanical
     energy Q2* – Q1*.
        Suppose we make Q1* equal to Q1. Then, because the second
     engine is less efficient than the first engine, the preceding displayed
     formula shows that Q2* must be less than Q2, so that Q2 – Q2* > 0;
     and the difference Q2* – Q1*, the work absorbed by the second, less
     efficient engine during a cycle, is less than W = Q2 – Q1 , the work
                        IV. Entropy and Its Law                          45

done by the first, more efficient engine. At the end of a cycle the
composite engine has withdrawn a positive quantity of heat Q2 – Q2*
from the hot reservoir and done an equal quantity of work on its
surroundings. It has converted heat drawn from a single reservoir into
mechanical energy, leaving the world otherwise unchanged. Alterna-
tively, we can arrange matters so that the second engine absorbs all
the mechanical energy the first engine delivers. Then the composite
engine extracts heat from the cold reservoir and delivers an equal
quantity of heat to the hot reservoir.
   Thomson and Clausius independently surmised that both of these
italicized statements describe impossible engines. This surmise
quickly earned the status of a physical law, the second main law of
the new science of thermodynamics. It has two equivalent forms:

     —No cyclic engine can withdraw heat from a single source
     and convert it into mechanical energy, leaving the world
     otherwise unchanged. In other words, a cyclic engine
     can’t be perfectly efficient. It can’t transform all the heat it
     withdraws from a heat source into mechanical energy; it
     needs a heat sink, to which it conveys some of the energy
     extracted from the hot reservoir.
     —No cyclic engine can transfer heat from a cooler reser-
     voir to a warmer reservoir, leaving the world otherwise
     unchanged. In other words, a cyclic engine that transfers
     heat from a cooler reservoir to a warmer reservoir needs
     to be supplied with mechanical energy. Even if it is as
     efficient as possible, it must extract less heat from the
     cold reservoir than it deliver to the hot reservoir, the dif-
     ference being equal to the mechanical energy that disap-
     pears in the course of a cycle.
   Thomson and Clausius drew two remarkable inferences from the
Second Law. Thomson used it to define temperature in a way that
made it independent of thermometers. Clausius used the Second
Law and Thomson’s definition of temperature to define entropy and
formulate the law of entropy change.
46                              Why We are Free

                       Thermodynamic Temperature
        Before Thomson used Carnot’s theorem to redefine temperature,
     scientists had defined a body’s temperature as the reading of a
     thermometer that has been in thermal contact with the body long
     enough for both to reach equilibrium. They had formulated empir-
     ical laws that relate the volume and pressure of a gas sample to the
     temperature that would be measured by an ideal-gas thermometer
     – a thermometer that uses an ideal gas as the substance that expands
     or contracts when it absorbs or releases heat.
        Since the work W done by a Carnot engine during a cycle is the
     difference Q2 – Q1 between the quantities of heat extracted from the
     hot reservoir and delivered to the cold reservoir, Carnot’s theorem
     tells us that the engine’s efficiency W/Q2 depends only on the ratio
     Q2/ Q1. This ratio takes an especially simple form if the working sub-
     stance of a Carnot engine is an ideal gas. (The internal energy of
     an ideal gas sample depends only on the sample’s temperature, and
     the sample’s pressure, volume, and temperature are related by the
     “equation of state” PV = nRT, where R is a constant that has the same
     value for ideal gas samples of any chemical composition, and n is the
     number of gram-molecules (moles) in the sample.) From this defini-
     tion of an ideal gas one can deduce that

                    Q1/Q2 = T1/T2 .
        But Carnot’s theorem shows that the efficiency of an ideal Carnot
     engine – and hence the ratio Q1/Q2 – doesn’t depend on any property
     of the working substance. Thomson accordingly proposed, in 1848,
     that physicists define the ratio T1/T2 between the temperatures of two
     bodies as the ratio Q1/Q2 between the quantities of heat extracted
     from and delivered to the bodies when they act as (or are in thermal
     equilibrium with) the heat reservoirs in an ideal Carnot engine. The
     preceding displayed equation then shows that temperature ratios
     defined in this way coincide with temperature ratios measured by an
     ideal-gas thermometer. As Thomson explained,
        In the present state of physical science, therefore, a question of
        extreme interest arises: Is there any principle on which an absolute
        thermometric scale can be founded? It appears to me that Carnot’s
                            IV. Entropy and Its Law                              47

      theory of the motive power of heat enables us to give an affirmative
      answer.
      The relation between motive power and heat, as established by
      Carnot, is such that quantities of heat, and intervals of tempera-
      ture, are involved as the sole elements in the expression for the
      amount of mechanical effect to be obtained through the agency of
      heat; and since we have, independently, a definite system for the
      measurement of quantities of heat, we are thus furnished with a
      measure for intervals according to which absolute differences of
      temperature may be estimated.3

   While the first law of thermodynamics makes heat independent of
calorimeters, Thomson’s definition, based on Carnot’s theorem and
the first law of thermodynamics, makes temperature ratios indepen-
dent of thermometers.
   Thomson’s definition fixes the zero-point of the temperature scale
but leaves the unit of temperature undefined. Thomson suggested
that the unit of temperature be chosen to make the freezing and boil-
ing temperatures of water at standard pressure be separated by one
hundred units. The resulting unit of temperature, denoted by ºK or
just K, is called the Kelvin in his honor.

                Entropy and the Law of Entropy Change
   Thomson’s definition of temperature paved the way for Rudolf
Clausius’s discovery, in 1854, of a previously unnoticed property of
isolated macroscopic systems in thermal equilibrium. In 1865 he
named this property entropy. Clausius deduced from the second
law of thermodynamics that the entropy of an undisturbed system,
unlike its energy and its mass, may change with time, and he proved
that it never decreases. Later he extrapolated this law to the largest
macroscopic system, the physical universe:
      The entropy of the world tends toward a maximum.
   After discussing Clausius’s definition of entropy and his derivation
of its law from the second law of thermodynamics, I’ll argue that this
extrapolation is invalid.
  We can rewrite the equation that Thomson used to define
temperature,

  3       Thomson, William (Lord Kelvin), Philosophical Magazine October 1848.
48                             Why We are Free

     		Q1/Q2 = T1/T2,
     as
     		Q2/T2 – Q1/T1 = 0 .
        This equation is suggestive. Suppose that the working substance in
     Carnot’s imaginary engine absorbs a small quantity of heat, denoted
     by dQ, as it transitions between two neighboring equilibrium states.
     While the working substance is in contact with the hot reservoir at
     temperature T2, these small heat transfers add up to Q2; while it is
     in contact with the cold reservoir at temperature T1, they add up to
     –Q1. The preceding displayed equation tells us that in the course of a
     complete cycle the changes dQ/T add up to zero.
        This conclusion suggests the question: Do the changes dQ/T
     add up to zero around any cyclic sequence of reversible transitions
     between equilibrium states of any macroscopic system? If the answer
     is yes, we can further infer that the sum of the small quantities dQ/T
     along any reversible path connecting any two equilibrium states, A
     and B, of the system, is the difference SB – SA between the values of a
     property S of the system in these states.
        To see why, suppose that S does indeed return to its initial value
     when the state of the system it refers to undergoes any reversible
     cyclic process. Suppose that one series of reversible changes, ABC,
     passes through an arbitrary state B and another series of reversible
     changes, CDA, brings the system back to its initial state A via another
     arbitrary state D. Since we are assuming that the quantities dQ/T
     sum to zero around any reversible path, they sum to zero along the
     path ABCDA. So the sum along the path CDA is the negative of the
     sum along the path ABC. But the sum along the path CDA is the neg-
     ative of the sum along the reverse path ADC, because each summand
     in the sum of incremental changes dQ/T along ADC is the negative
     of the corresponding summand in the sum along CDA –when you
     reverse a heat inflow it becomes a heat outflow and vice versa. So
     the sum of the quantities dQ/T has the same value along the paths
     ABC and ADC – two arbitrarily selected paths connecting two given
     states, A and C. Which is what we set out to prove.
        So if the quantity dQ/T sums to zero around any closed sequence
     of reversible changes, it represents a small change in a property of
     the system – a quantity that, like temperature, pressure, and internal
                       IV. Entropy and Its Law                             49

energy, has the same value whenever the system is in an equilibrium
state. Clausius named this property entropy. But does the quantity
dQ/T sum to zero around any closed sequence of reversible changes?
   To show that it does, Clausius invented a simple but ingenious
argument.
                        Clausius’s Argument
    Recall that Carnot’s proof of his theorem (that all ideal Carnot
engines working between two heat reservoirs at given temperatures
have the same efficiency) deploys two Carnot engines. One operates
in its direct mode, withdrawing heat from the hot reservoir, deposit-
ing heat in the cold reservoir, and doing work on the piston. The other
operates in its reverse mode, withdrawing heat from the cold reser-
voir, depositing heat in the hot reservoir, and having work done on it
by the piston. Thomson’s and Clausius’s revised versions of Carnot’s
proof also use coupled pairs of Carnot engines, one member of each
pair operating in its reverse mode. Clausius’s proof that the quantity
S returns to its initial value when the state of the macroscopic system
it refers to undergoes any reversible cyclic process uses a generalized
version of this idea.
   Suppose a macroscopic system undergoes a sequence of n small,
not necessarily reversible changes. At the kth change the system
accepts a small quantity of heat dQk from a reservoir Rk at tem-
perature Tk. dQk can be positive, negative, or zero. (So the word
“accepts” doesn’t have its everyday meaning in this context; but the
new meaning will help us keep the signs straight.) The nth and final
change brings the system back to its initial state, so the sequence of n
changes constitutes a cycle. We can make n large enough so that the
discrete sequence of changes approximates a continuous sequence as
closely as we wish.
   Clausius now imagines a collection of n ideal Carnot engines.
The kth engine works between reservoir Rk at temperature Tk – the
temperature of the system during the kth change – and a reservoir
R0 used by all n Carnot engines. The kth engine replaces the heat
drawn by the system from the reservoir Rk by delivering an equal
amount of heat dQk to Rk and it withdraws a quantity of heat dQk0
from the common reservoir R0. Thomson and Clausius showed in
their revised version of Carnot’s proof that
50                              Why We are Free

                 dQk/Tk = dQk0/T0 (k = 1, 2, …,n)
       Summing these n equations, we get:
                     Σk dQk/Tk = (ΣkdQk0)/ T0 ,
     where the symbol Σk indicates that the quantity on its right is to be
     summed over all values of the index k between 1 and n. The sum Σk
     dQk0 represents the total quantity of heat that has been withdrawn
     from the reservoir R0 in the course of a cycle. Call this quantity Q0.
        At the end of a cycle the reservoirs with labels from 1 to n are
     back in their initial states, and so is the system. But a quantity of
     heat Q0 has been withdrawn from the reservoir R0. Suppose Q0 is
     positive. Since energy is conserved, the cyclic process just described
     must produce an equal quantity of mechanical energy. But the
     Second Law says this can’t happen; heat drawn from a single source
     can’t be transformed entirely into mechanical energy. So Q0 must be
     non-positive.
        The last displayed equation then tells us that the sum Σk dQk/Tk is
     also non-positive:

             Σk dQk/Tk ≤ 0 for any cyclic process (1)
     If the cycle is reversible, the preceding equation still holds if we
     reverse the sign of each of the quantities dQk. But this is impossible
     unless the sum Σk dQk/Tk equals zero:
            Σk dQk/Tk= 0 for a reversible cyclic process       (2)
        Earlier we saw that if S is a quantity that changes by an amount
     dQ/T when the system it refers to reversibly absorbs a quantity of
     heat dQ, and if S returns to its initial value when the system under-
     goes any reversible cyclic process, then the difference SC – SA doesn’t
     depend on the path that connects A to C. Equation (2) says that S
     does indeed returns to its initial value when the system undergoes
     any reversible cyclic process. So S is indeed a physical property of the
     system, the property Clausius named entropy.
        The preceding argument defines the entropy S of a system in ther-
     mal equilibrium through the amount by which S changes when the
     system passes from one equilibrium state to another via a series of
     reversible changes. Consequently, S is defined only up to an additive
                       IV. Entropy and Its Law                              51

constant, which we may identify with the entropy of the system in an
arbitrary reference state.
   Next suppose that an isolated, or undisturbed, macroscopic
system evolves from equilibrium state A to equilibrium state C via an
irreversible process. Because the system is isolated, it doesn’t interact
with the outside world; no heat flows into or out of it and no work is
done on or by it.
   For example, imagine a box divided into two compartments by a
removable partition. Suppose that initially, one compartment is filled
with air at temperature T2, the other with air at a lower temperature
T1, and assume (as can always be arranged) there’s no pressure dif-
ference between the compartments. After the partition is removed,
the sample settles into an equilibrium state at a single uniform tem-
perature between T1 and T2. If during this process a quantity of heat
Q flows from the set of molecules that make up the subsample that
was initially at temperature T2 to the set that make up the subsample
that was initially at temperature T1, the entropy of the whole sample
changes by an amount (Q/T2 – Q/T1). In this example the entropy
of the system increases (because T2 > T1). We want to show that the
entropy of any isolated, or undisturbed, system either increases or
doesn’t change when it passes from one state of thermal equilibrium
(in which all its macroscopic properties have definite, unchanging
values) to another.
   Call the initial equilibrium state A and the final equilibrium state
C. Now construct a cycle by adding a reversible sequence of changes
CDA, in which heat can flow into or out of the system and work
can be done on or by it. (Any two equilibrium states can be joined
by infinitely many reversible sequences of reversible changes, repre-
sented by smooth curves joining the points that represent the two
states.) Applying equation (1) to the cycle ACDA gives:
                ΣAC dQk/Tk + ΣCDA dQk/Tk ≤ 0
  Because no heat flows into or out of the system during the irre-
versible leg AC, the first sum vanishes. The second sum is SA – SC, the
entropy change between C and A. So
                SC ≥ SA                            (3)
     When a closed, or isolated, system evolves between two
     equilibrium states, its entropy cannot decrease; it must
     either increase or stay the same.
52                             Why We are Free

       This is the law of entropy change. Clausius deduced it, in the
     way I’ve described, from the Second Law of thermodynamics. His
     argument shows that if the entropy of an isolated system were to
     decrease, we could build a device – the device described in Clausius’s
     proof – that converts all the heat drawn from a single source into
     mechanical energy.
         The law doesn’t say that the entropy of an isolated system must
     increase during an irreversible change in the system’s state; it merely
     says that it cannot decrease. For example, if an isolated system con-
     sists of two subsystems with initially different temperatures, the law
     tells us that heat can flow only from the warmer to the cooler sub-
     system, because heat flow in the opposite direction would decrease
     the system’s entropy. But the law doesn’t tell us that heat must flow
     between the subsystems. As in our earlier example, the two subsys-
     tems might be separated by a membrane that doesn’t conduct heat.
        A separate physical law governs heat flow. It contains a parameter
     that characterizes the thermal conductivity of a medium at each point
     and in every direction. If you change the sign of the time coordinate
     in this law, and hence the direction in which time increases, you get
     a different law – one that predicts that heat flows up a temperature
     gradient and thus violates the law of entropy change.
        More generally, separate macroscopic laws govern the processes
     through which an isolated system evolves from one equilibrium state
     to another through a sequence of irreversible processes. The law of
     entropy change constrains the laws that govern these processes, but
     doesn’t, on its own, require that irreversible processes cause the
     entropy of an isolated system not initially in thermal equilibrium to
     increase.
         Defining Entropy for Systems Not in Thermal Equilibrium
        What is the scope of Clausius’s definition of entropy? So far we’ve
     defined entropy for homogeneous systems, such as uniform gas
     samples, in thermal equilibrium. The preceding proof of the law
     of entropy non-decreases applies to two states, A and C, of such a
     system connected by an irreversible path. Now consider an undis-
     turbed nonuniform gas sample. Can we assign entropies to its states
     between A and C and apply the law of entropy non-decrease to
     them? For example, can we assign entropy to an isolated gas sample
     whose temperature varies smoothly from point to point?
                        IV. Entropy and Its Law                              53

   Clausius defined the entropy S of a system in thermal equilibrium
through its changes between neighboring equilibrium states. The
First Law of thermodynamics tells us that if the volume V of a gas
sample enclosed in a cylinder fitted with a movable piston changes
by an amount dV and a positive or negative quantity of heat dQ
flows into the sample, its internal energy U changes by an amount
dU given by:
                dQ = dU + P dV.
   Here P is the pressure the sample exerts on the piston. If the piston
has area A and travels a short distance dx, it does work PAdx or PdV.
So the preceding equation says that the work done by the sample
when its volume changes must come from either the sample’s inter-
nal energy or from heat that flows into the sample or from a com-
bination of the two. The preceding equation shows that unlike dU
and dV, dQ isn’t the change in a quantity that characterizes the state
of the gas sample; although heat is a form of energy and energy is
conserved, a gas sample doesn’t hold heat in a separate account. It
does, though, hold entropy in a separate account. Clausius’s theo-
rem enables us to replace dQ by TdS, where dS, like dU, dV, and dT,
denotes a small change in a quantity that characterizes the state of
the gas sample. The preceding equation then takes the form
                 TdS = dU + PdV                   or
                 dS = (dU/T) + (P/T)dV
   Suppose now that we can draw imaginary surfaces separating the
region occupied by an inhomogeneous gas sample into cells in each
of which the temperature and pressure are (nearly) uniform. We will
be able to do this if the gas sample isn’t too chaotic. But if the entropy
of the sample is to equal the sum of the entropies of our imaginary
cells, two more conditions must be satisfied: The sample’s energy U
must be additive: it must equal the sum of the energies of the parts.
And work performed by the system must be equal to the sum of the
amounts of work PdV performed by the parts. Then, and only then,
can we equate the change dU in the sample’s energy to the sum of the
energy changes of the parts. Enrico Fermi emphasized this condition
in his lectures on thermodynamics:
    The entropy of a system composed of several parts is very often
    equal to the sum of the entropies of all the parts. This is true if
    the energy of the system is the sum of the energies of all the parts
54                                    Why We are Free

           and if the work performed by the system is equal to the sum of the
           amounts of work performed by all the parts. Notice that these con-
           ditions are not quite obvious and that in some cases they may not
           be fulfilled. Thus, for example, in the case of a system composed
           of two homogeneous substance, it will be possible to express the
           energy as the sum of the energies of the two substances only if we
           can neglect the surface energy of the two substances where they
           are in contact. The surface energy can generally be neglected only
           if the two substances are not very finely divided; otherwise it can
           play a considerable role. 4
        Energy is usually additive under laboratory conditions. Parcels
     of air in the atmosphere, whose energies include a height-depen-
     dent gravitational potential energy, also satisfy the additivity condi-
     tion, as do parcels of gas in the interiors of stars. But the Earth as a
     whole and the Sun as a whole don’t satisfy the condition, because the
     gravitational potential energy of a system held together by the mutual
     gravitational attraction of its parts isn’t a sum of contributions each
     of which depends only on local conditions. This is a consequence of
     what physicists call the “long-range” character of Newtonian gravi-
     tational force – the fact that it decreases only with the inverse square
     of the separation between mutually attracting particle. This makes
     gravitational potential energy a nonlocal property, in contrast to the
     energies associated with the short-range forces that come into play
     when two gas atoms or molecules collide, or the binding energies
     of atoms in gas molecules or of atoms and molecules in crystals. So
     Clausius’s definition of entropy doesn’t apply to planets, stars, galax-
     ies, or other self-gravitating systems. Consequently, it doesn’t apply
     to the universe.
        An isolated macroscopic gas sample settles into thermal equilib-
     rium – a macroscopically quiescent state of uniform temperature.
     Could a self-gravitating system be in such a state? It could be in a
     state of mechanical equilibrium, in which the weight of every small
     parcel of gas balances the pressure force the surrounding gas exerts
     on the parcel’s boundary. But a calculation based on Archimedes’s
     law of hydrostatic equilibrium shows that if the system also had
     uniform temperature – if it were in thermal as well as mechanical
     equilibrium – it would extend to infinity and have infinite mass. A
     finite self-gravitating system can’t evolve toward a state of uniform
     temperature – a state without internal heat flow.
       4       Fermi, Enrico, Thermodynamics, Prentice-Hall, New York, 1937, p. 53.
                       IV. Entropy and Its Law                            55

    In a star, energy is liberated by thermonuclear reactions in the
deep interior and escapes from the surface layers in the form of light
and neutrinos. As a result, the star’s structure and its energy slowly
change. In a protostar whose central temperature is not yet high
enough for thermonuclear reactions to liberate energy, the loss of
energy by radiation from the surface layers is uncompensated, so the
protostar’s energy decreases. This has a surprising consequence. The
virial theorem (like entropy and its law, discovered and named by
Rudolf Clausius) implies that when a self-gravitating system of parti-
cles is in mechanical equilibrium, its gravitational energy, a negative
quantity, is equal in magnitude to twice the system’s thermal energy
(the combined kinetic energy of its particles). The sum of the sys-
tem’s gravitational energy and its thermal energy is consequently a
negative quantity equal in magnitude to its thermal energy (or half
its gravitational energy). So when the system loses energy, its thermal
energy, and hence its mean temperature, increase. Thus a self-gravi-
tating system in mechanical equilibrium has negative heat capacity
(the ratio between a small inflow of heat – in the present example
a negative inflow – and the consequent small increase in tempera-
ture).     In contrast, the second law of thermodynamics predicts
(and experiments confirm) that when a system (to which the law
applies) loses energy, its temperature drops. Of course, as we’ve just
seen, the domain of the Second Law doesn’t include self-gravitating
systems – and for basically the same reason that a self-gravitating gas
mass grows hotter as it radiates away energy: gravitational potential
energy is non-local and hence non-additive.
   Rudolf Clausius’s discovery of entropy and his reformulation of
the Second Law as the law of entropy change enabled him to recast
thermodynamics as a deductive mathematical science, an adjunct
to Newtonian particle physics and Newtonian fluid mechanics. That
science has proved to be enormously useful, and its predictions have
been uniformly successful in a very wide domain. But, as we’ve seen,
that domain is limited to macroscopic systems whose structure is
sufficiently smooth and whose energy can be expressed as a sum of
the energies of nearly uniform subregions. As long as “the entropy
of the universe” remains undefined, we can assign no meaning to
Clausius’s statement that the entropy of the universe tends toward a
maximum.
56   Why We are Free
                                                                                 57




                                      V
                               Atomism

   Thermodynamics’ two main laws are generalizations about the
outcomes of possible experiments. The first law says that in any
experiment in which heat appears in a closed (or isolated or undis-
turbed) system a strictly proportional quantity of mechanical energy,
such as gravitational potential energy, disappears. The second law
states that it is impossible to build a device whose only effect is to
transfer heat from a cooler to a warmer body; or, equivalently, to
build a device whose only effect is to transform heat drawn from a
single heat reservoir into mechanical energy. Some of Clausius’s con-
temporaries succeeded in constructing a theory based not on these
empirical generalizations but on Newton’s laws of motion together
with an assumption that, in the mid-nineteenth century, seemed far
less secure than thermodynamics’ two empirical laws: that matter
consists of invisible and indivisible particles in motion. Not until the
early 1900s did that assumption, the atomic hypothesis, become the
atomic fact (as the physicist Richard Feynman put it in his Lectures
on Physics).
   Atomic theories of macroscopic systems and processes have
a statistical character; they are formulated in the mathematical
language of probability theory. Ludwig Boltzmann showed that
the statistical description of an isolated sample of an ideal gas has a
counterpart to entropy. As we’ll discuss, this counterpart, sometimes
called statistical entropy, is well defined in a much broader domain
than Clausius’s entropy. It is a measure of the randomness inherent
in a statistical description. So for the sake of clarity, I’ll usually call it
randomness rather than statistical entropy.
58                                   Why We are Free

        While probability theory itself is uncontroversial, its interpreta-
     tion in statistical theories based on the atomic hypothesis raises a
     question that goes to the heart of the problem of free will versus
     determinism: Do the probabilities that figure in these theories repre-
     sent incomplete knowledge? Or do they represent a kind of objective
     indeterminacy distinct from quantum indeterminacy? To answer this
     question we’ll need to take a closer look at atomism and statistical
     physics.

                                 The Roots of Atomism
        In the fifth century BCE Leucippus and his pupil Democritus (460
     – 370 BCE) conjectured that the world consists of indivisible parti-
     cles, or atoms, moving about in otherwise empty space. Atoms came
     in a variety of sizes and shapes. Some had hooks or barbs on their
     surfaces, allowing them to form molecules; others, such as water
     atoms, were smooth. Atoms of fire and soul were small and round
     and moved at great speeds.
        Epicurus (341–270 BCE) based his philosophy on this thoroughly
     materialistic picture of the world. But he amended it in one import-
     ant way. In his ethical philosophy Epicurus assumes that we are free
     to shape our conduct. But how does freedom fit into a world in which
     our thoughts and actions are determined by invisible atoms and
     their motions? Epicurus suggested that there is an element of ran-
     domness in atomic motions. Atoms occasionally swerve from their
     paths, and these swerves have an irreducibly random character. This
     assumption allowed Epicurus to reconcile his materialistic picture
     of the world with an ethical philosophy based on human freedom.
        How did the atomists come up with their picture of the world? In
     his History of Western Philosophy Bertrand Russell suggested that the
     atomic hypothesis was a lucky guess:
         By good luck, the atomists hit on a hypothesis for which, more
         than two thousand years later, some evidence was found, but
         their belief, in their day, was nonetheless destitute of any solid
         foundation.1

      This judgment rests on a widely accepted view of the “scientific
     method” in the physical sciences:
        1      Russell, Bertrand, History of Western Philosophy, (New York, Simon & Schuster,
     1967) p. 68.
                              V. Atomism                                    59

     Scientists do experiments and make observations. These
     may suggest hypotheses that have testable implications.
     Further experiment or observations then confirm or
     disconfirm these hypotheses. Those that survive become
     physical laws.
   The same view of the scientific method underlies the definition of
physical laws in the Oxford English Dictionary, 3d edition: Physical
laws are statements “inferred from particular facts, applicable to a
defined group or class of phenomena, and expressible by the state-
ment that a particular phenomenon always occurs if certain con-
ditions be present.” Definitions like these reflect a view of physical
laws that was popular (though not uncontroversial) among physical
scientists in the late nineteenth century. Its most famous and influ-
ential advocate was the physicist and philosopher of physics Ernst
Mach. Mach held that physicists should abjure metaphysical notions,
such as Newton’s “absolute” space and “absolute” time; they should
rely entirely on objective experimental and observational facts.
Einstein tells us that Mach’s elaboration of this view in The Science of
Mechanics helped motivate his own search for a theory that would
relate the structure of spacetime to its contents.
    But Mach went further. He held that physical laws are nothing
more than economical summaries of experimental and observa-
tional data. So he rejected theoretical constructs that went beyond
the data. These constructs included atoms and Einstein’s princi-
ple of special relativity. During the opening years of the twentieth
century, Mach’s view of physical laws fell out of favor. One group
of experiments, which included experiments designed to test Ein-
stein’s predictions about the random motions of microscopic parti-
cles suspended in a liquid (Brownian motion), showed that atoms
actually exist. Another group of experiments confirmed special rel-
ativity’s predictions about phenomena involving particles traveling
at nearly the speed of light. Though physicists continued to insist,
and still insist, that scientific hypotheses stand or fall by their test-
able predictions, special relativity and the experimental vindication
of the atomic hypothesis showed that not all scientific hypotheses are
empirical generalizations. Could Leucippus and Democritus have
viewed atomism as a scientific hypothesis? Would they even have
understood the notion of a scientific hypothesis?
60                                 Why We are Free

        About Leucippus we know only that he was Democritus’s mentor.
     Democritus, however, was famous in his day as a mathematician as
     well as a philosopher. He wrote treatises on number theory, geome-
     try, and astronomy. And he was no run-of-the-mill mathematician
     (if such people exist). According to the historian of Greek mathe-
     matics Thomas Heath, Democritus “already had the idea of a solid
     being the sum of an infinite number of parallel planes, or indefinitely
     thin laminae [plates], indefinitely near together; a most important
     anticipation of the same thought which led to such fruitful results in
     Archimedes.” The thought in question is the idea underlying the inte-
     gral calculus, an early version of which Archimedes used to calculate
     the area of a segment of a parabola and the surface area and volume
     of a sphere. Two centuries before Archimedes, Democritus used the
     same idea to prove that the volume of a circular cone is one-third
     the product of its height and the area of its base, and that the volume
     of a pyramid is likewise one-third the product of its height and the
     area of its base. So Democritus was, to say the least, an exceptionally
     creative and insightful mathematician.
        Nowadays many mathematicians specialize in subjects remote
     from the concerns of the natural sciences. But Greek mathematics,
     physics, and astronomy were closely interwoven strands of a single
     project. Heath tells us that these subjects “were born together at the
     beginning of the sixth century.”2 Collections of geometric and arith-
     metic facts, rules, and algorithms had existed for millenniums in
     Egypt and Mesopotamia before Thales of Miletus (about 624 – 547
     BCE), after visiting Babylon and Egypt and acquainting himself with
     some of their mathematical treasures, invented a new kind of math-
     ematics: He proved the first theorems.
        A theorem is a statement about mathematical objects and rela-
     tions accompanied by a proof. Written out in full, a proof is a chain
     of logical deductions that connects the statement to be proved to a
     small fixed collection of unproved statements, or axioms, and a small
     fixed collection of terms, such as point and line in plane geometry,
     that are implicitly defined by the axioms that mention them. Logical
     deductions preserve truth: if the premises of a deduction are true,
     then so is its conclusion. So if geometry’s axioms are true, then so are
     its theorems. Greek mathematicians and their successors until well
     into the nineteenth century regarded the axioms of number theory
       2     Heath, T. L, A History of Greek Mathematics. (Cambridge University Press, 2013).
                            V. Atomism                                   61

and geometry as self-evident truths. By contrast, many theorems
about numbers and geometric objects were far from self-evident.
Some were amazing. For example, Greek mathematicians discovered
and proved that the lines connecting the vertices of any triangle to
the midpoints of the opposite sides intersect in a single point, which
divides each of these lines into two segments one of which is half the
length of the other.
   Again, Pythagoras (about 570 - 490 BCE) or one of his followers
discovered that geometric atomism is false: a side and a diagonal
of a square have no common measure; it isn’t possible to choose a
unit of length so that the lengths of a side and a diagonal are both
whole-number multiples of that unit. And since this claim could be
proved, it had to be true.
    Mathematics is a creative enterprise. Theorems and their proofs
need to be invented. Mathematicians imagine properties of num-
bers or geometric objects that might be true; then they imagine
possible routes to a proof. For its first practitioners the method of
conjecture and proof was a way of arriving at hidden truths about
the world, more reliable than divine revelation or authority. And
its successes seemed to reveal that numbers and geometric forms
underpin reality. Mathematics was the language of the new sciences
of physics and astronomy. Even the parts of Greek philosophy that
were not explicitly mathematical aspired to the logical rigor epito-
mized by mathematical demonstrations. Plato held that the study of
mathematics was a necessary propaedeutic to the study of philoso-
phy. The motto “Let no one unversed in geometry enter here” was
inscribed over the door of his Academy.
   Greek mathematicians didn’t draw a sharp distinction, as we do
today, between pure mathematics and mathematical physics. They
recognized that mathematics deals with idealized objects – that
dimensionless points, perfectly straight lines, and perfectly smooth
planes exist nowhere in the world of experience. But mathemati-
cal discoveries and the method of conjecture and proof seemed to
reveal hidden and often surprising truths not only about idealized
mathematical objects and relations but also about the physical world.
Theorems about plane figures and solids are also testable proposi-
tions about their inexact real-world counterparts. And experience
invariably supported these propositions to within the accuracy of
62                             Why We are Free

     the measurements. Mathematics as a deductive science (rather than
     as a set of rules, formulas, and algorithms) was seen as a new and
     powerful tool in humankind’s struggle to understand and control
     nature, allowing its practitioners to glimpse a hidden reality that
     undergirds experienced reality but can be described only in math-
     ematical language.
        Thales, reputed to have been the first mathematician, devised a
     method for finding the distance of a ship at sea and a method for cal-
     culating the heights of the pyramids, both based, presumably, on the
     theorem that pairs of corresponding sides of similar triangles have
     the same ratio. Both methods also rely on identifying light rays or
     lines of sight with the straight lines of theoretical geometry. By com-
     bining geometry with observation, Greek astronomers conjectured
     and then proved that the Earth and the Moon are spheres. They also
     arrived at the modern explanation of solar and lunar eclipses. In the
     fourth century BCE, Heraclides suggested that the daily motions of
     the stars are produced by the Earth’s rotation (rather than by the rota-
     tion of a solid Earth-centered sphere in which the stars are embed-
     ded). A century later Aristarchus anticipated Copernicus’s model of
     the planetary system, in which the Moon is a satellite of Earth, Earth
     is a planet, and the planets are satellites of the Sun. Aristarchus also
     invented and applied a method of deducing the ratio of the Sun’s
     and the Moon’s distances from observations of their directions
     when the Moon is exactly half full. His account marks the debut of
     trigonometric ratios such as sines and tangents.
        Archimedes took over the method and style of Euclid’s Elements
     (composed around 300 BCE) and extended its vocabulary to include
     the notions of mass, force, and mechanical equilibrium. He invented
     the notion of center of mass, discovered the principle of the lever
     (objects at opposite ends of a weightless beam balance if the ratio of
     their weights is equal to the reciprocal of the ratio of the distances
     of their centers of mass from the fulcrum), and founded the science
     of hydrostatics, which includes the proposition known as Archime-
     des’ principle: An object wholly or partly submerged in water experi-
     ences an upward, or buoyant, force equal in magnitude to the weight
     of the water it displaces; so the weight of a submerged object is equal
     to its weight in air minus the weight of an equal volume of water; if
     the difference is negative, the object experiences a net upward force.
                              V. Atomism                                    63

    Archimedes’s The Method of Mechanical Theorems used his
method of infinitesimals, along with what we’d now call physical con-
cepts – the notion of center of mass and the principle of the lever – to
calculate areas and volumes of geometric objects. For Archimedes,
number theory, geometry, and mechanics were interlocking parts
of a single mathematical structure. Archimedes was famous in the
ancient world for putting the physical principles he had discovered
to practical uses. His inventions include the screw pump (for bailing
ships), block-and-tackle pulley systems, and a mechanical model of
the solar system. He also invented devices that were used to defend
his native Syracuse, in Sicily, from the invading Romans: a powerful
catapult, a device for lifting ships out of the water and then dropping
them (Archimedes’s claw), and (perhaps) arrays of either lenses or
parabolic mirrors for focusing the Sun’s rays on an invader’s ships
and setting them on fire.
   To return to the atomic hypothesis, we can perhaps think of it,
in the context of Greek mathematics and natural science, as the
response to a question that is both philosophical and scientific. One
way to state the question is to ask what would happen if you split a
drop of water in two, then split each of the resulting drops in two,
and kept on in this way. Leucippus and Democritus might perhaps
have reasoned as follows.
   Either the process of splitting will go on forever or it will come to
an end. If every substance is indefinitely divisible into smaller and
smaller parts with the same physical properties, the only possible
answer to the question “Why do different substances have different
properties?” is “They just do.” If the splitting process eventually ends,
we have a choice. Either the process ends with a large collection of
indivisible water droplets or with a large collection of objects that
aren’t water droplets. The first possibility doesn’t help us to under-
stand why alcohol differs from water. If, as I’m assuming, Leucippus
and Democritus were seeking to understand such differences, they
would have opted for the second possibility – that if you continue
to split a drop of water you will eventually arrive at particles whose
properties don’t coincide with but serve to explain the properties of
water. In the historical context I have sketched, these would have been
objects describable in the vocabulary of Euclidean solid geometry. If
you ask the right question – a question that would have arisen quite
64                                   Why We are Free

     naturally in the context of Greek mathematics, physics, and natural
     philosophy – the atomic hypothesis seems almost inevitable.
         We can interpret the question “What happens when you keep
     splitting a bit of matter into smaller and smaller parts?” as either
     a philosophical or a scientific question, depending on the kind of
     answer we’re looking for. Physicists ask questions whose answers can
     be expressed in the vocabulary of mathematics, even if they have to
     invent new mathematics to do so. Biologists ask questions that fit into
     a conceptual framework based in part on the premises that all living
     organisms are genetically related and have evolved from a single
     ancestral population. Empiricists ask questions that can be answered
     by an appeal to sensations and perceptions; metaphysicians, by an
     appeal to basic metaphysical principles, such as Gottfried Wilhelm
     Leibniz’s principles of sufficient reason (everything has a reason) and
     identity of indiscernibles (distinct objects can’t have identical prop-
     erties).

                     Atomism Becomes a Testable Hypothesis
        The atomic hypothesis had immediate explanatory value. It sup-
     plied a starting point for an explanation of why water becomes a
     solid at low temperatures and becomes a vapor at high temperatures.
     It explained why you can mix wine and water in various proportions
     to make homogeneous liquids with experimentally distinguishable
     properties. It explained why a sample of brine exposed to air eventu-
     ally turns into salt crystals. Newton, with not much more direct evi-
     dence than Democritus had had, was a convinced atomist. To quote
     the historian of the physical sciences Alan E. Shapiro:
         The corpuscular theory of matter was thus for Newton not a
         hypothesis but a demonstrated principle established with as much
         certainty as the existence of God or the theory of gravitation. He
         cites two principal sorts of evidence in its support: various sub-
         stances penetrate the pores [empty spaces between atoms] of
         bodies, like water into vegetable and animal matter, and quick-
         silver [mercury] into metals; and transparency, which shows that
         light passes through the pores of a great variety of bodies [such as
         thin layers of gold]3
        While Newton considered his view that matter consists of atoms
     to be “a demonstrated principle” on a level with his law of gravitation,
        3      Shapiro, A.E., Fits, Passions and Paroxysms: Physics, Method and Chemistry and
     Newton’s Theories of Colored Bodies and Fits of Easy Reflection. (Cambridge University
     Press, 1993).
                             V. Atomism                                    65

he considered another of his strongly held views – that light rays are
streams of particles – to be a hypothesis in need of experimental
support – which his own experiments consistently failed to provide.
    Newton’s view of atoms and their role in observable phenomena
differed from Democritus’s in a crucial respect: Newton assumed
that the motions and interactions of atoms obey his three laws of
motion. Thus enriched, Democritus’s picture of the physical world
became a testable scientific hypothesis. It not only offered qualita-
tive explanations of some phenomena but could also serve as the
basis for testable predictions about the outcomes of precise mea-
surements. Prominent among the empirical rules Newton hoped the
atomic hypothesis could explain was Boyle’s law.
   In 1659 Robert Boyle, assisted by Robert Hooke, built an improved
version of Otto von Guericke’s air pump, and with its help began a
series of experiments on what Boyle called “the spring of the air”
– the fact that a finite sample of air resists compression and also
expands to fill any airtight enclosure. Their experiments supported
the quantitative relation between the pressure and the volume of
an enclosed gas sample (at a given temperature) that is now called
Boyle’s law: the pressure, or force per unit area, the sample exerts
on the walls of its container is inversely proportional to the sample’s
volume.
  To account for this remarkably simple rule, Newton proposed
that air atoms repel one another. He showed that this hypothesis
would yield Boyle’s law if (a) each gas atom repelled only its nearest
neighbor and (b) the repulsive force was inversely proportional to
the distance between the two atoms. “But whether elastic fluids do
really consist of particles so repelling each other,” he wrote in the
Principia, “is a physical question” – that is, a question to be settled
by experiment.
   And experiment did settle it. Although Newton’s model accounted
for Boyle’s law, another of its predictions contradicted an empirical
law established by Guillaume Amontons between 1700 and 1702: If
an air sample’s volume is held constant, its pressure increases with its
temperature. Newton’s model predicts instead that the force a gas
sample exerts on the walls of its container depends only on the aver-
age number of atoms per unit volume and not on the temperature.
  In his Hydrodynamica, published in 1738, Daniel Bernoulli pro-
posed an atomic model of gases that not only accounted much
66                             Why We are Free

     more simply for Boyle’s law than Newton’s model but also predicted
     Amontons’ law and other, as-yet-undiscovered, empirical laws.
        Like Newton, Bernoulli postulated that in a uniform gas sample
     the number of gas particles per unit volume has the same value
     everywhere. But instead of postulating that the particles of a quies-
     cent gas sample are themselves motionless, as Newton had done, he
     postulated that they have large random velocities. He imagined that
     each particle travels at constant speed in a fixed direction until it
     collides with another particle or with a wall, after which it sets off in
     a new direction. He assumed that the duration of a collision is much
     shorter than the time interval between collisions, as it is in collisions
     between billiard balls. (Bernoulli’s successors assumed further that
     particle collisions are elastic: the combined momentum of a pair of
     colliding particles is the same before and after a collision and so is
     their combined kinetic energy.)
         Newton had attributed the expansive tendency of a gas sample
     to a repulsive force between the gas’s constituent particles. In Ber-
     noulli’s model the fact that a gas sample expands to fill a box of any
     size follows directly from Newton’s first law of motion: a particle on
     which no force acts continues to move in a straight line with con-
     stant speed; collisions with other particles deflect a gas particle but
     can’t confine it to a finite region.
         Appealing to Newton’s second and third laws of motion, Ber-
     noulli equated the force an enclosed gas sample exerts on a wall of
     its container to the rate at which gas particles transfer momentum
     (mass times velocity) to the wall when they strike it and rebound. He
     assumed that such encounters are elastic, conserving momentum. The
     force per unit area, or pressure, is then proportional to the number
     of particles per unit volume and to two-thirds the average value of a
     particle’s kinetic energy (half the product of its mass and the square
     of its velocity). So Bernoulli’s model predicts the following simple
     relation between the pressure, P, the number of gas particles per unit
     volume, n, and the average kinetic energy of a particle, 〈½ mv2〉:

                     P = ⅔ n 〈½ mv2〉 〈E〉 〈E〉
            If we now assume that the temperature T of a gas is some
     constant multiple of the mean kinetic energy of the gas molecules,
     Bernoulli’s formula becomes
                              V. Atomism                                     67

                P = constant × nT = constant × (N/V)T,
   where N is the number of particles in a sample, V is the sample’s
volume, and n is the number of particles per unit volume. This rela-
tion includes not only Boyle’s law and Amontons’ law (which says
that the pressure in a gas sample whose volume is held constant
increases with its temperature) but also Charles’s law (1780), which
says that at constant pressure the temperature of an ideal-gas sample
is proportional to its volume. Moreover, because the displayed equa-
tion doesn’t depend on any property of the gas particles, it contains
Amedeo Avogadro’s hypothesis (1811): Equal volumes of different
ideal gases at the same temperature and the same pressure contain
equal numbers of particles (N in the displayed equation).
   We can’t call the preceding argument a derivation of the gas laws,
because it merely assumes that the average kinetic energy of the gas
particles is proportional to the gas sample’s temperature, as defined
by Thomson through Carnot’s theorem. It doesn’t explain why. As
we’ll see, a full derivation of the ideal-gas law didn’t appear until over
a century after Bernoulli proposed his model.


                        Atoms and Molecules
   During the eighteenth century chemists devised experimental
methods for distinguishing homogeneous “substances” from mix-
tures, and for distinguishing “elements” – substances that couldn’t
be broken down into simpler substances –from “compounds.” They
perfected the chemical balance and used it to discover that elements
combine to form compounds in fixed proportions by weight. They
also discovered that weight (or mass) is conserved when a com-
pound is formed or when it is separated into elements.
   During the first decade of the nineteenth century John Dalton
(1766 – 1844) realized that simple assumptions about the atomic
composition of elements and compounds could bring greater order
to the wealth of experimental data chemists had built up during the
preceding century. He postulated that every chemical element con-
sists of identical, unchanging atoms that differ from the atoms of
other elements, and that chemical compounds consist of identical
molecules made up of atoms of the compound’s constituent elements.
68                            Why We are Free

        These postulates immediately accounted for a striking regularity
     in the data. Sometimes two elements combine to form different com-
     pounds. For example, carbon and oxygen combine to form the gases
     we now call carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. Experiments
     showed that if samples of the two compounds contain equal masses
     of carbon, the mass of oxygen in the heavier sample is twice the mass
     of oxygen in the lighter sample. To take another stock example, arse-
     nic and oxygen likewise form two compounds. If samples of these
     compounds contain equal masses of arsenic the ratio between the
     masses of oxygen in the two samples is exactly 5/3 – again a ratio of
     two small whole numbers. These examples suggest, and experiment
     confirms, the following rule: If element #1 forms two (or more) dif-
     ferent compounds with element #2, then samples that contain the
     same mass of element #1 contain masses of element #2 that are in the
     ratio(s) of small whole numbers. Before Dalton, this finding seemed
     inexplicable. Dalton’s postulates make the explanation obvious:
     Every molecule made up of atoms of different kinds contains a small
     integral number of each kind.
        Dalton’s axioms by themselves didn’t allow chemists to predict the
     proportions of elements in every compound. In the preceding exam-
     ples you might guess, correctly, that the two oxides of carbon are,
     in modern notation, CO and CO2, but you might also guess, incor-
     rectly, that the oxides of arsenic contain a single arsenic atom (in
     fact they contain two). Dalton suggested that a “rule of simplicity”
     should guide the choice of chemical formulas for compounds. But
     efforts to follow this rule led to inconsistencies. Then in 1808, the
     same year in which Dalton’s A New System of Chemical Philosophy
     appeared, Joseph Gay-Lussac (1778 – 1850) published a new empir-
     ical law, the law of combining volumes. Suppose a sample of gas
     #1 and a sample of gas #2 combine to form a compound. Gay-Lus-
     sac measured the volumes of the reactants (gas #1 and gas #2) and
     the product at the same pressure and temperature. He found that the
     measured volumes always had the ratio of small whole numbers. For
     example, suppose that a sample of hydrogen and a sample of oxygen
     react to form water vapor, with no hydrogen or oxygen left over. The
     volumes of the hydrogen and oxygen samples and the volume of the
     water vapor produced by their reaction, all measured at the same
     temperature and pressure, turn out to have the ratios 2:1:2.
                            V. Atomism                                  69

   Three years later, in 1811, Avogadro published his conjecture that
equal volumes of dilute gases at the same temperature and the same
pressure contain equal numbers of particles (atoms or molecules).
Dalton’s axioms then imply that in the preceding example two atoms
of hydrogen combine with one atom of oxygen to make two mole-
cules of water. So each water molecule ends up with half an oxygen
atom – or, as we now say, half an oxygen molecule.
   But Dalton and many of his contemporaries refused to consider
the possibility that the “atoms” of oxygen (or hydrogen or nitro-
gen or chlorine) might be what we now call diatomic molecules.
Before 1925, when quantum mechanics began to explain chemical
bonds and chemical reactions, chemists had no firm basis for under-
standing what holds molecules together. They thought in terms of
inherent affinities between atoms. Such affinities, many believed,
couldn’t exist between atoms of the same kind. Finally, in 1861,
Stanislao Cannizzaro (1826 – 1910), ignoring this prejudice, used
Avogadro’s hypothesis to infer from experimental data on combin-
ing volumes a great many mutually consistent molecular formulas of
gaseous elements and compounds – enough to convince most of his
colleagues that the hypothesis was sound.
   This brief account of the atomic hypothesis before it became the
atomic fact suggests what is missing, or at least underemphasized
in the conventional account of “the scientific method.” Radical and
consequential scientific hypotheses are rarely if ever “suggested” by
experimental and observational data. They are, as Einstein put it,
free creations of the human mind. And, like other creative acts, they
help bring into being novel and unforeseen kinds of order.

  Maxwell’s Statistical Interpretation of Thermal Equilibrium
  A box one centimeter on a side filled with air at standard tem-
perature and pressure contains roughly 3 × 1019 (30 billion billion)
molecules. A completely detailed Newtonian description of this
collection of particles would specify, among other things, the three
position coordinates and three velocity components of each mol-
ecule. Yet experiments show that two undisturbed samples of the
same gas, or of the same sample at different times, have the same
measurable properties if the samples have the same temperature and
the same pressure. What accounts for the vast disparity between how
70                            Why We are Free

     much data we need to characterize the state of an undisturbed gas
     sample at the molecular level of description and how much we need
     to characterize the sample’s macroscopic, or thermodynamic, state?
         Thermodynamics interprets equilibrium states of an isolated
     system as states of maximum entropy. So to understand thermal
     equilibrium at the molecular level we need to know the molecu-
     lar-level counterpart of entropy.
         Daniel Bernoulli postulated that the distribution of molecular
     positions and velocities in a gas sample in thermal equilibrium is
     uniform (the same at all positions) and isotropic (the same in all
     directions). Now, statistical uniformity and isotropy are aspects of
     randomness, or lack of order, at the molecular level. This in turn
     may suggest that randomness, appropriately defined, is the molecular
     counterpart of thermodynamic entropy and that thermal equilibrium
     is the condition in which the positions and velocities of gas molecules
     are distributed as randomly as possible. To pursue this suggestion we
     need to make the notion of a distribution (of molecular positions or
     velocities) more precise, and we need to define randomness.
        Collisions between the molecules of an enclosed, undisturbed
     gas sample redistribute their positions and velocities. Experiments
     show that an undisturbed gas sample settles into a state in which its
     mass density, and hence the number of molecules per unit volume,
     has the same value everywhere, up to measurement error. We can
     plausibly assume that in thermal equilibrium the gas molecules in
     any small region are traveling in random directions. But what about
     their speeds?
         We might guess that in thermal equilibrium the molecules all
     have the same speed. But this can’t be right, because when we apply
     Newton’s laws to collisions between, say, billiard balls, we find (and
     experience confirms) that their post-collision speeds differ in gen-
     eral from their pre-collision speeds. Newton’s laws require only that
     the combined momentum and the combined kinetic energy of col-
     liding particles have the same values before and after a collision –
     provided the collision converts a negligible part of the pair’s initial
     kinetic energy into the particles’ internal energies. So molecular
     collisions tend to randomize the distribution of molecular speeds.
     Or so it may seem intuitively. But what, precisely, does randomize
     mean in this context? And what is the “most random” distribution of
                             V. Atomism                                    71

the velocities of molecules in an undisturbed gas sample? In a short
paper that appeared in 1860 James Clerk Maxwell offered answers to
these questions.
   To frame the question he began by representing a gas particle’s
velocity by a point in what he called velocity space. By introducing a
Cartesian reference frame – three mutually perpendicular lines pass-
ing through the same point (the coordinate origin) – we can assign
a particle three Cartesian coordinates, x, y, z, and we can assign its
velocity three Cartesian components: u parallel to the x axis, v par-
allel to the y axis, and w parallel to the z axis. We can think of u, v,
w as the position coordinates of a particle’s representative point in
velocity space.
    The velocities of particles in a macroscopic gas sample are repre-
sented by a dense swarm of points in velocity space. To represent the
distribution of these points we begin by dividing velocity space into
identical cells whose edges are parallel to the coordinate axes. By the
“occupation number” of a cell I mean the number of particles whose
representative points lie in that cell at a given moment. By the “frac-
tional occupation number” I mean the occupation number divided
by the number of particles in the sample. Maxwell assumed that there
is a range of cell sizes for which the fractional occupation numbers
of contiguous cells are nearly equal and each fractional occupation
number is proportional to the cell volume. If these conditions are
met we can approximate the fractional occupation number of a cell
in velocity space with dimensions du, dv, dw centered on the point
(u, v, w) by the product f(u,v,w)dudvdw of a smoothly varying func-
tion of position in velocity space, f(u,v,w), and the cell’s volume, du
dv dw. We can think of the fractional-occupation-number density
f(u,v,w) as the mass density of a smoothly varying “probability fluid.”
(In the present context probability is synonymous with fractional
occupation number.) The “mass” of probability fluid doesn’t change
with time – probability fluid is conserved – because the quantities
f(u,v,w) dudvdw summed over all the cells in velocity space, add up
to 1.
   Maxwell expressed the assumption that the particle velocities in a
gas sample in thermal equilibrium are randomly distributed by two
mathematical conditions:
     1. The distribution is isotropic. This condition implies that
72                            Why We are Free

          the value of f at a point (u, v, w) depends only the point’s
          distance from the origin (0, 0, 0) and hence only on the
          quantity u2 + v2 + w2, the square of that distance. That is,
             f(u,v,w) = F(u2 + v2 + w2) for some function F.
          2. A molecule’s velocity components in mutually
          perpendicular directions are uncorrelated. Let g(u)du
          denote the proportion, or fraction, of the particles in
          the sample for which u lies in a given interval du. Then
          the proportions with v and w in given intervals must be
          g(v)dv and g(w)dw, since there are no preferred direc-
          tions in velocity space. And if velocity components in
          mutually perpendicular directions are uncorrelated, the
          proportion of the molecules in the gas sample for which
          u, v, w lie in given intervals must be the product of the
          three individual proportions:
            F(u2 + v2 + w2) = g(u) g(v) g(w).
       This equation has the solution

            F(u2 + v2 + w2) = C3 exp[– a(u2 + v2 + w2)].
        Here a and C are constants and exp is the exponential function:
     exp(x) = ex, the number e raised to the power x. (e = 2.718 …, the
     limit of (1 + 1/n)n as n increases without limit.)
            The fractional occupation numbers f(u,v,w)dudvdw,
     summed over all the cells in velocity space, must add up to 1. This
     requirement determines the constant C:

            f(u,v,w) = (a/π)3/2 exp[– a(u2 + v2 + w2)]            (1)
       Maxwell’s two randomness conditions therefore determine
     the distribution of particle velocities up to a single parameter, the
     constant a in (1).
       Now recall Bernoulli’s formula for the pressure of an ideal gas,

            P = ⅔ n 〈E〉,
     where n is the number of particles per unit volume, E = ½ m(u2
     + v2 + w2), the kinetic energy of a particle, and 〈E〉 is the average
     value of E. This formula becomes the equation of state of an ideal
                              V. Atomism                                      73

gas, P = nT, if we define the temperature T of an ideal gas as ⅔ 〈E〉.
    Using Maxwell’s formula (1) for the distribution of particle veloc-
ities, we can calculate the average value of the squared particle veloc-
ity, and hence the average kinetic energy, which we then set equal to
T. This calculation gives a = m/2T, so Maxwell’s formula becomes

        f(u,v,w) = (m/2πT)3/2 exp[– E/T]                       (2)
  If we want to measure temperature on the Kelvin scale, we
must replace T in this formula by kT, where k is a constant, called
Boltzmann’s constant, whose value depends on the units in which we
choose to measure mass, length, and time.
   Because Maxwell’s formula was not suggested by observational
or experimental evidence but instead followed from mathematical
conditions that Maxwell devised to make precise the notion of
molecular disorder, it had a mixed reception. Most supporters of the
atomic hypothesis considered the assumption that the equilibrium
distribution of particle velocities doesn’t favor any position or direc-
tion in space plausible, but many balked at the assumption that in
thermal equilibrium the components of a gas particle’s velocity are
statistically uncorrelated.
   Nevertheless, Maxwell and other advocates of atomism used the
formula to construct quantitative theories of heat conduction, molec-
ular diffusion, and viscous dissipation of internal motions in gases.
These theories made testable prediction, which matched experiment
up to experimental error.
   Experimental physics didn’t reach a stage in which Maxwell’s for-
mula (2) could be directly tested for another half-century. Since then,
physicists have devised many direct tests. In one of the conceptually
simplest of these a molecular beam on its way to a detector passes
through narrow slits in two discs spinning at slightly different rates
around a common axis parallel to the direction of the beam. The
pair of spinning discs acts as a speed filter, like a pair of timed traffic
lights. For a given difference between the rates at which the discs
are spinning, a molecule that gets through a slit in the first disc also
gets through a slit in the second disc if, and only if, its speed falls
within narrow limits. This arrangement sorts molecules in the beam
by their speeds.
74                             Why We are Free

         The Doppler effect supplies another way of sorting molecules
     in a hot gas by their speeds. Each atom or molecule in a hot gas
     emits light in narrow bands of frequency, called emission lines. An
     observer equipped with a spectroscope sees light whose intensity in
     each narrow frequency band is the sum of the intensities of the light
     waves emitted in this frequency band by the gas’s individual atoms.
     Because each atom is moving relative to the observer, its light is
     shifted at each frequency by an amount proportional to the line-of-
     sight component of its velocity. Each emission line emitted by a hot
     gas is accordingly shifted in frequency and broadened: its frequency
     is shifted by an amount proportional to the average line-of-sight
     velocity of the atoms; it is broadened by the atoms’ thermal velocities
     – their velocities relative to the average velocity of the gas molecules.
     The profile (intensity versus frequency) of an emission line has the
     same shape as the distribution of line-of-sight velocities in the gas. If
     that distribution is Maxwellian, so is the emission-line profile.
         Experiments like these show that Maxwell’s formula accurately
     characterizes the velocity distribution of gas molecules in thermal
     equilibrium. Thus they support the statistical assumptions on which
     the formula rests – assumptions that lend specificity to the notion of
     a “random” distribution of molecular velocities.
        In 1867 Maxwell revisited the problem of the equilibrium distri-
     bution of molecular velocities. Referring to his earlier assumption
     that mutually perpendicular components of molecular velocity are
     independently distributed, he wrote: “As this assumption may appear
     precarious, I shall now determine the form of the [molecular-velocity
     distribution] function in another way.” Maxwell’s new argument was
     part of a detailed account of how encounters between gas particles
     redistribute energy and momentum. It rests on the assumption that
     the incoming velocities of colliding molecules are statistically uncor-
     related, a state of affairs Ludwig Boltzmann later called “molecular
     chaos.” Like the “precarious” assumption in Maxwell’s first derivation
     of formula (2), molecular chaos posits the absence of statistical
     correlations – but between the velocities of different molecules in
     a gas sample instead of between velocity components of the same
     molecule.
                            V. Atomism                                   75

   The 1867 paper contained another major result. Maxwell consid-
ered two intermingled samples of different gases. He assumed that
initially both gases are in thermal equilibrium, each at its own tem-
perature. He then showed that encounters between the molecules of
the two gases tend to erase differences between their average kinetic
energies. Earlier we saw that Bernoulli’s relation P = ⅔ n〈E〉 becomes
the equation of state of an ideal gas if we define the temperature T
of a gas in thermal equilibrium as a constant multiple of its average
molecular kinetic energy 〈E〉 . Maxwell’s argument shows that the
average molecular kinetic energy of a gas sample in thermal equilib-
rium does indeed have the defining property of temperature: energy
exchanges between two intermingled gas samples with different
average molecular kinetic energies tends to equalize these average
molecular energies. Notice that this crucial link between Daniel
Bernoulli’s atomic theory of an ideal gas and the empirical gas laws
was supplied not by experiments or observations but by the predicted
outcome of a thought experiment.

                 Entropy of an Ideal-gas Sample
  We’ve seen that certain thermodynamic properties of an ideal-gas
sample in thermal equilibrium have counterparts in the atomic
model:
  Thermodynamic property           Atomic counterpart
Pressure                        average momentum transfer per
                                unit area
Temperature                     average particle kinetic energy
Energy                          total particle kinetic energy
Mass density                    particle mass × average number
                                density
Mass                            total particle mass
  Conspicuously absent from this list is entropy. In 1872 Ludwig
Boltzmann filled this gap. He defined a statistical counterpart of
thermodynamic entropy that is also a measure of randomness in
systems and conditions for which entropy can’t be defined. I’ll refer
to this measure as randomness. It’s also called statistical entropy.
Randomness is fundamentally a mathematical property of abstract
probability distributions. It is a precise mathematical counterpart of
the word’s colloquial meaning.
76                             Why We are Free

        In one way Boltzmann’s definition of randomness is less general
     than Clausius’s definition of thermodynamic entropy. Clausius’s
     definition of entropy applies to macroscopic systems in thermal
     equilibrium or local thermal equilibrium. Boltzmann’s definition of
     randomness applies to states of an ideal-gas sample characterized by
     arbitrary distributions of molecular position and velocity.
          Boltzmann’s 1872 paper also purported to demonstrate that the
     growth of an isolated gas sample’s randomness is a consequence of
     Newton’s laws of motion, applied to the atomic model of an ideal gas
     sample. Although, as we’ll see, Boltzmann’s proof of this claim was
     flawed, it broke new ground. It raised the possibility that Clausius’s
     law of entropy change is a special case of a far broader and more
     deeply rooted generalization about processes that destroy (and, as
     I’ll argue later, also create) order in the physical universe.

         Boltzmann’s Formula for the Randomness of a Gas Sample
        We can derive a formula for the (thermodynamic) entropy of an
     ideal-gas sample in thermal equilibrium by combining Clausius’s
     definition of entropy with the equations that relate the energy and
     pressure of such a sample to its temperature, the number of particles
     in the sample, and the sample’s volume.
       We saw earlier that the first law of thermodynamics and Clausius’s
     definition of the entropy S imply the following formula for the
     change in S between neighboring equilibrium states of an enclosed
     gas sample:

              dS = dU + P dV
       Let’s apply this formula to an ideal-gas sample. If we choose a tem-
     perature scale in which
              U = NT and P = (N/V) T

       then         dS = N(dT/T + dV/V).                           (3)

       Since d[log (x/x0)] = dx/x,

              S = N[log(T/T0) + log(V/V0)] + constant              (4)
                              V. Atomism                                    77

   T0 and V0 in equation (4) are arbitrary constants. They need to be
there because the argument of the logarithm function – the quantity
x in the expression log x – must be a positive pure number; it mustn’t
depend on how we choose the units of distance, time, and mass. Any
reference temperature T0 and reference volume V0 will do because,
as we’ve seen, entropy is undefined up to an additive constant, and
changing the values of T0 and V0 merely adds a constant to the right
side of formula (4).
   In Newtonian mechanics six quantities define the state of a parti-
cle – its three position coordinates x, y, z and its three velocity com-
ponents u, v, w. If we know the laws that govern the forces acting on
a particle and are given the values of these six quantities at a single
moment, we can use Newton’s law of motion to calculate their values
at any later or earlier moment. Boltzmann united Maxwell’s velocity
space with position space to form a six-dimensional state space. The
state of each particle in a gas sample containing N particles is repre-
sented by a point in this six-dimensional space, and a microstate of
the whole sample is represented by a cloud of N such points.
    To construct a statistical description of the state of the cloud
Boltzmann divided the six-dimensional state space into cells of equal
six-dimensional volume dxdydzdudvdw. A statistical description of
the state of the cloud of representative points assigns each cell a frac-
tional occupation number
f(x,y,z,u,v,w) dxdydzdudvdw or f(τ)dτ, where the Greek letter
τ (tau) stand for the six coordinates of a representative point
in a molecule’s state space and dτ stands for the cell volume
dxdydzdudvdw in this space. We assume we can make the dimen-
sions of a cell so small and the value of N is so large that f(τ) varies
smoothly from cell to cell, like the density of a continuous fluid.
   If the assembly of N identical particles is a gas sample of volume
V in thermal equilibrium, the particles are uniformly distributed in
space, so the fraction of the total number of particles N contained
in a region of volume dV is dV/V. The particles also have a Maxwell
distribution in velocity. Finally, Boltzmann assumed that a particle’s
position isn’t correlated with its velocity.

  Then f(τ)dτ = (m/2πT)3/2 (1/V) exp[– E/T] dτ.
78                             Why We are Free

       Take the negative logarithm of both sides of this formula, noting
     that log(xk) = k log x, where k is any positive or negative real number:

             –log [f(τ)dτ] = E/T + log(T/T0)3/2 + log(V/V0),        (5)
     where T03/2 = (m/2π)3/2 (dudvdw), V0 = dx dy dz.
        Only the first term on the right side of equation (5), E/T, varies
     from cell to cell (E is the kinetic energy of a molecule; its average
     value 〈E〉 is 3T/2). Multiply equation (5) through by the fractional
     occupation number of a cell, f(τ)dτ, sum over all the cells, and denote
     the resulting average by angle brackets 〈 〉:

             〈-log[f(τ)dτ]〉 = 〈E/T +log(T/T0)3/2 + log(V/V0)〉,

       ,
             〈-log[f(τ)dτ]〉 = 〈E/T〉 +log(T /T0)3/2 + log(V/V0),
             =3/2 + log(T/T0 )3/2 + log(V/V0)
       Now recall that

             S = N[log(T/T0)3/2 + log(V/V0)] + constant.             (4)
       From equations (5) and (4) we conclude that

             S = N 〈-log f(τ)dτ〉 -log f(τ)dτ.                        (6)
         Like the statistical counterpart of the energy E of an ideal-gas
     sample consisting of N identical particles, the statistical counterpart
     of the sample’s thermodynamic entropy S is N times an average value
     – the average value of the quantity – log f(τ)dτ, the negative loga-
     rithm of the fractional occupation number. This quantity isn’t the
     average value of a physical property of the gas particles. Instead it
     characterizes a probability distribution – the distribution of the points
     that represent single-particle states in Boltzmann’s six-dimensional
     position-velocity space.
        Boltzmann conjectured that formula (6) defines the atomic coun-
     terpart of entropy not just for samples of an ideal gas in thermal
     equilibrium but of any smooth distribution of single-particle states
     in position- velocity space. When the particles are uniformly dis-
     tributed in space and have a Maxwell velocity distribution, the for-
     mula coincides with the formula for the thermodynamic entropy
     of an ideal gas. But formula (6) defines the randomness of a much
                              V. Atomism                                    79

wider class of macroscopic states of an undisturbed gas sample than
Clausius’s definition of thermodynamic entropy. For example, it
defines the randomness of a gas sample in which all the particles
have the same speed. Boltzmann now asked: With the statistical
counterpart of entropy defined in this way, does Clausius’s law of
entropy change have a counterpart in his and Maxwell’s statistical
description of an ideal-gas sample?

      Boltzmann’s Transport Equation and His H Theorem
   In his 1867 paper Maxwell used Newton’s laws of motion to study
the trajectories of colliding particles. He then used the results of that
study to describe how particle collisions cause the average values of
single-particle properties like kinetic energy to change with time.
Boltzmann deepened and extended Maxwell’s theory. He asked: How
do particle collisions change the distribution of fractional occupa-
tion numbers in six-dimensional position-velocity space?
    Boltzmann’s answer to this question, his transport equation,
equates the rate at which the fractional occupation number of a
given cell in the position-velocity space of a particle in an ideal-gas
sample changes with time to the difference between the rate at which
particles enter the cell and the rate at which they leave the cell.
   Boltzmann’s transport equation became the starting point of a
flourishing discipline, kinetic theory, which he and his successors
used to construct testable statistical theories of processes such as
heat conduction, viscous dissipation of relative fluid motions, and
the diffusion of one gas through another.
    Boltzmann also used his description of how molecular collisions
alter the populations of cells in position-velocity space to prove his
H theorem (Boltzmann denoted randomness by –H):

     The randomness of an undisturbed gas sample not initially
     in thermal equilibrium increases until it reaches its largest
     possible value, which corresponds to thermal equilibrium.
   As you’d expect, Maxwell’s form of the molecular-velocity
distribution maximizes the distribution’s randomness.
80                                Why We are Free

         Boltzmann’s proof of the H theorem is logically rigorous if one
     accepts its premises. Unlike the law of entropy non-decrease, it
     applies to any isolated gas sample, not just to samples in local ther-
     mal equilibrium. And unlike Clausius’s law of entropy non-decrease,
     the H theorem says that the randomness of an undisturbed gas
     sample not in thermal equilibrium actually increases with time if it
     isn’t already as large as it can be.

                            Criticism of the H Theorem
        Many of Boltzmann’s contemporaries rejected his statistical coun-
     terpart of entropy and his H theorem. Some of the critics rejected
     the atomic hypothesis and everything based on it. Advocates of
     Energetics, a school whose members considered the idea that heat
     is molecular motion to be unscientific, were especially energetic in
     their criticisms. The introduction to Part I of Boltzmann’s Lectures
     on Gas Theory (1896)4 contains a long list of “works on Energetics”;
     the foreword to Part II (1898) contains a supplementary and equally
     long list of “attacks on the theory of gases.” Among the distinguished
     critics it cites are Ernst Mach, Pierre Duhem, Henri Poincaré, Robert
     Mayer, Wilhelm Ostwald – and V. Lenin.
              But the criticism Boltzmann took most seriously was raised
     in 1876 by Josef Loschmidt. Loschmidt argued that the H theorem
     cannot show what it purports to show – that the randomness of an
     undisturbed gas sample not initially in thermal equilibrium increases
     with time – because it relies on a description of particle encounters
     based on Newton’s laws of motion. These laws are time-reversible:
     they don’t change when one replaces the time coordinate t by its neg-
     ative, thereby reversing the direction in which t increases. So if we
     replace t by –t in Boltzmann’s account of how molecular encoun-
     ters alter the populations of cells in position-velocity space and also
     replace his description of the sample’s initial state by a description of
     its final state, his proof of the H theorem becomes a proof that the
     randomness of an undisturbed gas sample decreases with time.
       Here’s how Boltzmann describes Loschmidt’s objection in his
     Lectures on Gas Theory.
        4     Boltzmann, Ludwig 1895. Lectures on Gas Theory, translated by Stephen G.
     Brush, (New York, Dover Publications, 2011).
                                  V. Atomism                                   81

      Let a gas be enclosed by absolutely smooth, elastic walls. Initially
      there is an unlikely but molecular-disordered state – for example,
      all the molecules have the same velocity. After a certain time the
      Maxwell velocity distribution will nearly be established. We now
      imagine that at time t, the direction of the velocity of each molecule
      is reversed, without changing its magnitude. The gas will now go
      through the same sequence of states backwards. We have therefore
      the case that a more probable [more highly random] distribution
      evolves into a less probable [less random] one, and the quantity H
      [the negative of randomness] increases as a result of collisions.5
   We can rephrase Loschmidt’s objection to Boltzmann’s derivation
of his H theorem as a question: How can molecular collisions, gov-
erned as they are by time-reversible laws, produce an irreversible
macroscopic change in a gas sample? As Boltzmann points out imme-
diately following the passage just quoted, the time-reversed picture
differs from the picture envisaged in his proof of the H theorem in
a crucial respect: The proof assumes (as did Maxwell’s earlier proof
that collisions between the molecules of intermingled gases tend to
equalize their temperatures) that the incoming (or initial) velocities
of colliding molecules are uncorrelated. This assumption can’t be true
in the time-reversed picture imagined by Loschmidt. Suppose, Boltz-
mann writes, that at some initial moment all the molecules have the
same speed a. Because a collision leaves the combined kinetic energy
of the collision partners unchanged, the collision partner of a mole-
cule that emerges from its first collision with a velocity b, say, must
have speed √(2a2 – b2). So in the time-reversed picture, molecules
with initial speeds b must collide only with molecules with speed
√(2a2 – b2). The assumption that the initial velocities of colliding
particles are uncorrelated doesn’t hold in the time-reversed picture.
   Yet this assumption is crucial not only to Boltzmann’s proof of the
H theorem. It is a special case of an assumption that – as Boltzmann
emphasized – underlies the entire molecular theory of ideal gases,
from Bernoulli to Boltzmann. The molecular theory of gases rests on
the assumption that the states of individual molecules in a gas sample
are uncorrelated. If this assumption weren’t true, at least to an excel-
lent approximation, we couldn’t characterize the state of an ideal-gas
sample by the distribution in position-velocity space of the points
that represent possible states of a single molecule. Since experience
strongly supports the predictions of the molecular theory of gases, it
  5       ibid. p. 58.
82                             Why We are Free

     also supports the assumption that single-particle states in an isolated
     gas sample are statistically uncorrelated. Why then is the assumption
     true, or at least very nearly true?
       Before addressing that question, we need to consider a theory that
     extends Boltzmann’s theory of an undisturbed ideal-gas sample to
     any undisturbed system of particles whose motions and interactions
     conform to Newton’s laws – Josiah Willard Gibbs’s statistical
     mechanics.

                        Gibbs’s Statistical Mechanics
        The theory expounded by Gibbs in his Elementary Principles in
     Statistical Mathematics, Developed with Special Reference to the
     Rational Foundations of Thermodynamics (1902) rests squarely on
     ideas introduced by Maxwell and Boltzmann but takes a giant step
     beyond them. Boltzmann, like Maxwell, assumed that the particles
     of a gas sample are statistically independent; the probability of find-
     ing a particle in a particular microstate doesn’t depend on the micro-
     states occupied by the remaining N – 1 particles. He could therefore
     represent a macrostate of an undisturbed gas sample by a probability
     distribution of the microstates of a single gas particle. Gibbs dropped
     this assumption. His theory represents the macrostates of any N-par-
     ticle system – not just samples of an ideal gas – by a probability dis-
     tribution of N-particle microstates. (That is, it assigns a non-negative
     number to every possible N-particle microstate, and these num-
     bers add up to 1.) Because Gibbs didn’t assume that the particles
     of a macroscopic system have statistically independent probability
     distributions, this probability distribution – a function of 6N posi-
     tion coordinates and velocity components – doesn’t factor into N
     identical functions of a single particle’s six position coordinates and
     velocity components.
         Gibbs represented the possible microstate of an undisturbed
     system of N interacting particles by a point in a 6N-dimensional
     position-momentum, or phase, space. His account of how the system
     evolves relies on a reformulation of Newton’s laws of motion pub-
     lished by William Rowan Hamilton in 1833.
        Hamilton’s version of Newtonian mechanics revealed a hidden
     symmetry between the roles of position and momentum in dynam-
     ical processes. It also underpins the most cogent formulation of the
     principles of quantum mechanics.
                                    V. Atomism                                             83

     Following Boltzmann’s example, Gibbs partitioned his phase
space into identical cells. He represented a probability distribution of
an undisturbed system’s microstates by a large (in principle infinite)
collection of points distributed among these cells, and he identified
the probability that a microstate’s representative point lies in a given
cell with the cell’s fractional occupation number (or its limiting value
as the number of cells increases without limit).
   Gibbs called the collection of N-particle microstates and the asso-
ciated probability distribution an ensemble. The members of a Gibbs
ensemble are imaginary N-particle systems. As he wrote, “Let us
imagine a great number of independent systems, identical in nature
but differing in phase, that is, with respect to their configuration and
velocity.”6 Gibbs called the fractional occupation numbers of cells
in the 6N-dimensional phase space probabilities and denoted them
by the letter P. But whereas the occupation numbers in Boltzmann’s
theory represent numbers of gas-particles in an actual gas sample,
Gibbs’s occupation numbers don’t have a concrete interpretation:
they refer to imaginary replicas of an N-particle system.
   Having defined an ensemble, Gibbs asked: Which ensembles are
the statistical counterparts of thermal equilibrium?
   Because a macroscopic system has finite spatial extent and finite
energy, the points that represent its possible microstates occupy a
finite region of the 6N-dimensional phase space. Since we can make
the number of these points as large as we please – the points rep-
resent imaginary replicas after all – we can represent the swarm of
points that represents them by a continuous fluid of variable density.
If we stipulate that the total mass of the fluid is 1, the probability
that a representative point lies in any given region of the phase space
equals the mass of the fluid within the region. As the system evolves,
the density of probability fluid changes smoothly at each point.
    Gibbs now deduces from Hamilton’s equations of motion that
these changes have a remarkable property. Consider the moving
point in 6N-dimensional position-momentum space that represents
a particular evolving microstate. Gibbs proved that the density of
probability fluid at that moving point is constant in time. He called
this conclusion “the fundamental equation of statistical mechanics.”
   6      Gibbs, J. Willard, Elementary Principles in Statistical Mathematics, Developed
with Special Reference to the Rational Foundations of Thermodynamics, (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1902)
84                       Why We are Free

     To visualize this conclusion, imagine a swirling fluid of
     variable mass density in physical space. Suppose the color
     of the fluid varies from white to black through shades
     of grey in such a way that the fluid is darker where it is
     denser. If the motion of the fluid preserved the density
     of every sufficiently small fluid element, its color would
     remain unchanged as it moved and changed shape.
     The actual motion of a fluid of variable density, such as
     air, doesn’t have this property. For example, a sound wave
     in air produces alternate compressions and rarefactions;
     fluid elements become smaller and denser as they con-
     tract, larger and less dense as they expand. Why does
     the motion of probability fluid in 6N-dimensional posi-
     tion-momentum space differ in this way from the motion
     of a real fluid like water or air in physical space?
     In important ways the two kinds of motion are similar.
     Newton’s laws of motion govern the flow of a real fluid;
     they also govern – though less directly, of course – the
     flow of probability fluid in 6N-dimensional phase space.
     Moreover, both flows are conservative: one conserves the
     mass of physical fluid; the other conserves the mass of
     probability fluid. Why, then, are the volume and densi-
     ty of an element of probability fluid in 6N-dimensional
     position-momentum space constant in time, while the
     volume and density of an element of a compressible fluid
     in physical space vary with time?
     Consider an imaginary closed surface, such as a sphere,
     in physical space. Because mass is conserved, during any
     given time interval the mass of fluid inside the surface
     changes by an amount equal to the inflow of mass across
     the bounding surface (counting outflows as negative
     inflows). The same is true of conserved fluids in Euclide-
     an spaces with any number of dimensions. (A Euclidean
     space of n dimensions is a space in which the squared
     distance between two points is equal to the sum of the
     squares of the n Cartesian-coordinate differences.) But
     conservation of mass does not entail that the volume of a
     fluid element (and hence its density) never changes.
                              V. Atomism                                   85

      Now consider a closed surface in a 6N-dimensional
      position-momentum space. As before, during any given
      interval of time the mass of probability fluid inside the
      surface changes by an amount equal to the inflow of mass
      across the surface. But the mass of probability fluid that
      flows across a surface element of unit area in unit time
      has two parts. The first part results from the fact that the
      3N position coordinates of a point in 6N-dimensional
      position-momentum space that represents an evolving
      microstate change by small amounts during a short time
      interval. The second part is new: it results from the fact
      that the point’s 3N momentum coordinates also change
      by small amounts during that time interval. When we
      calculate the probability current we need to add these two
      contributions. And when we do that, using Hamilton’s
      version of Newton’s laws, we find that the volume, as well
      as the mass, of an element of probability fluid centered
      on a point that represents an evolving microstate never
      changes.7
   Earlier we denoted by τ the set of six coordinates of a point in the
six-dimensional position-velocity space of a gas particle’s state space.
We denoted by dτ a volume element in that space; and by f(τ)dτ
the fractional occupation number, or probability, of a cell of volume
dτ centered on the point with coordinates τ. Let’s now use the same
notation for points, volume elements, and fractional occupation
numbers in the 6N-dimensional position-momentum space of an
undisturbed macroscopic system containing N particles. Gibbs’s
“fundamental equation of statistical mechanics” then says that f(τ),
evaluated at a moving point τ(t) that represents an evolving micro-
state of the system never changes. As before, define the randomness
S of the probability distribution {f(τ)dτ} as the probability-weighted
average, or mean, of the negative logarithm of the probability
        f(τ)dτ = 〈-log[f(τ)dτ〉.

        S = 〈-log 〈f(τ)dτ〉.
  Gibbs’s fundamental theorem implies that if τ(t) denotes the 6N
coordinates of a moving point that represents an evolving microstate
  7     ibid.
86                             Why We are Free

     of an undisturbed system, then the mass of probability fluid in an
     evolving cell, f[τ(t)]dτ(t), doesn’t depend on the time t.
       So neither do its logarithm and the negative mean of its logarithm,
     the randomness S:
          The randomness of the probability distribution that
          characterizes an evolving macrostate of an undisturbed
          macroscopic system is constant in time.
       In marked contrast, the entropy of an undisturbed macroscopic
     system may increase with time.
        Boltzmann showed that an undisturbed gas sample is in thermal
     equilibrium when the randomness of the probability distribution of
     single-particle microstates has the largest value compatible with a
     given value of the mean particle energy 〈E〉. He also showed that the
     single-particle randomness, multiplied by the number of particles
     N in a gas sample, plays the same role in the statistical theory of
     an ideal-gas sample as Clausius’s entropy does in thermodynamics.
     Gibbs proved the analogous propositions for an undisturbed system
     composed of particles whose motions and interactions are governed
     by Newton’s laws of motion:
           An undisturbed macroscopic system is in thermal
          equilibrium when the randomness of the probability
          distribution of its microstates has the largest value
          compatible with the mean energy E of the imaginary
          replicas that make up the ensemble that represents
          the system’s macrostate. Call this largest value Smax.
          Smax plays the same role in Gibbs’s statistical description
          of equilibrium states as Clausius’s entropy does in
          thermodynamics.
        Gibbs also showed, as Maxwell had done for an ideal gas, that the
     parameter T in Maxwell’s formula for the randomness- maximizing
     probability distribution of microstates has the defining property of
     temperature: when two initially undisturbed macroscopic systems
     characterized by randomness-maximizing probability distributions
     with different values of T are brought together and allowed to interact,
     the system with the larger value of T loses energy to the system with
                              V. Atomism                                    87

the smaller value, and the systems’ combined randomness increases
during this process.
   After 1925, quantum mechanics replaced Newtonian mechanics
as the fundamental theory of matter and radiation on small scales.
But thanks to deep structural similarities between quantum mechan-
ics and Hamilton’s formulation of Newton’s laws, the mathematical
framework of Gibbs’s theory survived this replacement virtually
unchanged. Gibbs’s theory, modified to fit the new microphysics,
has succeeded brilliantly in predicting the observable properties of
matter and radiation in thermal equilibrium.
   It also has an important new feature. The six-dimensional
position-momentum space, or phase space, of a particle governed by
quantum mechanics differs from the phase space of a classical parti-
cle. We can partition a classical particle’s phase space into arbitrarily
small cells of equal (six-dimensional) volume. In contrast, cells in
the phase space of a quantum particle have a minimum volume,
determined by Werner Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations: the
product of the indeterminacies of a position coordinate and the
corresponding momentum component can’t be less than h/4π, where
h is Planck’s constant. So the volume of a cell in the phase space of
a quantum particle can’t be less than (h/4π)3, and the volume dτ of
a cell in the 6N-dimensional phase space of a collection of N iden-
tical quantum particles can’t be less than (h/4π)3N. Now recall that
Boltzmann’s randomness, like Clausius’s entropy, is defined only up
to an additive constant; only changes in randomness and entropy
are well defined. In Boltzmann’s theory this is because we can par-
tition the position-momentum space of a classical particle into cells
of arbitrarily small volume. The smaller we choose a cell’s volume,
the smaller the cells’ fractional occupation numbers; the smaller the
cells’ fractional occupation numbers, the larger the average value of
the logarithm of their reciprocals – Boltzmann’s randomness. For
quantum particles Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations imposes a
lower limit on the volume of a cell in position-momentum space,
and hence an upper limit on the randomness of an N-particle gas.
Quantum mechanics makes randomness – not just its changes – well
defined. I’ll argue later that randomness is an objective property of
the physical universe.
88                            Why We are Free

        Boltzmann’s molecular theory of gases replaces thermodynamics’
     description of the equilibrium states of ideal-gas samples by a statis-
     tical theory based on the assumption that gases consist of particles
     moving and interacting in ways governed by Newton’s laws of motion.
     Gibbs’s theory extends Boltzmann’s theory to arbitrary macroscopic
     systems. Both theories have enjoyed great predictive success. Yet, as
     the preceding discussion has shown, they don’t fit smoothly together.
     Nor does either theory fit smoothly with thermodynamics:
          — In Boltzmann’s theory the randomness of the
          probability distribution that characterizes a macrostate
          of an undisturbed gas sample containing N particles
          equals the randomness of the probability distribution
          that characterizes a macrostate of a single gas particle,
          multiplied by N. This is a consequence of the assump-
          tion that the motions of gas particles are statistically
          uncorrelated. But as discussed below, Gibbs’s theory
          shows that this relation almost never holds. And even
          if it were to hold at one moment, it would immediately
          break down, because, as Boltzmann himself emphasized,
          encounters between gas particles create statistical cor-
          relations between the probability distributions of their
          velocities.
          — How can we reconcile Boltzmann’s proof that the
          randomness of an undisturbed gas sample not initially
          in thermal equilibrium always increases with the fact,
          pointed out by Loschmidt, that the proof rests on a
          time-reversible description of the motions of gas particles
          in the sample?
          — How can we reconcile Gibbs’s proof that the
          randomness of a closed system is constant in time with
          Boltzmann’s proof that the randomness of an undisturbed
          sample of an ideal gas increases with time (unless it
          already has its largest possible value)?
          — Gibbs’s proof that the randomness of a closed system
          is constant in time also clashes with Clausius’s law of
          entropy non-decrease. Yet, as we saw, the randomness
          of the probability distribution that characterizes an
          equilibrium state of an ideal-gas sample coincides with
                                      V. Atomism                                                89

     the system’s entropy.
     — Finally, Boltzmann’s theory supplies a physical
     interpretation of the probabilities it assigns particle​
     microstates. It locates the N points that represent the
     microstates of a gas sample’s N particles in a single
     particle’s six-dimensional position-velocity space, and
     it identifies the probabilities of single-particle states
     with the fractional occupation numbers of (sufficiently
     small) cells in that space. Gibbs’s statistical mechanics,
     in contrast, leaves the probabilities it assigns the micro-
     states of a macroscopic system uninterpreted. It identifies
     system microstates with fractional occupation numbers
     of cells in the 6N-dimensional position-momentum space
     of an N-particle system, but the systems whose repre-
     sentative points are distributed among these cells are
     imaginary replicas, or, as Erwin Schrödinger called them,
     “mental copies” of a single, real system. “Now what on
     earth could it mean, physically,” Schrödinger asked, “to
     distribute a given amount of energy over [a collection of]
     mental copies?”8
   We can gain insight into these issues by using some mathematical
properties of randomness stated and proved by Claude Shannon in
1948 in “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” the paper that
launched information theory.9
      Conditional Randomness and Correlation Information
    Let {pi} denote a discrete set of non-negative numbers pi that add
up to 1. These are the defining properties of probabilities pi and a
probability distribution {pi}. The index i labels an individual “event”
in a discrete set of events {i}. (It can also label a possible value Ai of
a random variable A, a mathematical object that has a discrete set
of possible values A1, A2, ... with corresponding probabilities p1, p2,
... . These might be the possible outcomes of a measurement of a
physical quantity A.)
   We interpret the quantity

   8      Schrödinger, Erwin, Statistical Thermodynamics, (Cambridge University
   Press, 1948) p. 3.
   9      Shannon, C.E., The Bell System Technical Journal (Vol. 27, July, October, 1948) pp.
379–423, 623–656.
90                              Why We are Free

                     S = –Σi pi log pi

       as a measure of the probability distribution’s randomness.
        Denote by Smax the largest value of S for which the set of probabilities
     {pi satisfies a given constraint. For example, we might require the
     mean of a molecule’s kinetic energy, Σi pi Ei, to have a given value.
     Boltzmann’s theory characterizes the state of thermal equilibrium of
     a gas sample by the probability distribution that maximizes S subject
     to this constraint.
       We interpret the difference

                             I = Smax – S
        as a measure of a probability distribution’s information. A
     probability distribution is maximally informative if S = 0, that is, if
     one of the system’s possible state has probability 1 and the rest have
     probability zero. It is least informative if S has the largest possible
     value that is consistent with given constraints on the probability dis-
     tribution. If the number of possible states is finite and equal to n
     and there are no constraints on the probability distribution, the most
     random distribution assigns the same probability 1/n to each state,
     and S = log n.
             Suppose that the error δ of a particular measurement has a
     certain probability distribution. Assume that the mean error is 0 and
     that the average of the squared error, or mean square error, is some
     real number σ2. The most random probability distribution of mea-
     surement errors δ – the distribution whose randomness is as large
     as possible subject to these conditions – is then f(δ) = (1/√(2π σ2))
     exp[–δ2/2σ2]. The probability that the error lies between δ and δ + dδ
     is f(δ)dδ. Maxwell’s theory predicts that each component of a mole-
     cule’s velocity in a gas sample in thermal equilibrium is distributed
     according to this formula. So the present definition of randomness
     coincides with Maxwell’s.
             Now consider a pair of random variables, A, whose possible
     values are A1, A2, ..., and B, whose possible values are B1, B2, ... . We
     assign each pair of possible values Ai, Bj a joint probability P(Ai, Bj).
     Summed over all pairs of indices i, j, these joint probabilities add up
     to 1. Summed over the possible values Bj of B, the joint probabilities
                              V. Atomism                                   91

P(Ai, Bj) add up to P(Ai), the probability that A takes the value Ai
regardless of the value taken by B:

		P(Ai) = Σj P(Ai, Bj). 			                                (a)

Similarly,      P(Bj) = Σi P(Ai, Bj). 			                  (b)

        We can think of the joint probabilities as entries in a table
whose rows are labeled by the index i and whose columns are labeled
by the index j. The entries in the ith row sum to P(Ai). So if we divide
each of these entries by P(Ai) we get a new set of nonnegative num-
bers that sum to 1. These are the conditional probabilities P(Bj|Ai);
P(Bj|Ai) is the probability that B takes the value Bj given that A has
the value Ai :

        P(Bj|Ai) = P(Ai, Bj)/P(Ai), Σj P(Bj|Ai) = 1 (i =1, 2, ...)

  Similarly, the entries in the jth column sum to P(Bj), so if we divide
the ith entry in the jth column by P(Bj) we get the conditional prob-
ability P(Ai|Bj), the probability that A takes the value Ai given that B
has the value Bj :

        P(Ai|Bj) = P(Ai, Bj)/P(Bj), Σi P(Ai|Bj) = 1 (j = 1, 2, ...)

  Since the logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of
the factors,

        log P(Ai, Bj) = log P(Ai) + log P(Bj|Ai)
                      = log P(Bj) + log P(Ai|Bj)

   If you insert these expressions for log P(Ai, Bj) into the definition
of S you will find, after a short calculation:

        S({P(Ai, Bj)}) = S({P(Ai)}) + Σi P(Ai) S({P(Bj|Ai)})
                        = S({P(Bj)}) + Σi P(Bj) S({P(Ai | Bj)})
or, more succinctly,
        S(A, B) = S(A) + Σi P(Ai)S(B|Ai)
                = S(B) + Σj P(Bj)S(A| Bj)
92                              Why We are Free

       The joint randomness of a pair of random variables A, B equals
     the randomness of one of them plus the weighted average value of
     the conditional randomnesses of the other.
       The random variables A, B are said to be (statistically) independent
     or uncorrelated if, for every pair of indices i, j the joint probability
     P(Ai, Bj) is the product of the individual probabilities:
        P(Ai, Bj) = P(Ai) P(Bj), just in case A, B are independent, or
     uncorrelated, random variables (RVs).
        And this condition implies that the randomness of the joint prob-
     ability distribution of uncorrelated random variables equals the sum
     of the randomnesses of the individual probability distributions:

             S({P(Ai, Bj)}) = S({P(Ai)}) + S({P(Bj)}),
     or more succinctly,
             S(A, B) = S(A) + S(B) if A, B are uncorrelated RVs.
         Now consider the set of all joint probability distributions {P(Ai, Bj)}
     that have a given pair of individual probability distributions {P(Ai)},
     {P(Bj)} that satisfy formulas (a), (b) above. Using a standard algorithm
     of elementary calculus (the method of Lagrange multipliers), one
     can find the joint probability distributions {P(Ai, Bj)} that maximizes
     the randomness S({P(Ai, Bj)}), or S(A, B), subject to these conditions.
     It turns out to be the joint probability distribution {P(Ai) P(Bj)}.
          The randomness of the joint probability distribution of
          two random variables has its largest possible value if the
          variables are uncorrelated.
       According to the preceding definition of information, the differ-
     ence

                     S({P(Ai)P(Bj)}) – S({P(Ai, Bj)})
        is positive unless A and B are uncorrelated, in which case it
     vanishes. The difference represents correlation information – infor-
     mation associated with correlations between the random variables
     A, B. To repeat: Unless the random variables A and B are statistically
     independent, the randomness of their joint probability distribu-
     tion falls short of its largest possible value, the sum of the statistical
     entropies of the probability distributions of the individual variables,
                             V. Atomism                                    93

by a quantity that represents information associated with statistical
correlations between the variables. (Two random variables are cor-
related if the probability that one of them takes one of its possible
values depends on the value taken by the other random variable.)
    If we have three random variables, A, B, C, a straightforward gen-
eralization of the preceding argument shows that the randomness of
their joint probability distribution falls short of its largest possible
value, the sum of the randomnesses of the probability distributions
of the individual variables, by a quantity that represents information
associated with statistical correlations between the random variables
– correlations between the pairs A and B, B and C, A and C, as well
as triple correlations.         With the concept of correlation infor-
mation in hand, we can now resolve the conflicts between Boltz-
mann’s and Gibbs’s theories. We can also get a deeper understanding
of Loschmidt’s objection to the H theorem and Boltzmann’s reply to
that objection.

                       Boltzmann and Gibbs
   Gibbs represented the possible macrostates of an undisturbed
system of N interacting particles by probability distributions of
N-particle microstates. The preceding discussion shows that (a) the
randomness S of such a probability distribution takes its largest pos-
sible value when the microstates of the N particles have mutually
independent probability distributions; (b) the N-particle probabil-
ities are then products of single-particle probabilities, and S is N
times the randomness of the single-particle probability distribution;
and (c) the difference between S and its largest possible value rep-
resents information associated with correlations between variables
that refer to different particles.
     Boltzmann assumed, in effect, that correlation information
is initially absent in an N-particle gas sample; the N-particle ran-
domness is then initially equal to N times the single-particle ran-
domness. Gibbs proved, however, that the N-particle randomness
of any isolated system is constant in time. Boltzmann’s response to
Loschmidt’s criticism of the H theorem shows that he understood
that particle collisions create statistical correlations between par-
ticles. His proof of the H theorem shows that particle collisions
initially create correlation information – that in an undisturbed gas
94                             Why We are Free

     sample, an increase in single-particle randomness is accompanied
     by an equal increase in correlation information. Collisions transform
     single-particle information into correlation information.
        Boltzmann’s proof of the H theorem would be valid if, and only if,
     the correlation information created by the decay of single-particle
     information immediately left the system – if, say, it leaked into the
     system’s surroundings.
        And if correlation information tended to leak into a nominally
     undisturbed system’s surroundings, the following discussion shows
     that we would also be able to resolve the conflict between Clausius’s
     law of entropy non-decrease and Gibbs’s theorem that the random-
     ness of the probability distribution that characterizes a macroscopic
     system’s macrostate is constant in time. We’d then be led to ask: Under
     what conditions does correlation information leak out of a nominally
     undisturbed macroscopic system? And is there any reason to suppose
     that such conditions regularly occur?

                    Gibbs’s Theorem and Clausius’s Law
        Gibbs’s definition of the randomness of an undisturbed macro-
     scopic system applies to a wider class of macroscopic systems than
     Clausius’s definition of thermodynamic entropy. Yet Gibbs proved
     that the randomness of an isolated, or undisturbed, system is con-
     stant in time, whether or not the system is in a state of thermal
     equilibrium. In contrast, the system’s thermodynamic entropy can
     increase with time if the system is not initially in thermal equilib-
     rium. Gibbs’s proof that the randomness of an undisturbed system
     is constant in time is simple and straightforward. His “fundamental
     equation of statistical mechanics” shows that both the volume and
     the “mass” of an element of probability fluid centered on a point that
     represents an undisturbed system’s evolving microstate are constant
     in time.
       In Chapter XII of his Elementary Principles of Statistical Mechanics
     Gibbs addresses this conflict between his theory and Clausius’s law
     of entropy non-decrease. He argues that the probability fluid in
     6N-dimensional phase space changes with time like a stirred liquid.
     Suppose the liquid contains coloring matter of variable density.
        If we give the liquid any motion whatever … the density of the col-
        oring matter at any same point [i.e., any point moving with liquid]
                                 V. Atomism                                 95

   will be unchanged.... Yet no fact is more familiar to us than that
   stirring tends to bring a liquid to a state of … uniform densities of
   its components. … 10
   Imagine the region occupied by the liquid to be divided into cells
of equal volume. No matter how small we make these cells, the dis-
tribution of coloring matter will eventually appear to be uniform on
that scale. In language introduced by Gibbs’s successors, the “coarse-
grained” probability distribution becomes increasingly uniform
while the “fine-grained” distribution never changes. Some of Gibbs’s
successors therefore proposed to identify thermodynamic entropy
with the coarse-grained randomness of the probability distribution
that characterizes a macrostate of an undisturbed system in Gibbs’s
theory..
    Gibbs’s argument doesn’t, however, provide a criterion for the
scale of coarse-graining. More important, while his analogy between
the flow of probability fluid in phase space and the flow of a col-
ored liquid is illuminating, it doesn’t supply a reason for the temporal
asymmetry of the process. Because the equations that govern the
motion of an ideal fluid are time-reversible, any description of the
mixing process is likewise reversible if we exclude the effects of
molecular diffusion (as Gibbs does). In a single brief passage Gibbs
addresses this problem. He suggests that the conflict we’ve been
discussing reflects an inability of mathematical models to capture
physical reality:
   But while the distinction of prior and subsequent events may be
   immaterial with respect to mathematical fictions, it is quite other-
   wise with respect to the events of the real world. It should not be
   forgotten, when our ensembles are chosen to illustrate the proba-
   bilities of events in the real world, that while the probabilities of
   subsequent events may often be determined from the probabilities
   of prior events, it is rarely the case that the probabilities of prior
   events can be determined from those of subsequent events, for we
   are rarely justified in excluding the consideration of the antecedent
   probability of the prior events. 11
   Whereas a realistic picture of the physical world distinguishes
between the directions of the past and the future, Gibbs’s statistical
mechanics, like Boltzmann’s kinetic theory of gases, rests on
mathematical laws – Newton’s laws of motion – that don’t make this
distinction.
  10   Gibbs Elementary Principles pp. 144-5.
  11   Gibbs Elementary Principles p. 150.
96                                    Why We are Free

                                    Toward a Resolution
        Although Clausius’s law of entropy non-decrease rests on an
     empirical generalization (that no cyclic engine can convert heat
     drawn from a single source into mechanical energy and leave the rest
     of the world unchanged), no physical law has been confirmed more
     strongly or in more different ways. Yet Gibbs’s statistical mechan-
     ics, which supplies what Gibbs in the subtitle of his book called “a
     rational foundation” for thermodynamics, predicts that the statis-
     tical counterpart of the entropy of an undisturbed system is con-
     stant in time. If both Clausius and Gibbs are right, as I think they
     are, it follows that the systems for which Clausius’s law holds aren’t,
     strictly speaking, undisturbed. For if they were, and if the domain
     of statistical mechanics includes the domain of thermodynamics
     (as it surely does), Gibbs’s theorem implies that the law of entropy
     non-decrease is false. So we’re led to ask: When are we justified in
     treating macroscopic systems as if they didn’t interact at all with the
     outside world?
         We can think of any macroscopic system as part of a larger mac-
     roscopic system. If we take that system to be large enough, we are
     surely justified in neglecting its interaction with its environment
     when we describe what is happening in the original system. Now
     recall Gibbs’s remark that “while the distinction of prior and sub-
     sequent events may be immaterial with respect to mathematical
     fictions, it is quite otherwise with respect to the events of the real
     world.” Gibbs’s statistical mechanics applies to undisturbed mac-
     roscopic systems – systems that do not interact at all with the out-
     side world. The Second Law, in contrast, refers directly to the world
     of experience.12 It refers neither explicitly nor implicitly to undis-
     turbed systems, which are mathematical fictions. This line of rea-
     soning suggests that by investigating the environments in which
     macroscopic systems are usually embedded and how the nominally
     isolated systems of experimental macrophysics interact with these
     environments, we may be able to do three things: reconcile Gibbs’s
     theorem on the constancy of entropy’s statistical counterpart with
     the law of entropy non-decrease; reconcile Gibbs’s theorem with
        12     “We, therefore, put forward the following proposition as being given directly by
     experience: It is impossible to construct an engine which will work in a complete cycle, and
     produce no effect except the raising of a weight and the cooling of a heat-reservoir.” Max
     Planck, Treatise on Thermodynamics, trans. Alexander Ogg. Third edition translated from
     the seventh German edition. Dover Publications, New York, 1945.
                            V. Atomism                                   97

Boltzmann’s H theorem and with the postulate of molecular chaos,
which underpins both Maxwell’s and Boltzmann’s gas theories; and
counter Loschmidt’s objection to the H theorem.
   Physicists recognized early on that they could gain insight into
the mathematical regularities that lie behind appearance by mini-
mizing interactions between the objects they studied in their labo-
ratories and the outside world, and by ignoring these interactions in
their theories. Galileo’s experimental and theoretical studies of the
(almost) frictionless motion of bodies sliding down inclined planes
illustrate this strategy. But whereas macroscopic systems can be
effectively insulated against exchanges of heat, mechanical energy,
and momentum with their environments, it’s much harder to insu-
late them against exchanges of information (in the technical sense
defined earlier) with their environments. Suppose now that nominally
undisturbed macroscopic systems are normally embedded in highly
random environments, and consider an isolated system composed
of a nominally undisturbed macroscopic system S and an extensive
(but bounded) random environment 00 – a system characterized by
a probability distribution of microstates whose randomness has its
largest possible value. By Gibbs’s theorem, the randomness of the
combined system S + E is constant in time. But, as Boltzmann’s proof
of his H theorem implies, collisions between molecules of S and mol-
ecules of E at the interface between S and E create molecular correla-
tions. Information associated with these correlations flows from S to
E. Hence the randomness of S increases, while the randomness of E
decreases by an equal amount. The transfer of correlation informa-
tion from S to its environment preserves the mutual statistical inde-
pendence of the single-particle probability distributions and causes
the randomness of the N-particle distribution to increase steadily
with time – a stronger – as well as more widely applicable –statement
than that provided by the law of entropy non-decrease.
  But what justifies the assumption that (actual) macroscopic sys-
tems are embedded in random environments? The assumption of
primordial randomness implies that
     A complete description of a macroscopic system’s initial
     state contains just the information created by the system’s
     history, which includes an account of how the initial state
     was prepared.
98                                   Why We are Free

        This supplies a framework – but only a framework – for address-
     ing what the physicist Nico Van Kampen13 has called “the main
     problem in the statistical mechanics of irreversible processes:” What
     determines the choice of macrostates and macroscopic variables?
        Van Kampen has also emphasized the role of “repeated random-
     ness assumptions” in theories of stochastic processes:
         This repeated randomness assumption is drastic but indispensable
         whenever one tries to make a connection between the micro-
         scopic world and the macroscopic or mesoscopic levels. It appears
         under the aliases “Stosszahlansatz,” “molecular chaos,” or “random
         phase approximation,” and it is responsible for the appearance
         of irreversibility. Many attempts have been made to eliminate
         this assumption, usually amounting to hiding it under the rug of
         mathematical formalism.14

        To derive his transport equation and his H theorem, Boltzmann
     had to assume (following Maxwell) that the initial velocities of
     colliding molecules in a closed gas sample are uncorrelated. This
     assumption can’t hold for non-equilibrium states, because when the
     information that characterizes a non-equilibrium state decays, resid-
     ual information associated with molecular correlations comes into
     being at the same rate. Indeed Poincaré proved that if you wait long
     enough, the (classical) microstate of an undisturbed system whose
     particles move and interact in ways governed by Newton’s laws of
     motion eventually returns to a state that approximates the system’s
     initial state arbitrarily closely. However, because a gas sample’s res-
     ervoir of microscopic information is huge, molecular chaos may
     prevail to a good approximation for periods much shorter than the
     Poincaré recurrence time, which is typically much greater than the
     age of the universe.
        Another approach to the problem of justifying repeated random-
     ness assumptions starts from the remark that no gas sample is an
     island unto itself. Almost sixty years ago, J. M. Blatt15 argued that the
     fact that actual gas samples interact with their surroundings justifies
         13    N. G. van Kampen in Fundamental Problems in Statistical Mechanics, Proceedings
     of the NUFFIC International Summer Course in Science at Nijenrode Castle, The Netherlands,
     August, 1961, compiled by E. G. D. Cohen (Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1962), especially
     pp. 182-184.
         14    N.G. van Kampen, Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry, 3d edition
     (Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2007), p. 58.
         15    J. M. Blatt, Prog. Theor. Phys. 22, 745 (1959).
                                      V. Atomism                                               99

the assumption that correlation information is permanently absent
in a nominally closed gas sample. The walls that enclose a gas sample
are not perfectly reflecting. When a gas molecule collides with a
wall, its direction and its velocity acquire tiny random contributions.
These leave the single-particle probability distribution virtually
unaltered, but they alter the histories of individual molecules,
thereby disrupting multi-particle correlations. Blatt distinguished
between states of true equilibrium, characterized (in the vocabulary
of the present essay) by an information-free probability distribu-
tion, and quasi-equilibrium states, in which single-particle infor-
mation is absent but correlation (or residual) information is pres-
ent. With the help of a simple thought experiment, he argued that
collisions between molecules of a rarefied gas sample and the walls
of its container cause an initial quasi-equilibrium state to relax into
true equilibrium long before the gas has come into thermal equilib-
rium with the walls. Earlier, P.J. Bergmann and J.L. Lebowitz16 con-
structed and investigated detailed mathematical models of the relax-
ation from quasi-equilibrium to true equilibrium through external
“intervention.” More recently, T.M. Ridderbos and L.G. Redhead17
have expanded Blatt’s case for the interventionist approach. They
constructed a simple model of a famous experiment, the spin-echo
experiment18, in which a macroscopically disordered state evolves
into a macroscopically ordered state. They argued that in this
experiment (and more generally) interaction between a nominally
isolated macroscopic system and its environment mediates the loss
of correlation information.
  Blatt noted that this “interventionist” approach “has not found
general acceptance.”
     There is a common feeling that it should not be necessary to intro-
     duce the wall of the system in so explicit a fashion. ... Further-
     more, it is considered unacceptable philosophically, and some-
     what “unsporting,” to introduce an explicit source of randomness
     and stochastic behavior directly into the basic equations. Statis-
     tical mechanics is felt to be a part of mechanics, and as such one
     should be able to start from purely causal behavior.19

    16   P. J. Bergmann and J. L. Lebowitz, Phys. Rev. 99, 578 (1955); J. L. Lebowitz and P.
J. Bergmann, Annals of Physics 1, 1 (1959).
    17   T. M. Ridderbos and M. L. G. Redhead, Found. Phys. 28, 1237 (1988).
    18   E. L. Hahn, Phys. Rev. 80, 580 (1950).
    19   J. M. Blatt, Prog. Theor. Phys. 22, 745 (1959), p. 747.
100                                   Why We are Free

           Derivations of Boltzmann’s H theorem and its generalization
      that rely on decoherence20 exemplify and significantly extend the
      interventionist approach. These derivations assume that macro-
      scopic systems are initially in definite quantum states but interact
      with random environments. Under these conditions, environmental
      interactions transfer information very effectively from the system to
      its surroundings. Microscopic information that is wicked away from
      the system disperses outward, eventually getting lost in interstellar
      and intergalactic space.
          Because the microstates of undisturbed systems evolve reversibly,
      a theory that assigns macroscopic systems (or the universe) definite
      quantum states cannot provide a framework for theories that distin-
      guish in an absolute sense between the two directions of time. The
      historical approach sketched in this book offers such a framework
      because by linking the initial states of macroscopic systems to states
      of the early universe it supplies a cosmological context for theories
      of irreversible processes. Because the probability distributions that
      characterize the initial states of macroscopic systems depend on
      their histories, there can be no genuine laws about initial conditions,
      only historical generalizations. For example, macroscopic systems
      cannot usually be prepared in definite quantum states; but physicists
      have succeeded in preparing superconducting quantum interference
      devices (SQUIDs) in superpositions of macroscopically distinct
      quantum states. Again, macroscopic systems are usually microscop-
      ically disordered; but Hahn’s spin-echo experiment showed that this
      is not necessarily the case. A historical narrative based on the strong
      cosmological principle and the assumption of primordial random-
      ness predicts that macroscopic systems are usually embedded in
      random environments and that their initial states usually contain
      only information associated with the values of macroscopic variables.
      However, as the spin-echo experiment shows, macroscopic systems
      can be prepared in states that do contain microscopic information.




         20     M. Schlosshauer, Decoherence and the Quantum-to-Classical Transition, corrected
      2d printing (Berlin, Springer, 2008).
                                                                     101




                               VI
                    A Unified Picture
                         of the
                     Physical World
                    The Measurement Problem




		Figure 2 . The Stern-Gerlach experiment
   Some atoms – silver, for example – have magnetic moments: in
a magnetic field they behave as if they were tiny bar magnets. In
1922, three years before the birth of quantum mechanics and two
years before Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck proposed that
electrons have an intrinsic spin and an intrinsic magnetic moment,
physicists Otto Stern and Walter Gerlach devised a now classic
experiment to measure the strength of a silver atom’s magnetic
moment. (Because silver atoms have a single valence electron, they
have a magnetic moment equal to the electron’s magnetic moment.)
Their experimental setup included a vertical magnetic field whose
102                               Why We are Free

      field-lines diverged from top to bottom. When a silver atom travel-
      ing in a horizontal direction enters such a field, classical electromag-
      netic theory predicts that it is deflected upward or downward by an
      amount proportional to the cosine of the angle its magnetic moment
      makes with the field. In the Stern-Gerlach experiment (Figure 2)
      the atom, after emerging from the diverging magnetic field, strikes a
      detector, where it leaves a permanent trace. The height of this trace
      above or below the point at which the atom would have struck the
      detector if it hadn’t been deflected by the magnetic field is propor-
      tional to the vertical component of the atom’s magnetic moment. So
      if we knew the initial orientation of the atom’s magnetic moment we
      could infer its magnitude from the height of the trace. This is the
      quantity Stern and Gerlach set out to measure.
         The experiment was done not with a single silver atom but with
      a narrow beam of silver atoms. The atoms had nearly the same hor-
      izontal velocities but randomly oriented magnetic moments. So
      Stern and Gerlach expected that the heights of the traces produced
      by individual atoms would be distributed smoothly along a vertical
      strip, whose length would be a calculable multiple of a silver atom’s
      magnetic moment. To their surprise the traces of individual atoms
      clustered around the points that corresponded to the two extreme
      orientations of the magnetic moment, as if half of the magnetic
      moments had been initially parallel to the field, half antiparallel.
      Yet the conditions of the experiment ensured that before the atoms
      entered the field their magnetic moments were randomly oriented.
      What was going on?
          Quantum mechanics eventually answered the question. Its laws
      predict that under the conditions of the Stern-Gerlach experiment
      the magnetic moment of a silver atom must exhibit one of two equal
      values, parallel or antiparallel to the magnetic field. But while this
      prediction, along with countless other similar predictions, agrees
      with experiment, physicists still – after more than 90 years – don’t
      agree about how to interpret the theory on which it rests. They
      disagree about how that theory relates to classical physics and the
      world of experience. That disagreement in turn reflects, in part, a
      diversity of opinion about the nature of chance and its role in physi-
      cal theories – questions that also underlie the issue of free will versus
      determinism.
              VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                   103

           The Classical World and the Quantum World
   Classical physics both refines and extends commonsense notions
about the physical world. The world of classical physics is made up of
objects with measurable properties, usually called “dynamical vari-
ables” or just “physical quantities.” Physical quantities have definite
values, which represent the outcomes of ideal error-free measure-
ments and which define the physical state of the system they refer to.
For example, at each moment a classical particle has a definite posi-
tion, specified by its three position coordinates in some coordinate
system, and a definite velocity, specified by its three velocity compo-
nents in that coordinate system; and these six quantities define its
physical state, which varies smoothly with time in a way governed
by Newton’s laws of motion and appropriate force laws, including
Newton’s law of gravitation.
  Some of the physical quantities of classical physics have
counterparts in quantum theory, where they go by the same names.
Among these properties are position, velocity, energy, linear momen-
tum, and angular momentum. Many relations between classical
quantities also have quantum counterparts. For example, the for-
mulas that express a particle’s momentum, kinetic energy, potential
energy and angular momentum in terms of its position and velocity
have the same form in classical physics and quantum physics.
   But the mathematical objects that represent the quantum coun-
terparts of classical quantities don’t always have definite numerical
values when the system they refer to is in a definite state. For exam-
ple, while the electron in a hydrogen atom can be in a state of definite
energy, neither the quantum counterparts of its position coordinates
nor the quantum counterparts of its momentum components have
definite values in such a state.
  Because quantum dynamical variables can’t in general be assigned
definite numerical values, the outcome of an ideal error-free mea-
surement of a quantum dynamical variable that refers to a quantum
system in a definite state isn’t predictable in general. It does, though,
have a predictable set of possible values. These are called the physical
quantity’s eigenvalues. For example, the Stern-Gerlach experiment
shows that the magnetic moment of a silver atom has just two eigen-
values, +h/4π and –h/4π, where h is the constant introduced in 1900
by Max Planck in his semi-empirical formula for the frequency
104                               Why We are Free

      distribution of thermal radiation.) Each eigenvalue of a physical
      quantity is associated with one or more eigenstates.

           An ideal measurement of a physical quantity has a
           predictable outcome just in case the system to which the
           quantity refers is in one of the quantity’s eigenstates. The
           measurement then yields the corresponding eigenvalue.
         This statement is the most basic of the rules that link the
      mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics to the mathematical
      formalisms of classical theories and to experience.
         Different physical quantities that refer to the same system needn’t,
      and in general don’t, have the same eigenstates. For example, the
      energy eigenstates of the electron in a hydrogen atom are not eigen-
      states of either the electron’s position coordinates or its velocity com-
      ponents. Even if an electron is in a state of definite energy it doesn’t
      have a definite orbit.
          An undisturbed, or isolated, system needn’t be in an eigenstate
      of any of the system’s physical quantities, including its energy. But
      every state of the system can be expressed as a superposition of the
      eigenstates of any physical quantity that pertains to the system. That
      is, the wavefunction (or state vector) that represents a given state can
      be expressed as a linear combination – a sum of multiples – of wave-
      functions (or state vectors) that represent eigenstates of any given
      physical quantity that pertains to the system. The coefficients in such
      linear combinations are complex numbers, numbers of the form a
      + bi, where a and b are real numbers and i denotes the square root
      of –1. For example, we can express the wavefunction that represents
      an arbitrary state of the electron in a hydrogen atom as a sum of
      complex multiples of wavefunctions that represent states of definite
      energy.
         The mathematical language of quantum theory expresses these
      highly non-intuitive (and philosophically opaque) properties of
      physical quantities and physical states of molecules, atoms, sub-
      atomic particles, and other quantum systems precisely and unam-
      biguously. These are the language’s main features:

           Quantum states. Every isolated, or undisturbed, physical
           system has its own state space. The mathematical objects
             VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World           105

    that inhabit state space are called wavefunctions or, more
    generally, state vectors. Each state vector represents a
    possible state of the system. For example, an electron has
    two possible spin states, represented by a pair of state
    vectors. If a vertical magnetic field is present, an experi-
    ment designed to exhibit an electron’s magnetic moment,
    which is proportional to its spin, will show either that
    the magnetic moment and the spin point up or that they
    point down. Spin-up and spin-down are the only two
    possible outcomes of such an experiment, and in a series
    of identical experiments they occur equally frequently.
   State vectors combine with one another and with numbers much
like vectors in Euclidean space.

    Vectors and their algebra. Let u denote a vector in
    Euclidean space. It is defined by its direction and length.
    We can picture it as a free-floating arrow, untethered to
    any particular point. If c is a positive real number, cu is
    also a vector, represented by an arrow whose length is c
    times the length of the arrow that represents u. If c is a
    negative real number, cu is the vector whose direction
    is opposite to the direction of u and whose length is |c|
    times the length of u, where |c| denotes the absolute value
    of c. If u1 and u2 are any two vectors, their sum u1+ u2 is
    represented by an arrow you can construct by joining the
    arrows that represent u1 and u2 end to tip in either order
    (while preserving their lengths and directions), then join-
    ing the free end to the free tip.
    State vectors in an undisturbed physical system’s state
    space have exactly the same algebraic properties, except
    that the constant c in the preceding account is a complex
    number. Thus if ψ1 and ψ2 are state vectors in the state
    space of a given system and a and b now denote any
    complex numbers, then aψ1 + bψ2 is also a state vec-
    tor in the same space, representing one of the system’s
    possible states. The state vector aψ1 + bψ2 represents a
    superposition of the states represented by ψ1 and ψ2.
106                               Why We are Free

         Superpositions of quantum states have no counterpart in the
      language of classical physics (or in ordinary language). They are
      responsible for the most counterintuitive features of the quantum
      world. For example, the cat in Erwin Schrödinger’s famous thought
      experiment is in a superposition of the states “dead” and “alive” until
      its interaction with the world of experience puts it into one state or
      the other, just as in the Stern-Gerlach experiment a silver atom’s
      interaction with the measuring apparatus puts into a definite classi-
      cal state, “up” or “down.”
              Observables. The language of quantum physics rep-
           resents physical quantities by mathematical objects called
           observables, a subclass of a broader class of objects called
           operators. Like the variables that represent physical quan-
           tities in Newtonian physics, observables (as well as other
           operators) can be added to one another, multiplied by
           complex numbers, and multiplied by one another. And
           relations between Newtonian variables have counterpart
           in relations between the corresponding observables. But
           multiplication of operators (including observables) is non-
           commutative: if O1 and O2 are operators, O1O2 need not
           equal O2O1. In particular, the observables that represent
           a particle’s position coordinates don’t commute with the
           operators that represent the corresponding momentum
           components. Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations are a
           consequence of the fact that “conjugate” physical quan-
           tities, like a position coordinate and the corresponding
           momentum component or like a particle’s energy and its
           time coordinate, don’t commute.
         Physics texts and papers in physics journals often distinguish the
      quantum counterparts of classical variables by adding a circumflex
      ˆ or a suffix, like op, to the symbol that represents the corresponding
      classical variable, if there is one, writing Ê or Eop for the quantum coun-
      terpart of energy E. But physicists customarily use the same words,
      such as position, momentum, and energy, for classical variables
      and their quantum counterparts, relying on context to distinguish
      between them. In nontechnical contexts the failure to distinguish
      between classical variables and their quantum counterparts can lead
      to confusion. Consider the Stern-Gerlach experiment. Stern and
               VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                    107

Gerlach thought of silver atoms as classical objects. They thought
they were measuring the vertical position coordinates of silver atoms
in the beam by recording the positions at which the atoms struck a
detector. In 1923, when Stern and Gerlach carried out their experi-
ment, the phrases “the vertical position coordinate of a silver atom”
and “the height at which an atom strikes the detector” referred to the
same physical quantity, the z coordinate of a silver particle. But once
quantum mechanics had been formulated as a mathematical theory,
this was no longer true. “The vertical position coordinate of a silver
atom” became a quantum observable, represented by an operator,
while “the height at which an atom strikes the detector” remained a
classical quantity. What Stern and Gerlach measured, and what the
classical theory of the motion of a tiny bar magnet in an inhomoge-
neous magnetic field (incorrectly) predicted, were values of a classi-
cal position coordinate. What quantum theory predicts, through a
rule that links the quantum world to the world of experience, is the
average value of the classical counterpart of a quantum observable.
   Before they strike the detector, each silver atom is in a superposi-
tion of two distinct position states, corresponding to the fact that a
silver atom’s magnetic moment has just two eigenstates. But the atom
isn’t in two places at the same time. Nor is it strictly accurate to say
that the detector records the atom’s position. Before the atom inter-
acts with the detector its position is represented by an operator and
doesn’t have a definite value. Afterwards the same atom does have
a definite position, which coincides with a spot on a photographic
plate.
   More generally, in a quantum measurement a system in a definite
quantum state interacts with a macroscopic measuring device, such
as a photographic plate or a particle detector, that is in a definite clas-
sical state. The interaction causes the combined system, consisting
of the measured system plus the measuring device, to evolve rapidly
from its initial state, in which the measured system is in a definite
quantum state and the measuring device is in a definite classical
state, to a final joint state, in which the measured system is in an
eigenstate of the measured quantity and the measuring device is in a
corresponding “pointer state.” The rapid evolution of the combined
system during a quantum measurement is sometimes called a “jump.”
108                                   Why We are Free

        Here’s how Dirac describes the measurement process in the fourth
      edition of The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (1967; first edition
      1930):
          When we measure a real dynamical variable ξ, the disturbance
          involved in the act of measurement causes a jump in the state of the
          dynamical system. From physical continuity, if we make a second
          measurement of the same dynamical variable ξ immediately after
          the first, the result of the second measurement must be the same
          as that of the first. Thus after the first measurement has been made,
          there is no indeterminacy in the result of the second. Hence, after
          the first measurement has been made, the system is in an eigen-
          state of the dynamical variable ξ, the eigenvalue it belongs to being
          equal to the result of the first measurement. This conclusion must
          still hold if the second measurement is not actually made. In this
          way we see that a measurement always causes the system to jump
          into an eigenstate of the dynamical variable that is being measured,
          the eigenvalue this eigenstate belongs to being equal to the result of
          the measurement.1 (italics added)

         Dirac doesn’t describe the rapid evolution of the combined system
      in a quantum measurement. He fills this gap by what he calls a “gen-
      eral assumption.” Consider an observable O and a physical state s
      of the system of which O is a property. Dirac’s general assumption
      equates the average outcome of a large number of identical ideal mea-
      surements of O when the system O pertains to is in state s to a real
      number constructed according to a simple rule from the operator O
      and the state vector s.
         Dirac’s general assumption contains – and extends in the simplest
      possible way – our earlier basic rule: if a system is in an eigenstate of
      the observable O, an ideal measurement of O yields the correspond-
      ing eigenvalue of O. It implies further that if the system isn’t in an
      eigenstate of O, the outcome of an ideal measurement is one of O’s
      eigenvalues. Finally, it yields a formula for the relative frequencies of
      the possible measurement outcomes in an infinite series of identical
      measurements of O when the system is in state s.
         Dirac’s general assumption links the mathematical formalism
      of quantum mechanics to measurement outcomes efficiently and
      unambiguously. It has enabled physicists to carry out experimental
         1     Dirac, P.A.M., The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, fourth edition (revised),
      (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1967), p. 46.
             VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                109

tests of quantum theories of molecules, atoms, and subatomic par-
ticles and of macroscopic objects such as crystals, conductors, and
semi-conductors – objects whose observable properties depend
critically on their quantum microstructure. Up until now all such
predictions have been confirmed to the accuracy of the models and
calculations on which they rest.
   What is missing from Dirac’s account of measurement is a descrip-
tion of the measurement process itself – the rapid evolution, during
a measurement, of the joint state of the combined system. Can quan-
tum theory supply such a description? This is the measurement
problem. In a recent popular article, “The Trouble With Quantum
Mechanics,” the physicist Steven Weinberg succinctly defines the
core of the problem:
   If we regard the whole process of measurement as being governed
   by the equations of quantum mechanics, and these equations are
   perfectly deterministic, how do probabilities get into quantum
   mechanics?2

             “The Quantum-to-Classical Transition”
   Introductory textbooks on quantum mechanics usually have a
section entitled “The Hydrogen Atom.” The hydrogen atom the text-
books describe is a fictitious object because, unlike actual hydrogen
atoms, it doesn’t interact with the outside world. Yet the quantum
theory of an undisturbed hydrogen atom accurately predicts the
measurable properties of real hydrogen atoms, such as the frequen-
cies at which a hot sample of atomic hydrogen gas emits light and a
cool sample absorbs light.
   In contrast, an account of quantum measurement that neglects the
interaction between the measuring device and its environment fails
spectacularly. For, as Weinberg emphasized, an undisturbed quan-
tum system, like an undisturbed classical system, evolves determin-
istically; but the measurement postulate, Dirac’s “general assump-
tion,” predicts (and experiments confirm) that in general a quantum
measurement has more than one possible outcome. Thus we can
neglect the interaction between a physical system and its environ-
ment, at least in a first approximation, in some circumstances but
not in others. What, precisely, are these circumstances?
110                               Why We are Free

         An undisturbed quantum system can be in a state that doesn’t
      change with time and in which its energy, like the energy of an
      undisturbed classical system, has a definite value. But unlike an
      undisturbed classical system, whose energy has a continuous range
      of possible values, an undisturbed quantum system that occupies a
      bounded region of physical space has a discrete set of possible ener-
      gies and a corresponding discrete set of possible quantum states. In
      1970 physicist Hans Dieter Zeh pointed out that we can assign the
      system a definite quantum state if and only if the difference between
      the energy of that state and the energies of neighboring states greatly
      exceeds the energy associated with the system’s interaction with its sur-
      roundings. If this condition isn’t fulfilled, transitions between neigh-
      boring energy levels occur so rapidly that the system can no longer
      be assigned a state of definite energy.
         Atoms and molecules in dilute gases satisfy this condition because
      the intervals between their low-lying energy levels typically exceed
      the energies associated with the interaction between an atom or
      molecule and its neighbors. In contrast, as I mentioned earlier, mac-
      roscopic systems have very closely spaced energy levels. Under ordi-
      nary experimental conditions the intervals between adjacent energy
      levels of a macroscopic object are much smaller than the energy
      associated with the object’s interaction with its environment. So
      even if the laws of quantum mechanics apply to isolated, or undis-
      turbed, macroscopic objects, as experimental evidence strongly
      suggests they do, these objects cannot, under ordinary conditions,
      be assigned definite quantum states.
         This remark is the starting point of decoherence theories of quan-
      tum measurement. These theories seek to refine and improve an
      account of quantum measurement proposed in 1932 by the math-
      ematician John von Neumann. Von Neumann set out to replace
      Dirac’s general assumption by an account of the measurement
      process itself. He idealized the combined system in a quantum
      measurement – the measured system plus the measuring appara-
      tus – as an undisturbed system in a definite quantum state. He also
      assumed that if the measured system is initially in an eigenstate of
      the measured observable, the measurement leaves it in that state
      and puts the measuring apparatus into a corresponding quantum
      state that is macroscopically distinguishable from the quantum states
                 VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                                111

associated with other possible measurement outcomes. If the mea-
sured system’s initial, or pre-measurement, state is not an eigenstate
of the measured observable, the rules of quantum mechanics allow
us to represent it as a superposition of eigenstates of the measured
observable – a sum of complex multiples of the state vectors that
represent the measured observable’s eigenstates. Schrödinger’s equa-
tion then predicts that the combined system evolves into the same
superposition of combined-system states. Each state of the combined
system in this superposition is a possible outcome state, in which the
measured system is in one of the eigenstates of the measured observ-
able and the measuring apparatus is in a correlated quantum state.
Moreover, the squared magnitude of each coefficient in the superpo-
sition is the probability of the corresponding measurement outcome,
as predicted by Dirac’s general assumption.
   But Dirac’s general assumption implies, and experiment confirms,
that a quantum measurement leaves the measured system in one or
another of the measured quantity’s eigenstates, not in a superposi-
tion of all of them.
   There’s a more subtle difficulty with von Neumann’s account of a
quantum measurement as I’ve described it so far. Each coefficient
in the superposition that represents the measured quantum system’s
initial state is a complex number; it has a magnitude and a phase.3
A measurement governed by Dirac’s general assumption preserves
information about the magnitudes of the coefficients in the super-
position that represents the measured quantum system’s initial state:
their squares are the probabilities of the outcomes represented by the
state vectors they multiply.
   But Dirac’s account of a quantum measurement implies that it
destroys information about the relative phases of the coefficients. In
von Neumann’s account, a quantum measurement preserves infor-
mation about both the magnitudes and the relative phases of the
coefficients in the superposition that represents the evolved joint
state of the measured system and the measuring apparatus.
    3      Consider a complex number a + bi, where a and b are real numbers and i is the
square root of –1. We can think of a and b as the rectangular coordinates of a point in a
plane, the complex-number plane. The angle between the x-axis and the line joining the
origin to the point that represents a complex number is called the phase of that number.
Two complex numbers have the same phase if and only if the line joining their representa-
tive points passes through the origin of the complex-number plane.
112                                   Why We are Free

         There’s also a more subtle difficulty with von Neumann’s account:
      It contradicts the fact, stressed by Niels Bohr, that the measuring
      apparatus in a quantum measurement is a macroscopic system in a
      definite classical state. Von Neumann’s account of a quantum mea-
      surement assumes that the measuring apparatus is initially in a defi-
      nite quantum state. Decoherence theories emend von Neumann’s
      account not by addressing this difficulty but by postulating that
      the measuring apparatus interacts with a random environment (in
      calculations, either thermal radiation or a tenuous gas). Instead of
      assuming, as von Neumann did, that the combined system is undis-
      turbed (and hence in a definite quantum state), decoherence theories
      assume that a supersystem consisting of the combined system plus
      a bounded portion of the postulated random environment can be
      treated as an undisturbed system in a definite quantum state. A
      quantum measurement then transfers information about the rela-
      tive phases of the state vectors of the combined system (measured
      system plus measuring device) to the environment. Model calcu-
      lations by Wojciech H. Zurek, Erich Joos and Hans Dieter Zeh, by
      Maximilian Schlosshauer, and by other authors, have shown that
      interaction between the measuring apparatus and the random envi-
      ronment rapidly decoheres macroscopically separated states of the
      combined system, randomizing the relative phases of the coefficients
      in the superposition of combined-system state vectors predicted by
      von Neumann’s account:
         Formally, decoherence can be viewed as a dynamical filter on the
         space of quantum states, singling out those states that, for a given
         system, can be stably prepared and maintained, while effectively
         excluding most other states, in particular, nonclassical superposi-
         tion states of the kind popularized by Schrödinger’s cat.4

      By predicting the loss of coherence between different possible out-
      comes of a quantum measurement, decoherence theory improves
      von Neumann’s account. But as the authors mentioned above have
      stressed, it doesn’t predict that quantum measurements have defi-
      nite but unpredictable outcomes. And, as I’ve already emphasized,
      it ignores Bohr’s requirement that the measuring apparatus is in a
      definite classical state before and after a quantum measurement.
        4     Schlosshauer, Maximilian, “The quantum-to-classical transition and
        decoherence,” arXiv:1404.2635v1 [quant.phys], 9 April 2014.
               VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                        113

  Von Neumann’s Collapse Hypothesis and Attempts to Avoid It
   Von Neumann completed his account of quantum measurement
by postulating that no sooner does the superposition of outcome
states produced by interaction between the measured system and the
measuring apparatus come into being than it “collapses” randomly
onto one of these outcome states, the probability of each possible
outcome being equal to the squared magnitude of the corresponding
coefficient in the superposition. With this additional assumption,
von Neumann’s account reproduces – but doesn’t explain – Dirac’s
general assumption. It replaces Dirac’s “jump” of the joint state of
the combined system by a “collapse” of the combined system’s wave-
function. Von Neumann assumed that this collapse is a real physical
process. But quantum mechanics doesn’t describe it. Does quantum
mechanics need to be modified or extended to include it?
    Von Neumann suggested that the experimenter’s awareness of
the outcome of a quantum measurement causes the superposition
of outcome states to collapse. Other prominent physicists, including
Eugene Wigner, embraced this view. Wigner interpreted a system’s
wavefunction as representing the physicist’s knowledge about the
system: “Given any object, all the possible knowledge concerning
that object can be given as its wave function.”5
    [T]he impression which one gains at an interaction [with a quan-
    tum system] may, and in general does, modify the probabilities
    with which one gains the various possible impressions at later
    interactions. In other words, the impression which one gains at an
    interaction, called also the result of an observation, modifies the
    wave function of the system. The modified wave function is, fur-
    thermore, in general unpredictable before the impression gained
    at the interaction has entered our consciousness: it is the enter-
    ing of an impression into our consciousness which alters the wave
    function because it modifies our appraisal of the probabilities for
    different impressions which we expect to receive in the future.6

   In an essay entitled “The Copenhagen Interpretation of Quan-
tum Theory” Werner Heisenberg (1958) argued that the indetermi-
nacy of quantum measurement outcomes arises from “our incom-
plete knowledge of the world.” Just before a measurement begins, the
   5      Wigner later changed his mind.
   6      Wigner, Eugene, “Remarks on the Mind-Body Question” in Symmetries and
Reflections, (Cambridge, MA. MIT Press, 1970) p. 173
114                                   Why We are Free

      measured object is in a definite quantum state. Then, in Heisenberg’s
      account, it interacts with a macroscopic measuring device.
           This influence introduces a new element of uncertainty, since the
          measuring device is necessarily described in the terms of classical
          physics; such a description contains all the uncertainties concern-
          ing the microscopic structure of the device which we know from
          [statistical] thermodynamics, and since the device is connected
          with the rest of the world, it contains in fact the uncertainties of the
          microscopic structure of the whole world. These uncertainties may
          be called objective in so far as they are simply a consequence of the
          description in the terms of classical physics and do not depend on
          any observer. They may be called subjective in so far as they refer
          to our incomplete knowledge of the world. … It is for this reason
          that the result of the [measurement] cannot generally be predicted
          with certainty; what can be predicted is the probability of a certain
          result …7

         Physicists Christopher Fuchs and Rüdiger Schack have proposed
      a related interpretation of quantum theory, which they call Quantum
      Bayesianism or QBism. (Bayesian statistics interprets probabilities as
      degrees of belief. Its methods enable one to update his or her degree
      of belief in a hypothesis in the light of new evidence.) It rests in part
      on an earlier paper they co-authored with Carlton Caves. Physicist
      N. David Mermin, a prominent supporter of this interpretation, has
      written:
          QBism attributes the muddle at the foundations of quantum
          mechanics to our unacknowledged removal of the scientist from
          the science.8

         Much of this muddle is associated with the ‘wavefunction’ that
      quantum mechanics assigns to a physical system. This irritatingly
      uninformative term reveals the lack of clarity present in the field from
      its very beginning in 1925. People argue to this day about whether
      wavefunctions are real entities, like stones or ripples on a pond, or
      mathematical abstractions that help us to organize our thinking, like
      the calculus of probabilities.
         Fuchs and Schack adopt the latter view. They take a wavefunction
      to be associated with a physical system by an agent – me, for example,
          7    Heisenberg, W. Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science,
      (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1958.)
          8    Mermin, N. David, Nature, 26 March 2014, “QBism puts the scientist back into
      science”
                VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                            115

based on my past experience. I use the wavefunction, following rules
laid down by quantum mechanics, to calculate the likelihood of what
I might experience next, should I choose to probe further. Depend-
ing on what I then perceive, I can update the wavefunction on the
basis of that experience, allowing me to better assess my subsequent
expectations.9
     At the opposite pole from QBism are emended versions of
Schrödinger’s equation that describe the “collapse of the wave-
function” as a real physical process. G.C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, and
T. Weber (1986) have proposed one such theory, and Philip Pearle
(1989) has described a modified version of it. Both versions add
to Schrödinger’s equation a stochastic term that causes a superpo-
sition of quantum states to collapse onto one of its components.
The stochastic term represents an interaction between a nominally
undisturbed system and a purpose-built and otherwise unobserved
space-filling stochastic field, reminiscent of the ether of pre-relativity
physics. These theories contain adjustable parameters whose values
are chosen to ensure that superpositions representing possible states
of atoms and molecules do not collapse within observable periods of
time whereas superpositions representing impossible states – super-
positions whose components are separated by macroscopic distances
– do not persist long enough to be detected experimentally.
   Still other attempts to explain why measurements have definite
but unpredictable outcomes take as their starting point the remark
that under typical experimental conditions no bounded system
(including the supersystems considered in decoherence theories)
can be idealized as an undisturbed system in a definite quantum
state. In 1957 Hugh Everett III, then a doctoral student of John A.
Wheeler, suggested a radical answer to the question: Why do quan-
tum measurements have definite but unpredictable outcomes? He
postulated that quantum mechanics is universally valid: it applies to
arbitrarily large undisturbed physical systems. But only the universe
is an undisturbed physical system. So, Everett reasoned, we should
identify the supersystem consisting of the measured system, the mea-
suring device, and the environment with the universe. A quantum
measurement then causes the premeasurement state of the universe
to evolve into a superposition of universe-states in each of which the
   9      Caves, C. M., Fuchs, C. A., & Schack, R. (2002). “Quantum probabilities as
Bayesian probabilities.” Physical Review A, 65(2), 022305.
116                               Why We are Free

      measured system is in an eigenstate of the measured observable and
      the rest of the universe is in a correlated quantum state. Everett now
      postulated that the universe-states that occur in this superposition
      represent states of distinct but equally real universes in each of which
      a particular measurement outcome has occurred. A measurement
      causes the universe in which it occurred to split into many – some-
      times infinitely many – replicas, differing only in the outcome of the
      measurement that caused the splitting.
         There is an extensive literature about what this account might (or
      could) mean, and how (or whether) it can be reconciled with the rest
      of physics, including general relativity and the physics of the every-
      day world of medium-sized objects. As far as I know, these issues
      haven’t been resolved.
         The theories of quantum measurement I’ve been describing
      assume either that some bounded part of the universe can be ide-
      alized as being in a definite quantum state or that the universe itself
      is in a definite quantum state. None of these theories successfully
      predicts that an ideal quantum measurement leaves the measuring
      apparatus in a definite pointer state and the measured system in a
      corresponding quantum state, an eigenstate of the measured phys-
      ical quantity. They leave Weinberg’s question “How do probabilities
      get into quantum mechanics?” unanswered. My suggested answer to
      this question also answers a question asked in 1908 by the mathema-
      tician and theoretical physicist Henri Poincaré in his essay “Chance”:
      How do probabilities get into classical mechanics?

                               Poincaré’s “Chance”
        Poincaré begins his essay by contrasting the “ancients’” view of
      chance with the “modern” view:
         To begin with, what is chance? The ancients distinguished between
         the phenomena which seemed to obey harmonious laws, estab-
         lished once for all, and those that they attributed to chance, which
         were those that could not be predicted because they were not sub-
         ject to any law. In each domain the precise laws did not decide
         everything, they only marked the limits within which chance was
         allowed to move. In this conception, the word chance had a pre-
         cise, objective meaning; what was chance for one was also chance
         for the other and even for the gods.
                VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                              117

    But this conception is not ours. We have become complete deter-
    minists, and even those who wish to reserve the right of human
    free will at least allow determinism to reign undisputed in the
    inorganic world. Every phenomenon, however trifling it be, has
    a cause, and a mind infinitely powerful and informed concerning
    the laws of nature could have foreseen it from the beginning of the
    ages. If a being with such a mind existed, we could play no game of
    chance with him; we should always lose.
    For him, in fact, the word chance would have no meaning, or
    rather there would be no such thing as chance. That there is for
    us is only on account of our frailty and our ignorance. And even
    without going beyond our frail humanity, what is chance for the
    ignorant is no longer chance for the learned. Chance is only the
    measure of our ignorance. Fortuitous phenomena are, by defini-
    tion, those whose laws we are ignorant of.10

   No sooner does Poincaré arrive at this answer to his opening ques-
tion than he explains why it won’t do. Chance, he argues, must be
“something more than the name we give to our ignorance,” because
some chance phenomena, while individually unpredictable, obey
mathematical laws. “Laws of chance” relate the probabilities of mea-
surement outcomes and other macroscopic phenomena to the fre-
quencies of these outcomes in large (or infinite) collections of iden-
tical trials. For example, probability theory allows us to calculate the
probability of k heads in N tosses of a coin, for k = 0, 1, 2, ..., N, if
we are given the probability p of heads for a single toss. It predicts
that the probability of pN heads approaches 1 as N increases without
limit.
  Poincaré now asks, “What are the defining properties of chance
processes whose outcomes are governed by probabilistic laws?” He
considers three examples of such processes.
   The first is an idealized cone balanced on its tip. If no force other
than gravity acts on it, the cone remains in this state forever, but
any disturbance, however slight, causes it to topple over. If we try to
balance a real cone on its tip we will fail. The cone will topple in an
unpredictable direction. But if we repeat the experiment many times,
using exactly the same experimental arrangement to fix the cone’s
initial position and motion, the direction in which it tips will be
more or less uniformly distributed between 0 and 2π radians (0 and
360 degrees). If the cone tended to topple in a particular direction,
  10    Poincaré, H. Science and Method, (New York, Dover Publications, 2003), p.64-5.
118                               Why We are Free

      we would look for the cause of this asymmetry in a corresponding
      asymmetry of the cone itself or of the experimental arrangement that
      determines its initial state. In this example, as Poincaré put it. “slight
      differences in the initial conditions produce very great differences
      in the final phenomena.” Roulette, another of Poincaré’s examples,
      exemplifies the same principle. Small uncontrollable differences in
      the relative speed of the ball and the roulette wheel produce unpre-
      dictable differences in the number of red and black compartments
      it passes over before coming to rest. But probability theory predicts
      that the fraction of N spins with the outcome red approaches ½ as N
      increases.
         Poincaré discusses other processes that display extreme sensitivity
      to small changes in their initial conditions. In the 1880s he had dis-
      covered that in some regions of the planetary system, a small change
      in an asteroid’s initial position or velocity causes its orbit to diverge
      at an exponential rate from the original orbit. Such orbits are pre-
      dictable in principle but not in practice. They are said to be chaotic;
      and the phenomenon they exemplify is called deterministic chaos.
      Students of chaos theory have found that mathematically analogous
      processes occur in a wide variety of complex systems, including the
      Earth’s atmosphere and the biosphere.
         The processes Poincaré discusses have unpredictable outcomes
      not because we don’t know the laws that govern them – we do –
      but because, unlike an “infinitely powerful and informed” mind, we
      don’t know enough about their initial conditions. Yet we correctly
      predict that the cone topples in a random direction, that in the long
      run the roulette ball comes to rest in a red compartment as often as it
      does in a black compartment, and that in the planetary system small
      bodies in chaotic orbits are randomly distributed along the eclip-
      tic (the great circle in which the plane of Earth’s orbit intersects the
      celestial sphere). Why do these statistical predictions succeed?
         Consider roulette. If we knew the initial speeds of the ball and
      the wheel we could predict the color of the compartment in which
      it came to rest. But the initial speeds have ranges of possible values.
      Define subranges of these ranges so that initial relative speeds in the
      same subranges correspond to the same outcome. If the number of
              VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                  119

these subranges is large enough and if the initial relative speeds are
smoothly – not necessarily uniformly – distributed over the whole
range of possible initial speeds, then the probabilities of the out-
comes red and black will be nearly equal, because any smooth curve
has nearly the same height at nearly equal horizontal coordinates.
Thus, Poincaré concludes, red and black occur equally frequently in
a long series of identical spins of the wheel because two conditions
are satisfied: (a) small changes in a relevant initial condition produce
large differences in the outcome (i.e., the number of same-outcome
subranges in the range of initial conditions is very large); and (b) the
distribution of initial conditions is smooth, so that contiguous sub-
ranges have (nearly) equal probabilities of being realized. Poincaré’s
other examples admit a similar analysis.
   Condition (a) defines a class of chance processes that have statisti-
cally predictable outcomes. Poincaré’s remaining task was to explain
why, in processes that satisfy this condition, the curve that represents
the distribution of the relevant initial conditions is smooth.
   Poincaré argued that the distribution of initial conditions of
chance processes that have statistically predictable outcomes is the
“outcome of a long previous history,” during which irregularities
on the smallest scales have been smoothed out by “complex causes”
working over a long period of time.
    Poincaré doesn’t appeal to the second law of thermodynamics to
justify this claim. (As I argued earlier, such an appeal would be ille-
gitimate because the Second Law doesn’t apply to the physical uni-
verse.) He does, though, connect the absence of irregularities on very
small scales to the temporal asymmetry of macroscopic processes –
the fact that macroscopic processes such as heat flow, unlike molec-
ular motions and collisions, are governed by laws that distinguish
between the direction of the past and the direction of the future. He
discusses in some detail how different the course of events would
look to a being traveling backward in time and concludes: “Lengthy
explications [of such differences] perhaps would aid in the better
comprehension of the irreversibility of the universe.” In the end, he
leaves the smoothness of the curve that represents the probability
distribution of the cone’s initial tilt unexplained.
120                                Why We are Free

        Poincaré’s Cone in Light of the Strong Cosmological Principle
        Poincaré assumes that the initial positions and velocities of the
      cone’s axis, the roulette ball, and the asteroid have definite values.
      In other words, these systems are in definite (classical) microstates.
      Since we don’t know the precise values of the physical quantities that
      characterize classical microstates we assign probabilities to them.
          A probability distribution of initial microstates defines a (clas-
      sical) macrostate. A macrostate is the result of an experimental or
      observational protocol. An experiment or observation gives us infor-
      mation about the macrostate of the measured or observed system.
          Newton’s laws of motion connect initial microstates to final
      microstates. Hence they connect the probability distribution that
      characterizes a system’s initial macrostate to the set of its possible
      final macrostates. What Poincaré couldn’t explain was why we can
      successfully represent the probability distributions of microstates
      that characterize the initial macrostates of the cone, the roulette ball,
      and the asteroid by smooth curves.
           In a universe in which the strong cosmological principle holds,
      macroscopic systems don’t in general have definite initial micro-
      states. Instead a macroscopic system’s initial macrostate is character-
      ized by a probability distribution of microstates fashioned by the sys-
      tem’s history. The most recent episode of such a history describes the
      act of measurement or observation, and the probability distribution
      it creates typically contains particular kinds of information but not
      others. An experimental arrangement designed to put the cone into
      its initial state imposes limits on the cone’s initial tilt and initial angu-
      lar velocity but creates little or no additional information. The device
      that sets the roulette wheel and the ball in motion determines their
      ranges of initial speeds but nothing more. And plausible scenarios
      for the origin of the solar system don’t specify the initial distribution
      of the positions and velocities of each of the myriad small bodies it
      contains in enough detail and with enough precision to produce a
      non-uniform distribution of their present celestial longitudes. If the
      strong cosmological principle holds, the probability distributions that
      characterize the initial macrostates of the macroscopic systems in Poin-
      caré’s examples are represented by smooth curves because in each case
      the system’s history didn’t create the kinds of information that would
      produce deviations from smoothness.
              VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                   121

   Instead of imagining an infinite series of identical trials whose ini-
tial conditions are defined by a probability distribution of (initial)
microstates, we can imagine an experimental ensemble – an infinite
collection of identical cones uniformly distributed in space, each in
a definite microstate. We stipulate that the fraction of cones in every
range of microstates equals the fraction of identical trials in which
the cone’s initial microstate lies in that range. That fraction is the
probability assigned to that range by the probability distribution that
characterizes the cone’s initial macrostate. Such a collection evolves
into one in which the fraction of cones in every range of microstates
equals the fraction of trial outcomes in which the cone’s final micro-
state lies in that range.
    This mode of description extends to experimental systems the
indeterminacy in position that the strong cosmological principle
attributes to naturally occurring systems. It says that physics doesn’t
describe particular systems but only uniformly dispersed and iso-
tropically oriented systems defined by their histories.
   The strong cosmological principle and the assumption of primor-
dial randomness also explain what Poincaré called “the irreversibility
of the universe.” In a history of the physical universe based on these
initial conditions, randomness is the primordial condition. Subse-
quently, cosmogonic processes create information associated with
the probability distributions that characterize galaxies, stars, planets,
and other self-gravitating systems. Some of this information decays
in processes governed by the second law of thermodynamics, and
thereby fuels the creation of new kinds of information. For exam-
ple, the burning of hydrogen to helium in the Sun’s core creates the
sunlight that supports life on Earth. Do these inferences about the
strong cosmological principle still hold in a universe whose micro-
structure is governed by quantum mechanics rather classical phys-
ics? Can the strong cosmological principle resolve the problem of
time’s arrow and the measurement problem of quantum mechanics?

     Quantum Indeterminacy and Quantum Measurement
  To extend Poincaré’s account to macroscopic systems whose
microstates are governed by quantum physics we need a way of link-
ing measurement outcomes, which give us information about a mea-
122                                     Why We are Free

      suring device’s classical macrostate, to the microstates of the mea-
      sured system, described in the language of quantum physics. Dirac’s
      general assumption and its generalization11 supply such a link.
         Let s denote a microstate of a system S, and let O denote a property
      S. Suppose S is in the microstate s.

             Dirac’s general assumption equates a real number,
             denoted by 〈s|O|s〉, that depends on the state s and the
             observable O to the average result of a large number of
             measurements of O when the system is in state s.
          Let α denote a macrostate of the macroscopic system S. Gibbs’s
      statistical mechanics characterizes such macrostates by probability
      distributions of the system’s microstates. Let s denote a microstate
      of S, and let pα(s) denote the probability assigned to that microstate
      by the probability distribution that characterizes the macrostate α.
      Dirac’s general assumption implies that the weighted average of the
      quantities 〈s|O|s〉 – the sum of products 〈pα(s) s|O|s〉 – equals the
      average result of a large number of measurements of O when the
      system is in the macrostate α:

             The average of the quantities s|O|s , weighted by the
             probability that the microstate s is in the macrostate α,
             equals the average result of a large number of measure-
             ments of O when the system is in the macrostate α.        (1)
         In a description of measurement that comports with the strong
      cosmological principle we interpret the initial conditions that char-
      acterize a macroscopic system S as characterizing an experimental
      ensemble of systems, and the preceding rule becomes:

             The weighted average in rule (1) equals the average value
             of the macroscopic counterpart of O in an experimental
             ensemble of systems in the macrostate α.               (2)
         We can now describe quantum measurements in a way that differs
      slightly but significantly from von Neumann’s account as emended
      by decoherence theory. Decoherence also plays an essential role in
      the new account: it randomizes the relative phases of wavefunc-
      tions of microstates of the combined system that belong to different
        11     Dirac, P.A.M., The Principles , pp. 132-133.
              VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                 123

pointer states. But the new account, unlike von Neumann’s account
as emended by decoherence theory, doesn’t assume that the com-
bined system plus a random section of its environment is in a
definite quantum microstate. Instead it assumes that the combined
system plus a random section of its environment is in the super-
position of microstates that, in the quantum version of Gibbs’s sta-
tistical mechanics, represents a macrostate of the combined system.
A straightforward calculation then shows that the experimental
ensemble that represents the premeasurement state of the combined
system rapidly evolves into an experimental ensemble of postmea-
surement states in each of which the measured system is in an eigen-
state of the measured observable and the measuring apparatus is in
the corresponding pointer state.
   Does this account of quantum measurement explain how proba-
bility gets into quantum mechanics? Does it solve the measurement
problem?
   One can argue that it does not explain how probability gets into
quantum mechanics, because it rests on the strong cosmological
principle, which posits that a complete description of the physical
world specifies only probabilities of physical states and physical
quantities. Posits are not explanations.
    Yet the strong cosmological principle doesn’t have an ad hoc char-
acter. As I mentioned earlier, it defines the simplest possible model
of the universe that is consistent with observations of the cosmic
microwave background and of the spatial distribution and line-of-
sight velocities of galaxies. It also accounts for the fact that refer-
ence frames in which Newton’s and Maxwell’s laws as well as their
special-relativistic generalizations hold are unaccelerated relative
to a frame defined by the cosmic microwave background and the
distribution and motions of distant galaxies. Equally importantly,
the strong cosmological principle supplies a single, objective inter-
pretation of probability as it occurs in quantum physics, in statis-
tical mechanics, and in cosmology. Does the preceding account of
measurement solve the measurement problem? One can argue that
it doesn’t.
    Dirac’s general assumption equates the number denoted by
〈s|O|s〉 to the average result of a large number of measurements of
124                              Why We are Free

      O. Von Neumann’s account of measurement was intended to replace
      this assumption by a theory of measurement. It failed to do so, even
      when emended by decoherence theory. The preceding account of
      measurement unlike the emended von Neumann account, success-
      fully predicts that quantum measurements have definite outcomes.
      But it relies on Dirac’s general assumption (which underlies the quan-
      tum version of Gibbs’s statistical mechanics). Doesn’t this mean that
      it leaves the measurement problem unresolved?
         Yes and no. Yes if you assume that there are as-yet undiscovered
      mathematical laws of which the laws of quantum physics and clas-
      sical physics (including general relativity) are limiting cases. If such
      laws existed, Dirac’s general assumption wouldn’t be an assumption;
      it would be a theorem. In their present forms, however, quantum
      physics and classical physics have unbridgeable differences. Quan-
      tum superpositions have no classical counterpart; and quantum
      physics can’t describe curved spacetime. At the same time, special
      relativity is a pillar of quantum mechanics. The last point is worth a
      more detailed discussion.

                 Special Relativity and Quantum Mechanics
         Einstein based his special theory of relativity (1905) on two
      assumptions: a) All inertial reference frames – frames in which New-
      ton’s laws of motion and Maxwell’s laws of electricity and magnetism
      hold – enjoy equal status. b) The speed of light in empty space has
      the same value in every direction and in every inertial frame. Min-
      kowski accordingly set the speed of light in empty space equal to 1,
      so that in his new geometry distance intervals and time intervals
      are always measured in the same unit. He then defined the squared
      space-time interval between two point-events in spacetime as the
      squared time interval between the point-events and the squared dis-
      tance interval (given by Pythagoras’s theorem as the sum of their
      squared position-coordinate differences); and he postulated that this
      quantity has the same value in every unaccelerated reference frame.
      Finally, he stipulated that the algebraic statements that express phys-
      ical laws should take the same form in all unaccelerated, or inertial,
      reference frames.
         These postulates greatly extended the domains of mechanics and
      electromagnetism. The laws of pre-relativity physics became limiting
              VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                    125

cases of relativistic laws, valid only for particles traveling with speeds
much less than the speed of light. And experiments invariably con-
firmed the predictions of theories that comported with the princi-
ples of special relativity. Nevertheless, the earliest versions of quan-
tum mechanics, Werner Heisenberg’s “matrix mechanics” of 1925
and Erwin Schrödinger’s “wave mechanics” of 1926, didn’t comport
with these principles: like Newton’s laws of motion, they assumed
that space is Euclidean and that the time interval between any two
moments has the same value in all allowed coordinate systems.
    Schrödinger’s wave equation is the quantum counterpart of New-
ton’s equation of motion for an electron in an external electric field.
Schrödinger and other founders of quantum theory tried to formu-
late a relativistic generalization of the wave equation – an equation
that would have the same form in all unaccelerated, or inertial, ref-
erence frames. But they ran into a formidable mathematical obsta-
cle. Schrödinger’s equation is “linear”: any sum of numerical multi-
ples of two (or more) solutions of the equation that satisfy the same
boundary conditions) is likewise a solution. There were compelling
reasons to require the equation’s relativistic generalization to share
this property. But that requirement seemed impossible to satisfy.
    In 1928 Paul Dirac discovered a way around this difficulty. He
devised a wave equation whose coefficients were not numbers but
4×4 matrices – rectangular arrays of (real or complex) numbers that
can be added to and multiplied by one another according to certain
rules. These matrix-coefficients weren’t arbitrary: they were deter-
mined by the requirement that the relativistic wave equation be con-
sistent with special relativity’s version of the law of energy conserva-
tion. Three years earlier, Heisenberg had used matrices to represent
an electron’s position coordinates and momentum components, but
no physical law with matrices as coefficients had previously been
suggested.
   Schrödinger’s equation has a single solution that satisfies given
boundary conditions. It represents the quantum state of a point-like
charged particle. Dirac’s relativistic wave equation has not one but
four solutions.
  One pair of these solutions describes electrons with an extra, inter-
nal degree of freedom. Dirac proved that the extra degree of freedom
shows up in two ways: as an intrinsic angular momentum, or spin;
126                                   Why We are Free

      and as an intrinsic magnetic moment. A classical point charge has
      neither an intrinsic angular momentum nor an intrinsic magnetic
      moment. Dirac showed that his relativistic wave equation predicts
      that electrons have both. It also predicts that the spin has two possible
      values, h/4π and –h/4π, where h is Planck’s constant. And it predicts
      the ratio between the intrinsic magnetic moment and the spin. The
      predicted ratio has twice the value classical electromagnetic theory
      predicts for a spinning charged sphere. Experiments confirmed both
      predictions with high accuracy. For example, Dirac’s theory predicts
      that each energy level of an electron in an external magnetic field
      splits into a pair of levels, one with the electron’s magnetic moment
      parallel to the magnetic field line at its position, the other antiparal-
      lel; and it predicts the magnitude of the splitting.
         Dirac’s wave equation also made new predictions about the energy
      spectrum of hydrogen. Schrödinger’s equation predicts that the elec-
      tron in a hydrogen atom has a discrete set of negative energy states.
      The energy of the nth state, for n = 1, 2, 3, ..., is inversely proportional
      to n2. Schrödinger’s equation also predicts the (negative) constant
      of proportionality. Both predictions agree closely with experiment.
      Dirac’s relativistic theory predicts that the energy levels have a fine
      structure that depends on a second quantum number, j, which also
      takes integer values. This prediction matched precise experimental
      measurements.
         The second pair of solutions to Dirac’s relativistic wave equation
      was harder to interpret than the first pair. It seems to describe elec-
      trons in impossible states of negative total energy (including the rest
      energy mc2). Dirac eventually concluded that the negative-energy
      solutions represent a previously unknown particle with the same
      mass and spin as the electron and an equal but opposite charge. A
      short time later, experimental physicists discovered a particle with
      precisely these characteristics, the positron.
         Despite its successes, Dirac’s relativistic theory of the electron
      raised important technical problems. “[T]hese problems were all
      eventually to be solved (or at least clarified) through the development
      of quantum field theory.”12At the same time, quantum field theory
      reinforced the link between quantum mechanics and special rela-
         12     Weinberg, Steven, The Quantum Theory of Fields, (Cambridge University Press,
      1995,) Volume 1, p. 14.
                 VI. A Unified Picture of the Physical World                 127

tivity. In the preface to his magisterial two-volume The Quantum
Theory of Fields, Steven Weinberg writes: “The point of view of this
book is that quantum field theory is the way it is because ... it is the
only way to reconcile the principles of quantum mechanics ... with
those of special relativity.”13
    Special relativity, in turn, is a local approximation to general rela-
tivity, Einstein’s unified theory of spacetime and gravitation. In Min-
kowskian spacetime the squared spacetime interval between two
events equals the squared time interval between the events minus
the squared distance interval, which in turn equals the sum of the
three squared coordinate intervals. Gauss showed that the geometry
of a smoothly curved surface could be derived from a formula that
expresses the squared distance between two neighboring points on
the surface as a sum of multiples of the squares of the coordinate
intervals in a system of curvilinear coordinates, in which the multi-
ples vary smoothly with position. Riemann, Gauss’s pupil, extended
his theory to curved spaces with any number of dimensions. Rie-
mann’s theory expresses the squared distance between two neigh-
boring points as a sum of multiples of the squares of the coordinate
intervals in an n-dimensional system of curvilinear coordinates;
the multiples vary smoothly with position. Finally, Einstein’s theory
expresses the squared distance between two neighboring events in
spacetime as the difference between a multiple of the squared time
interval between the events and a sum of multiples of the squared
space intervals in a four-dimensional system of curvilinear coordi-
nates; each of the four multiples is a smooth function of the four
coordinates. Einstein’s field equations relate these multiples and their
first and second derivatives to the spacetime distribution and flow of
mass/energy. Quantum mechanics presupposes that the (undisturbed)
systems it describes are embedded in the spacetime Einstein’s general
theory of relativity describes.
   For decades physicists have tried to construct a mathematical struc-
ture that would contain general relativity and quantum mechanics as
limiting cases. Yet, as we’ve seen, quantum mechanics needs general
relativity; and general relativity doesn’t explain the microstructure
of the physical world. The preceding discussion shows that in a uni-
verse that comports with the strong cosmological principle, quantum

  13    ibid. p. xxi
128                             Why We are Free

      mechanics and general relativity fit smoothly together, linked by the
      quantum version of Gibbs’s statistical mechanics and the ensemble
      version (2) of Dirac’s general assumption (1). In this scheme chance
      arises from the postulated existence of space-time coordinate sys-
      tems relative to which a complete description of the physical world
      privileges no position or direction, and manifests itself in quantum
      indeterminacy, in the probabilities that relate microstates (governed
      by quantum mechanics) and macrostates (governed by classical
      physics), and in the largely indeterminate character of the initial
      conditions that define macroscopic objects and processes.
                                                                         129




                                 VII
                         Living World
   Physicalism rests on the assumption that the physical quantities
that occur in classical, or non-quantum physical theories, have
definite values even when we don’t or can’t know them precisely. It
implies a modified form of determinism that allows for quantum
indeterminacy. As an alternative to physicalism I’ve proposed a
pair of cosmological hypotheses: the strong cosmological princi-
ple and the assumption of primordial randomness. I’ve argued that
these hypotheses define a framework for physics that supplies phys-
ical interpretations of chance in quantum mechanics and statistical
mechanics. Now I want to argue that this framework allows us to
view biology as an autonomous science – one that, though based
on strongly confirmed physical laws, doesn’t reduce to physics. In
particular the new framework accommodates consciousness and,
more generally, the inner lives of living organisms.
                       Biological Complexity
   Although the same strongly confirmed physical laws govern phys-
ical and biological processes, Ernst Mayr has argued that living sys-
tems exhibit kinds of complexity that have no counterpart in the
physical world. The organization of living systems
   endows them with the capacity to respond to external stimuli, to
   bind or release energy (metabolism), to grow, to differentiate, and
   to replicate. Biological systems have the further remarkable prop-
130                                 Why We are Free

          erty that they are open systems, which maintain a stead-state bal-
          ance in spite of much input and output. This homeostasis is made
          possible by elaborate feedback mechanisms, unknown in their
          precision in any inanimate system.1

        Mayr immediately points out that “complexity in and of itself is
      not a fundamental difference between organic and inorganic sys-
      tems.” But organic complexity has “extraordinary properties not
      found in inert matter”2:
          The complexity of living systems exists at every hierarchical level,
          from the nucleus to the cell, to any organ system (kidney, liver,
          brain), to the individual, to the species, the ecosystem, the society.
          The hierarchical structure within an organism arises from the fact
          that the entities at one level are compounded into entities at the
          next higher level – cells into tissues, tissues into organs, and organs
          into functional systems.3

         Moreover, “systems at each hierarchical level have two properties.
      They act as wholes ... and their characteristics cannot be deduced
      from the most complete knowledge of the components taken sepa-
      rately ...”4 In other words, systems at each level are characterized by
      emergent properties – properties that evince novel and unpredict-
      able kinds of order.
         By contrast, the kinds of order that physicists study are predictable,
      at least in principle. As an example consider the orderly structure of
      hemoglobin, the molecule in the blood of vertebrates that carries
      oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. Quantum mechanics
      predicts the structure of hemoglobin. It also predicts that the mol-
      ecule has two distinct conformations with different oxygen-binding
      affinities. But chemists, as chemists, don’t ask how these two confor-
      mations came about – why they occur in the blood of vertebrates –
      or why the active form is found in the lungs but flips into the inactive
      form in muscle tissues undergoing exertion. Quantum mechanics
      doesn’t address these questions. More generally, it doesn’t seek to
      explain the functions and histories of specifically biological kinds
      of complexity – kinds of complexity that emerge in the course of
      evolution.
         1      Mayr, Ernst, Toward a New Philosophy of Biology (Cambridge, Harvard University
      Press, 1988), p. 14.
         2      ibid.
         3      ibid.
         4      ibid, p.15.
                            VII. Living World                              131

                         Chance and Order
    Earlier I quoted Mayr on the importance of chance in evolution.
Chance, he points out, plays a central role both in genetic vari-
ation and natural selection. It is likewise central to our pre-scien-
tific views of individual human experience and human history. Yet
in the physicalist world-view only quantum measurements have
objectively unpredictable outcomes, and quantum measurements
are largely irrelevant to both genetic variation and natural selection.
In the physicalist worldview the unpredictability of events that are
not quantum measurement reflects our ignorance of relevant ini-
tial conditions. In contrast, in a scientific worldview that comports
with the strong cosmological principle chance and the assumption
of primordial randomness chance is objectively real at all levels of
description, from the molecular to the cosmological. Randomness
is the raw material from which processes governed by deterministic
mathematical laws fashion myriad novel varieties of physical and –
especially – biological order

  Randomness and Information Have a Hierarchical Structure
   In a scientific theory that comports with the strong cosmological
principle physical quantities are associated with probability distri-
butions. Such a theory assigns a physical quantity’s possible values
probabilities and assigns each of these values (or each small range
of values) a probability. It interprets these probabilities as relative
frequencies in a cosmological ensemble. Following Boltzmann, I
defined the randomness of a probability distribution as the mean, or
probability-weighted average, of the negative reciprocal of the prob-
ability, and the probability distribution’s information as the amount
by which the distribution’s randomness falls short of its largest pos-
sible value – the value that meets given constraints. Claude Shannon
showed that the information of a probability distribution is the sum
of contributions associated with statistical correlations between
pairs, triples, quadruples, and so on of the events to which the distri-
bution assigns probabilities.
   If the assumption of primordial randomness holds, the probability
distributions that characterized the universe at the earliest times
when our present strongly confirmed physical laws held were max-
imally random; they contained no information. As the universe
132                                 Why We are Free

      expanded, physical processes governed by quantum mechanics and
      by the laws of general relativity created information in the form of
      multiparticle correlations. In particular, gravitational instability
      – the tendency of relatively dense regions to expand more slowly
      than less dense regions – caused the initially uniform distribu-
      tion to become progressively more clumpy.5 This process creates
      information on very large scales, leaving randomness on molecular
      and small macroscopic scales untapped.
         Once self-gravitating systems have begun to form, gravitational
      collapse – the tendency of relatively dense regions to expand more
      slowly than less dense regions –creates spatial inequalities of mass
      density and temperature. Thus gravitational collapse diminishes
      randomness and creates information. It is the ultimate source of
      the information that, in accordance with Clausius’s law of entropy
      non-increase, fueled the origin of, and continues to sustain, life on
      Earth.
         In experimental physics and chemistry, the experimenter uses a
      local source of information to create the information that charac-
      terizes an experimental setup. As Bohr emphasized, experimental
      setups must be capable of being described in the language of clas-
      sical physics. So descriptions of experimental setups don’t contain
      quantum-level information. Of course, experimental predictions can
      and do involve quantum mechanics.
         (Think of the Stern-Gerlach experiment.)
         Biophysicists and biochemists use the experimental and theoretical
      methods of physics and chemistry to study specific biological phe-
      nomena. Their efforts leave little room for doubt if any that biolog-
      ical structures and processes are also physical structures and pro-
      cesses, governed by the same strongly confirmed physical laws. Yet
      the theory of biological evolution, within which accounts of specific
      biological structures and processes are necessarily embedded (recall
      Dobzhansky’s dictum that nothing in biology makes sense except
      in the light of evolution), can’t be construed as a physical theory.
      Physical theories make testable predictions about the outcomes of
      experiments or observations based on assumptions about initial

         5    For a detailed account of one version of this process, see David Layzer,
      Cosmogenesis: The Growth of Order in the Universe, (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1990)
                                 VII. Living World                           133

conditions. In contrast, evolution gives rise to novel and unpredict-
able kind of order.
   How do evolutionary explanations differ from explanations
offered by physical theories? Evolutionary theories, like theories in
the physical sciences, seek to show that the present state of a system
could have evolved from a hypothetical earlier state through pro-
cesses governed by physical laws. Laplace’s theory of the origin of
the solar system, for example, sought to explain why the system con-
sists of planets that circle the Sun in the same direction. The theory
purported to show that an initially structureless gas cloud governed
by Newton’s laws would evolve into a system with these features.
Analogously, population genetics, the predictive arm of evolution-
ary theory, successfully models the evolutionary acquisition of rel-
atively simple traits like industrial melanism, “the darkness—of the
skin, feathers, or fur—acquired by a population of animals living in
an industrial region where the environment is soot-darkened.”6But
population genetics doesn’t aspire to predict, for example, that some
species of fish will evolve into land-dwelling animals. We don’t yet
have a sufficiently detailed and reliable description of the evolution-
ary precursors of land-dwelling animals. And, as Mayr has empha-
sized, the evolutionary history of land-dwelling animals is punctu-
ated, and to a considerable extent determined by, chance events that
have major but unpredictable evolutionary consequences. The story
that connects a structureless gas cloud to a model of the solar system
can’t have an evolutionary counterpart because chance events break
the causal chain.

                                  What Is Life?
   Although the origin of life is still highly speculative, biologists’
understanding of the history of life leaves little room for doubt that all
living organisms descended from small populations of membrane­-
-enclosed, approx­imately self-replicating collections of molecules.
What distinguished these primordial organisms from nonliving
molecular assemblies of similar composition and complexity?
  Unlike nonliving molecular assembles, every living organism, no
matter how simple, has interests and needs that set it apart from and
put it into a particular relationship with its environment. A living
  6     “Industrial Melanism”, Encyclopedia Britannica.
134                           Why We are Free

      organism must regulate its interaction with its surroundings in ways
      that allow it, among other things, to:
         •    replicate itself more or less accurately;
         •    maintain processes that allow it to import building
              materials and high-grade (i.e. low-entropy)
              information and export waste products and low-grade
              information;
          • maintain close-to-optimal relative chemical
              abundances
          • (homeostasis); protect itself against predators.
          • promote the wellbeing and reproductive success of
              other, not necessarily related, individuals and groups.
         These and other interests and needs not only distinguish organ-
      isms from nonliving systems. They also distinguish living organisms
      from one another. Every living organism has a unique set of interests
      and needs as well as a unique history.
          The observation that sensitivity to external stimuli, sentience,
      and consciousness are ubiquitous in the living world suggests that
      the emergence of enclosed, approximately self-replicating molecular
      assemblies coincided with the emergence of something like a point of
      view – a rudimentary version of subjectivity. Inner lives enable living
      organisms to respond in unified and creative ways to the challenges
      and opportunities presented by the external world and to exploit the
      opportunities offered by the ubiquity of chance in the macroscopic
      world.
         This hypothesis may seem daring but it’s hard to avoid. Because
      evolution is a fact and consciousness and sentience are biological
      attributes, they must be the product of evolutionary processes, like
      bilateralism or the structure of hemoglobin. Since the most essen-
      tial feature of consciousness is its subjective character, we can hardly
      avoid assuming that subjectivity came into being with our earliest
      ancestors, the first enclosed, approximately self-regulating molec-
      ular aggregates with interests and needs that include those men-
      tioned above. How primitive forms of subjectivity evolved into more
      complex forms then becomes a scientific problem, like the origin of
      feathers.
                                 VII. Living World                              135

   Why then do many contemporary neuroscientists and philosophers
deny the reality of consciousness as a feature of physical reality dis-
tinct from the neural processes that underpin it? The thesis that
elementary particles and photons are the ultimate and only con-
stituents of physical reality is neither required nor implied by any
strongly confirmed physical law. One can deny it without accepting
the strong cosmological principle and the assumption of primordial
randomness. But someone who does accept these assumptions has
a strong motive to reject physicalism because it implies (and phys-
icalism denies) that chance, randomness, and order, along with the
novel kinds of order that biological evolution fashions from the raw
material of randomness are as real and objective as mass and electric
charge.

                                   Creativity
   In a paper entitled “Evolution as a Creative Process” Theodosius
Dobzhansky wrote: “A living organism resembles a work of art,
and the evolutionary process resembles the creation of a work of
art.”7The creation of a work of art involves analogues of random
genetic variation and natural selection. But I think it involves some-
thing more. Creative processes not only rely on macroscopic ran-
domness, a feature of the physical world that is a consequence of
the strong cosmological principle and the assumption of primordial
randomness. They also exploit this feature. Consider the following
example of the creative process, supplied by a member of my family.
   My brother Bob is a lyric poet as well as a neurologist. I asked him
to write down an account of how he writes a poem. This is what he
wrote:
                            HOW I WRITE A POEM
                            by Robert Layzer
   A new poem often starts with a phrase that evokes some interest
or feeling, or points to a subject that might be interesting or moving.
Sometimes the phrase describes something I saw or heard in the envi-
ronment, or a painting that I am attached to; or it could be a fragment
of a thought or a feeling.

  7    Dobzhansky, T., Proc. Ninth Int. Congress Genetics, 1954, pp. 435-449.
136                           Why We are Free

         Rarely, the poem may emerge and be completed within a day. More
      often nothing much happens for a while-hours or days-while I repeat
      the phrase silently or aloud now and then. Then, out of nowhere, new
      phrases and sentences start to cluster around the original idea, like
      crystals coming out of solution. I begin to see a theme, and that sug-
      gests more words to enlarge the theme. My conscious mind becomes
      more involved as I shape and plan the structure and content. Pruning
      and revising may take place as the poem develops, or after it is nearly
      finished. This is a much more conscious process; now I am reading the
      poem in the context of the history of literature, as if I were a critic.
        During the composition, I try to listen for unexpected words or ideas,
      and to the internal assonances and other harmonies that tell a story of
      their own. In fact, the sound of the poem may turn out to be the main
      carrier of meaning, and if the poem is successful I may not understand
      the real “message” for some time afterward. But if I’m successful, the
      ending often gives a sense of a question answered.

         The creative process described in this account generates candidates
      for selection by a process that is both random and constrained: only
      candidates in certain broad categories, which themselves depend on
      the work being created, present themselves for selection. The goal
      of a creative process isn’t known beforehand; the process isn’t tele-
      ological. But once the process has reached its endpoint, its product
      can be seen to satisfy “fitness criteria” that were already in place; it
      “gives a sense of a question answered”; “everything comes together,
      and you say ‘that’s it.’” The sustained exploratory effort in artis-
      tic creation has a counterpart in Bergson’s philosophical account of
      evolution: the élan vital. It also has counterparts in modern accounts
      of biological evolution. Notably, biologists John Gerhart and Marc
      Kirschner have proposed a theory of phenotypic variation in evolu-
      tion – a theory of how differences between anatomical, physiolog-
      ical, and behavioral traits of organisms have evolved – that differs
      radically from older accounts, in which phenotypic variation and the
      divergence of genetic lineages result mainly from the action of natu-
      ral selection on uncorrelated variations of individual genes:
                                    VII. Living World                                         137

      Most anatomical and physiological traits that have
      evolved since the Cambrian are, we propose, the result
      of regulatory changes in the usage of various members of
      a large set of conserved core components that function
      in development and physiology. Genetic change of the
      DNA sequences for regulatory elements of DNA, RNAs,
      and proteins leads to heritable regulatory change, which
      specifies new combinations of core components, operat-
      ing in new amounts and states at new times and places
      in the animal. These new configurations of components
      comprise new traits.8
   As I mentioned, artistic creation is an exploratory process. An
artist searches for and eventually finds targets in a large “space” of
imagined structures. Kirschner and Gerhard have argued that evo-
lution is an exploratory process in this sense:
  As the name [Exploratory Processes] implies, some conserved
core processes appear to search and find targets in large spaces or
molecular populations. Specific connections are eventually made
between the source and target. These processes display great robust-
ness and adaptability and, we think, have been very important in
the evolution of complex animal anatomy and physiology. Examples
include the formation of microtubule structures, the connecting of
axons and target organs in development, synapse elimination, muscle
patterning, vasculogenesis, vertebrate adaptive immunity, and even
behavioral strategies like ant foraging. All are based on physiological
variation and selection. 9
   Kirschner and Gerhart have given a more extended (and highly
readable) account of their view of evolution in The Plausibility of
Life.10
  In 1980 I discussed the hypothesis that evolution is a process of
hierarchic construction, involving not just constraints on deleterious
mutations but also what Kirschner and Gerhart call “deconstraints.”

   8       Kirschner, Marc W. and Gerhart, John C., Proc. National Academy of Sciences 104,
supp. 1, May 15, 2007.
   9        ibid.
   10      Kirschner, Marc W. and Gerhart, John C., illustrated by John Norton, The
Plausibility of Life, (Yale University Press, 2005).
138                                Why We are Free

      The only example I then knew about was the adaptive vertebrate
      immune response. I append the abstract of that paper to this chapter.

                                           Free Will
      In his introduction to The Oxford Handbook of Free Will
      philosopher Robert Kane writes:
          [D]ebates about free will in the modern era (since the seven-
          teenth century) have been dominated by two questions, not
          one – the “Determinist Question”: “Is determinism true?”
          and the “Compatibility Question”: “Is free will compatible (or
          incompatible) with determinism?”11

        Some scientists and philosophers have argued that free will must
      be an illusion because genuine freedom – the capacity to influence the
      course of future event – would be incompatible with determinism;
      and science, they argue, is deterministic: past conditions and physical
      laws determine future events. Although quantum mechanics predicts
      that certain processes – quantum determined measurements – have
      unpredictable outcomes, such processes don’t begin to account for
      the kind of unpredictability required by a robust conception of
      human freedom.
         If we replace physicalism’s assumption that classical physical
      quantities have definite values by the strong cosmological principle
      and the assumption of primordial randomness, the answer to Kane’s
      first question – Is determinism true? – is no. Initial conditions in
      biological processes ranging from evolution to individual develop-
      ment and cultural evolution are products of histories punctuated by
      unpredictable events. And these processes have a creative character.
      They give rise to novel and unpredictable forms of order.
        Since human behavior is a province of biology, we can now replace
      Kane’s second question (“Is free will compatible (or incompatible)
      with determinism?”) by the question “Is free will compatible with
      biology?” If this book’s central argument is correct, the answer is an
      unambiguous yes.



         11     The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, ed. Robert Kane, Oxford, Oxford University
      Press, 2002.
                             VII. Living World                               139

                        Appendix, Chapter VII
   Abstract. The present theory offers a unified solution to three
closely related evolutionary problems. (1) Why does an evolving
population explore only a small fraction of the accessible pathways
in genotype space? (2) Conventional ideas about genetic variation
suggest that major adaptive shifts, which involve large numbers of
separate but functionally related genetic changes, have vanishingly
small probabilities of occurrence and require long periods of time.
Yet the fossil record indicates that such shifts are neither slow nor
uncommon. (3) Studies in comparative morphology and compar-
ative embryology indicate that evolution is a process of hierarchic
construction. How is the principle of hierarchic construction related
to the basic postulates of evolutionary theory? According to the
theory elaborated in this paper, the genomes of both unicellular and
multicellular organisms contain two functionally distinct systems
of genes: an α system, which encodes a program for the organism’s
development and which includes regulatory genes and other “mod-
ifiers” as well as structural genes; and a β system, which encodes a
strategy for adaptive variability and whose elements regulate the
rates of genetic recombination and of genic and chromosomal
mutations. Corresponding to these two systems are two classes of
adaptations: α adaptations, which enhance the fitness of their pos-
sessors, and β adaptations, which increase the expectation of fitness
in the descendants of their possessors. Sexual reproduction is the
most familiar example of a β adaptation. It is noteworthy that the
most primitive known form of sexuality, that found among bacteria,
is characterized by genetic mechanisms serving to regulate genetic
recombination in precisely the manner postulated here for β genes.
The β system serves to direct evolutionary flows in genotype space
into potentially adaptive channels. It also serves to stabilize and buffer
highly adapted genetic structures against the potentially disruptive
effects of accidental variations. At the genetic level of description, a
major adaptive shift corresponds to the ascent of a fitness peak in a
multidimensional subspace of genotype space. The β system serves to
focus evolutionary flow in this subspace in the direction of steepest
ascent, thereby ensuring rapid and coordinated evolution of the
genetic systems involved. (A mathematical framework that should
make it possible to construct numerical models of the evolutionary
140                               Why We are Free

      process just described is given by Layzer12) The principle of hierarchic
      construction emerges as a natural consequence of selection-regulated
      genetic variation. Hierarchic units are defined by their covariability
      (or costability). The “otherwise inexplicable tendency of organisms
      to adopt ever more complicated solutions to the problem of remain-
      ing alive” (Medawar 1967, pp. 99-100) results from the action (and
      progressive elaboration) of a genetic system that promotes just those
      kinds of genetic variation that result in the growth of functionally
      hierarchic genetic systems. The present theory also throws light on
      several specific evolutionary problems, including the interpretation
      of genic polymorphism, the variability of evolutionary rates inferred
      from the fossil record, the evolution of “pseudoexogenous” and
      “trivial” adaptation, and the problem of speciation. Applications to
      the evolution of social behavior are discussed elsewhere.13




         12     Layzer, David. “A macroscopic approach to population genetics.” Journal of
      Theoretical Biology 73.4 (1978): 769-788.
         13     Layzer, D., The American Naturalist, 115, 6, June 1980.
                                                                          141




                           Afterword
  As two researchers who knew well and were deeply influenced by
David Layzer’s life and work, we are honored to have been able to
help his family in assembling, editing, and communicating his final
book.
   David Layzer believed in and argued for the existence of true
novelty, creativity, and freedom in the physical world, and against
a worldview of physicalism that he saw as regarding all of these as
convenient fictions. In that worldview everything we see around us
today was “already contained” within the beginning state of the Uni-
verse, bound to that early state by an inevitable and barren unfolding
via mathematical physical laws.
    In this work and others he argued that the flaw in this physicalist
view is not in the mathematical laws of nature that partly underly
it, but rather in the historical and cosmological context in which
those laws operate. His postulated Strong Cosmological Principle
implies that chance is inevitable: a fully-detailed description of the
Universe simply does not exist – or perhaps more accurately, the
most-detailed description is statistical in the sense that no matter
how much data is specified about some region of the Universe, there
will be predictive questions with only probabilistic answers. This
applies at all times, and only statistical statements about the current
universe can possibly follow from its early state. Importantly, while
it is widely believed that quantum mechanics implies (some sense
of) objective chance, Layzer saw the objective chance inherent in the
Strong Cosmological Principle to be the basis rather than the result
of quantum uncertainty, forming a completely original way of view-
ing the quantum measurement problem that has been taken up by
other researchers including one of us (AA).
142                                   Why We are Free

         If the forms and structures inhabiting the current Universe were
      not (implicitly) present at its beginning, how did this information
      arise? In this question Layzer has provided insight after insight. He
      appears to be among the first who crisply connected non-equilib-
      rium processes in cosmology to the formation of chemical and other
      order – which is now a somewhat textbook view. But he also pointed
      out how this can be viewed as a competition between entropy gener-
      ation in a system versus the increase in the maximal possible entropy
      of that system; an expanding universe provides a widening gap
      between the two that is cosmological order. This insight has still not
      been fully concretized in thinking about the statistical mechanics of
      the Universe, though work in that direction is happening, includ-
      ing by one of us (AA). The cosmic store of order is the grist for the
      creation of higher levels of order, through astrophysical structure
      formation, chemical evolution, biological evolution and then neural
      systems; these combine to transform some of that cosmological-
      ly-generated reservoir of order into all of the artifacts we value.
         How this creative transformation takes place in the evolution-
      ary and neural domains occupied Layzer through much of his later
      life, but Why We are Free provides only a very compact view, so it is
      worth here bringing forward a bit more material here, pointing to
      further sources.
         For biology, he approvingly quotes Theodosius Dobzhansky:
          “A living organism resembles a work of art, and the evolutionary
          process resembles the creation of a work of art.”1
        Layzer’s insight into biological evolution endorses the role of
      chance in the creation of random genetic variations, but he sees
      subsequent natural selection as a non-chance process. He quotes
      evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr:.
          Evolutionary change in every generation is a two-step process:
          the production of genetically new individuals and the selection
          of the progenitors of the next generation. The important role of
          chance at the first step, the production of variability is universally
          acknowledged, but the second step, natural selection, is on the
          whole viewed rather deterministically: Selection is a non-chance
          process.2
         1      Dobzhansky, T., Proc. Ninth Int. Congress Genetics (1954), pp. 435-449
         2      Mayr, E., Toward a New Philosophy of Biology. (Cambridge, Harvard University
      Press, 1988) p. 21
                                       Afterword                                             143

  And Layzer writes
   Randomness is the raw material from which processes governed
   by deterministic mathematical laws fashion myriad novel varieties
   of physical and – especially – biological order.3
   For Layzer, chance again plays an essential role in freedom
of the will, but it does not make our choices and decisions them-
selves random, any more than biological evolution created random
life forms. Just as randomness seeds genetic variation that is then
selected for fitness, random chance simply generates multiple alter-
native possibilities for thoughts and actions.
   In this way Layzer draws a parallel between biological evolution,
a two-step process as Ernst Mayr described it, and free will, which
has also been described as a two-step process by many thinkers since
at least William James in the 1880’s.4 One of us (BD) has identified
nearly two dozen philosophers and scientists who have proposed or
endorsed two-stage models of free will since James.5 James was also
the first thinker to draw the parallel between Darwinian evolution
(then a new idea), freedom of the will, and chance.
 In an unpublished manuscript, “Naturalizing Libertarian Free
Will,” Layzer explained...
   It entails a picture of the physical universe in which chance pre-
   vails in the macroscopic domain (and hence in the world of experi-
   ence). Because chance plays a key role in the production of genetic
   variation and in natural selection itself, evolutionary biologists
   have long advocated such a picture. Chance also plays a key role
   in other biological processes, including the immune response and
   visual perception. I argue that reflective choice and deliberation,
   like these processes and evolution itself, is a creative process medi-
   ated by indeterminate macroscopic processes, and that through
   our choices we help to shape the future.6
  But Layzer makes clear that the ultimate decision or choice
between alternative possibilities is in no way itself random, but an
act of self-determination:
   To be fully human is to be able to make deliberate choices. Other
   animals sometimes have, or seem to have, conflicting desires, but
   we alone are able to reflect on the possible consequences of differ-
  3     See chapter VII - Chance and Order, p.127.
  4     See Doyle, R.O. “Jamesian Free Will,” in William James Studies (2010) Vol. 5, p. 1
  5     See https://informationphilosopher.com/books/scandal/Two-Stage_Models.pdf.
  6     See https://informationphilosopher.com/solutions/scientists/layzer/
  Naturalizing_Libertarian_Free_Will.doc. (2010) p.2.
144                                  Why We are Free

          ent actions and to choose among them in the light of broader goals
          and values. Because we have this capacity we can be held respon-
          sible for our actions; we can deserve praise and blame, reward and
          punishment. Values, ethical systems, and legal codes all presup-
          pose freedom of the will...
          A decision is free to the extent that it results from deliberation.
          Absence of coercion isn’t enough. Someone who bases an import-
          ant decision on the toss of a coin seems to be acting less freely than
          someone who tries to assess its consequences and to evaluate them
          in light of larger goals, values, and ethical precepts.117
         This makes clear that in Layzer’s view not all of the Universe is
      free — that is a capability enjoyed by only a very special set of sys-
      tems — like human minds — far up the hieheirarchy of complexity.
      But in his view all of the Universe is creative. From the creation of
      chemical order in the early universe to the creation of biological and
      mental novelty, new structures are continually coming into being,
      and allowing others to come into being. This notion extends even
      to mental creations such as the mathematical laws of physics that we
      use to describe the Universe itself. Layzer often quoted Einstein’s
      famous observation that scientific theories are “free creations of the
      human mind.” When one of us (AA) once asked him how to rec-
      oncile this with the notion that mathematical statements are true
      (or not) long before being discovered by people, he gave a beautiful
      response: many, many, many statements in mathematics follow from
      a given set of axioms. But this set of “all possible true statements” is
      information free — just like a physical system in equilibrium. Human
      mathematicians and physicists select particular ones from that giant
      set. In doing so, we create information that did not exist before.
         Layzer’s work was deeply novel itself, and in many ways uncon-
      ventional. We hope that this volume might help others to discover
      and build on some of his many insights, continuing to unfold the
      creative process he began.
                                                Anthony Aguirre, UC Santa Cruz
                                                   Bob Doyle, Harvard University
                                                                          January, 2021


         7    See https://informationphilosopher.com/solutions/scientists/layzer/Free_Will_
      As_A_Scientific_Problem.pdf. (2011) p. 31
                                                                        145




                        Bibliography
Aguirre, A. (1999) Astrophysical Journal, 521, 17-29.
Aguirre, A., and Tegmark, M. (2011) “Born in an Infinite Universe:
     a Cosmological Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics.”
     Phys. Rev. D 84.10: 105002.
Ayala, F.J. and T. Dobzhansky., Studies in the Philosophy of Biology,
     Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bergmann, P. J. and J. L. Lebowitz (1955) Phys. Rev. 99, 578.
Blatt, J. M., (1959) Prog. Theor. Phys. 22, 745.
Boltzmann, L. (1895) Lectures on Gas Theory, translated by Stephen
     G. Brush, New York: Dover Publications, 2011.
Cohen, E. G. D. (1962) Proceedings of the NUFFIC Interna-
     tional Summer Course in Science at Nijenrode Castle, The
     Netherlands, August, 1961. Amsterdam: North-Holland Press.
Crick, F. (1994) The Astonishing Hypothesis, New York: Simon and
     Schuster.
Dirac, P.A.M. (1967) The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, fourth
     edition (revised), Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dobzhansky, T. (1954) Proc. Ninth Int. Congress Genetics, pp. 435-
     449.
Dobzhansky, T. (1974) “Chance and Creativity in Evolution” in
     Ayala and Dobzhansky, p. 329.
Doyle, Robert O. (2010) “Jamesian Free Will,” William James
     Studies, vol.5, p1.
Doyle, Bob (2011) Free Will: The Scandal in Philosophy,
     Cambridge: I-Phi Press.
Eddington, A. S. (1958), The Nature of the Physical World, Ann
     Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Einstein, A. (1952) Relativity, the Special and the General Theory,
     15th edition, New York: Crown Publishers.
146                             Why We are Free

      Einstein, A. (1923) “The Foundations of the General Theory
          of Relativity,” in The Principle of Relativity, Methuen and
          Company, reprinted by Dover Publications, 1952.
      Einstein, A. (1953) The Meaning of Relativity, 5th edition,
          Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Fermi, E. (1937) Thermodynamics, New York: Prentice-Hall.
      Gerhart, J. and Kirschner, M. (2007) Proceedings of the National
          Academy of Sciences, May 15, 2007. 104 (suppl 1) 8582-8589.
      Gibbs, J. W. (1902) Elementary Principles in Statistical Mathematics,
          Developed with Special Reference to the Rational Foundations of
          Thermodynamics, New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Greenblatt, S. (2009) The Swerve, New York: Norton.
      Hahn, E. L. (1950) Phys. Rev., 80, 580.
      Heisenberg, W. (1958) Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in
          Modern Science, London: Allen & Unwin.
      Home, D. and A. Robinson, (1995) “Einstein and Tagore: Man,
          nature and mysticism”, Journal of Consciousness Studies 2.
      Hubble, E. (1936 ) The Realm of the Nebulae, Yale University Press.
      Kane, R. (2002) The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, New York:
          Oxford University Press.
      Kirschner, M. W. and Gerhart, J. C. (2005) The Plausibility of Life,
          New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Kirschner, M. W. and Gerhart, J. C. (2007) Proc. National Academy
          of Sciences 104, supp. 1, May 15, 2007.
      Laplace, Pierre Simon, (1951) A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities,
          translated into English from the French 6th ed. by Truscott,
          F.W. and Emory, F.L. New York: Dover Publications.
      Layzer, D. (1980) The American Naturalist, 115, 6.
      Layzer, D. (1990) Cosmogenesis: The Growth of Order in the
          Universe, New York: Oxford University Press
      Lebowitz, J. L and P. J. Bergmann (1959) Annals of Physics 1, 1.
      Mayr, E. (1983) The American Naturalist 121: 324-33; reprinted in
          Mayr (1988).
      Mayr, E. (1988) Toward a New Philosophy of Biology. Cambridge:
          Harvard University Press.
      Mermin, N. D. (2014) “QBism puts the scientist back into science”,
          Nature, 26 March 2014.
      Nagel, T. (2012) Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist
          Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly False,
          Cambridge: Belknap Press.
                          Bibliography                             147

Nagel, T. (2013) “The Core of ‘Mind and Cosmos,” New York Times,
    August 18, 2013.
Norton, J. D. (2015 ) “The Hole Argument”, The Stanford
    Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2015 Edition), Edward N.
    Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
    fall2015/entries/spacetime-holearg/>
Penrose, R. (1989) The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.
Planck, Max. (1945 ) Treatise on Thermodynamics, trans. Alexan-
    der Ogg. Third edition translated from the seventh German
    edition. New York: Dover Publications.
Ridderbos, T. M. and M. L. G. Redhead, (1988) Foundations of
    Physics. 28, 1237.
Schlosshauer, M. (2008) Decoherence and the Quantum-to-Classical
    Transition (corrected 2d printing) Berlin: Springer.
Schlosshauer, M. (2014) “The quantum-to-classical transition and
    decoherence,” arXiv:1404.2635v1 [quant.phys].
Schrödinger, E. (1948 ) Statistical Thermodynamics, Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. R. (2004 ) Freedom and Neurobiology, New York:
    Columbia University Press
Shannon, C.E. (1948) The Bell System Technical Journal, Vol. 27,
    pp. 379–423, 623–656, July, October, 1948.
Thomson, W. (1848) Philosophical Magazine, October, 1848.
Van Kampen, N. G. (2007) Stochastic Processes in Physics and
    Chemistry, 3d edition. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Wegner, D.M. (2002) The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge:
    MIT Press.
Weinberg, S. (1972) Gravitation and Cosmology. New York: Wiley.
Weinberg, S. (2017) New York Review of Books, January 19, 2017.
Weinberg, S. (1995) The Quantum Theory of Fields, Volume 1,
    New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wigner, E. (1970 ) “Remarks on the Mind-Body Question” in
    Symmetries and Reflections, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wilson, E.O. (1998) Consilience. New York: Knopf.
148                                 Why We are Free



                 Index                             Boyle’s 67
                                                   Boyle’s law 67
                                                   Brownian motion 59

                                                   C
      A
                                                   Caloric hypothesis 42, 43
      Absolute space and time 59                   Cannizzaro, Stanislao 69
      Absolute zero 33                             Cantor, Georg 16
      Absorption lines 28                          Carnot cycle 41, 42, 43, 48, 49
      Alternative possibilities 143                Carnot engine 42, 43, 44, 46, 49
      Amontons, Guillaume 65, 67                   Carnot, Sadi 39
      Amontons’ law 67                             Carnot’s theorem 39, 40, 43, 46, 47,
      Andromeda Nebula 25, 26                             49, 67
      Angular momentum 25, 103, 125                Caves, Carlton 114
       or spin 25                                  Cepheid variable stars 26, 27
      Archimedes 54, 60, 62, 63                    chance 143
      Aristarchus 62                               Chance 2, 8, 10, 11, 116, 117, 119,
      Arrow of time viii, 19, 52, 95, 100, 119            128, 129, 131, 134, 135, 141,
      Astonishing hypothesis 4                            142, 143
      Astronomical evolution 142                     objective 141
      Astrophysical Journal ix                     Chaos theory 118
      Atomic hypothesis 58, 63, 64, 73, 80           deterministic 118
      Avogadro, Amedeo 67, 69                      Charles’s law 67
      Avogadro’s hypothesis 67, 69                 Chemical evolution 142
                                                   Chemistry 5
      B                                            Choice 143
      Bell-shaped curve 32                         Classical mechanics 16, 103
      Bell Telephone Laboratories 29               Clausius, Rudolf 17, 18, 19, 39, 40,
      Bentley, Nicholas 21                                43, 45, 47, 49, 50, 52, 55, 57,
      Bergmann, P.J. 99                                   76, 79, 80, 86, 87, 94, 96
      Bergson, Henri 9                             Coarse-grained 95
      Bernoulli, Daniel 65, 66, 67, 70, 75, 81     Colding, Ludwig 38
      Biological evolution 142, 143                Compatibilism 138
      Biology 9                                    Complexity 144
      Bohr, Niels 112, 132                           biological 129, 130
      Boltzmann, Ludwig 17, 57, 74, 75, 76,          organic 130
             77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 87, 88, 93,     organized 9, 11
             100, 131                              Complex systems 8
       H theorem 17, 79                            Consciousness 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 19, 129,
       transport equation 79, 98                          134, 135
      Boltzmann’s constant 73                      Copenhagen interpretation of quan-
      Bondi, Hermann viii                                 tum theory 113
      Bose, Satyendra Nath 31                      Copernicus 62
      Bosons 31, 32, 33                            Cosmic microwave background 29,
      Boundary conditions 125                             35, 123
      Boyle, Robert 65                             Cosmological constant 23
                                         Index                                        149
Cosmological principle 15, 27, 28,
       35                                 negative 134
 Strong 33, 35                            of the universe 47, 55
Creativity 2, 9, 10, 11, 19, 61, 134,     statistical 57, 75, 79, 80
       141, 142, 143, 144                 thermodynamic 2, 76, 78, 86, 94
Crick, Francis 1, 4                      Epicurus 37, 58
Curtis, Heber 25                         Ethics 4, 58
Curvature of space 23                    Euclid 62
                                         Everett III, Hugh 115
D                                        Evolution 7, 8, 10, 11, 130, 132, 133,
                                                134, 135, 138
Dalton, John 67, 68                       biological 19
Darwin, Charles 7                         chemical 142
Decisions 6                              Expansion of the universe 28
Decoherence 100, 110, 112, 122            and contraction 23
Deliberation 143, 144                    Experience 3, 61, 81, 96, 107, 115, 143
Democritus 37, 58, 59, 60, 63, 65
Determinism 6, 7, 8, 10, 14, 20, 58,     F
       102, 117, 129, 131, 138, 143
Dirac, Paul 5, 34, 108, 110, 111,        Fair sample 26
       113, 122, 123, 125, 128           Fermi, Enrico 18, 31, 53
Disorder 11, 17                          Fermions 31, 32
DNA 4                                    Feynman, Richard 57
Dobzhansky, Theodosius 10, 11,           Fitness 143
       132, 135, 142                     Fractional occupation number 71, 72,
Doppler effect 27, 74                            78, 79, 83, 85, 87
Duhem, Pierre 80                         Free creations of the human mind 69,
                                                 144
E                                        Free will 1, 2, 5, 6, 9, 19, 58, 102, 138,
                                                 141, 143, 144
Eddington, Arthur S. viii, 17              and quantum indeterminism 5
Einstein, Albert 7, 22, 29, 32, 33,        illusion 6
       34, 35, 59, 69, 127, 144            libertarian 143
 free creations of the human mind        Friedmann, Alexander 23, 28
       69                                Fuchs, Christopher 114
Élan vital 9                             Fundamental equation of statistical
Elementary particles 29, 30                      mechanics 83, 84, 85
Emergence 130, 134
Energetics 80                            G
Energy
 conservation of 38, 40, 44              Galileo 24, 97
 gravitational 54                        Gay-Lussac, Joseph 68
 internal 38                             General theory of relativity 28
 kinetic 38, 66, 73, 78, 81              Gerhart, John 136, 137
 potential 38, 54, 103                   Gerlach, Walter 101, 102
Ensemble 15, 16, 83, 121, 128, 131       Ghirardi, G.C. 115
Entropy 17, 18, 40, 45, 47, 49, 50,      Gibbs, Josiah Willard 82, 86, 87, 88,
       51, 52, 53, 55, 57, 70, 75, 77,          93, 94, 95
       86, 142                           Gibbs’s statistical mechanics 122, 123,
                                                124, 128
150                                  Why We are Free

      Gold, Tommy viii                              J
      Goudsmit, Samuel 101
      Greenblatt, Stephen 38                        James, William 143
      Growth of order 142                           Joos, Erich 112
      Guericke, Otto von 65                         Joule, James 38

      H                                             K
      Hahn, Edgar 100                               Kampen Nico van 98
      Hamilton, William Rowan 82, 83, 85,           Kane, Robert 138
             87                                     Kant, Immanuel 24
      Heat capacity 55                              Kelvin 39, 47, 73
      Heath, Thomas 60                              kinetic energies 75
      Heisenberg, Werner 87, 106, 113, 125          kinetic energy 103
      Heraclides 62                                 Kirschner, Marc 136, 137
      Hole problem 34
      Homogeneous
                                                    L
       and isotropic 27, 35                         Laplace, Pierre Simon 10, 14, 25, 133
      Hooke, Robert 65                              Law
      Hoyle, Fred viii                               Maxwell’s 32
      H theorem 81, 93, 97, 98, 100                  Planck’s 32
      Hubble, Edwin 25, 26, 28                      Layzer, Robert 135
      Humason, Milton 28                            Leavitt, Henrietta Swan 25
                                                    Lebowitz, J.L. 99
      I                                             Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 64
      Identity of indiscernibles 64                 Leucippus 37, 58, 59, 60, 63
      Immune system 138, 143                        Loschmidt, Josef 80, 81, 88, 93, 97
      Indeterminism 5, 10, 20, 87, 113, 121,         objection 80, 97
              143                                   Lucretius 38
        primordial 58
        quantum 5, 20, 58, 128, 129, 131
                                                    M
      Indistinguishability 15                       Mach, Ernst 59, 80
        quantum 30, 31, 34                          Mach’s principle 35
      Information 7, 17, 90, 92, 93, 97, 98,        Macrostate 120
              99, 112, 120, 121, 131, 134, 142,     Magellanic Clouds 26
              144                                   Maxwell-Boltzmann theory 97
        creation 132                                Maxwell, James Clerk 32, 35, 71, 73,
      Information theory 89                                75, 77, 79, 82, 86, 90, 123
      Initial conditions 11, 13, 15, 35, 118,       Mayer, Robert von 38, 80
              119, 120, 122, 128, 131, 132,         Mayr, Ernst 8, 10, 11, 129, 131, 133,
              138                                          142, 143
      Interventionism 99                            Measurement 5, 109, 110, 122
      Irreversibility ix, 19, 48, 51, 52, 80, 81,    quantum 141
              88, 98, 100, 119, 121                 Measurement problem 20, 101, 109,
      Isotropic 23, 27, 70, 71                             121, 123, 124, 141
        and homogeneous 35                          Medawar, Peter 140
        and statistically uniform 34                Mermin, N. David 114
                                             Index                                        151

Microstate 77, 85, 89, 122                   Plato 61
Microtubule 137                              Poincaré, Henri 11, 14, 80, 98, 116,
Milky Way 24, 25                                     119, 120, 121
Mind 7, 11, 117, 118, 144                    Poincaré recurrence time 98
 omniscient 6                                Pointer state 123
Minkowski, Hermann 33, 124, 127              Positron 126
Molecular chaos 74, 97, 98                   Principle of sufficient reason 64
Mount Wilson Observatory 25                  Principle of superposition 104, 111
                                             Probabilities 16, 83
N                                            Processes 5, 7, 11, 14, 117, 121, 132
Nagel, Thomas 7                                creative 19
Natural selection 8, 136, 142, 143             stochastic 8
Neumann, John von 110, 111, 112,               two-step 8
       113, 123, 124                         Progress 8
Neuroscience 5                               Pythagoras 61, 124
Newton, Isaac viii, 1, 13, 14, 17, 21,       Q
       22, 24, 27, 33, 35, 37, 57, 59, 64,
       65, 66, 70, 77, 80, 85, 87, 103,      Quantum Bayesianism (QBism) 114
       123                                   Quantum indistinguishability 30
Normal distribution 32                       Quantum jump 107
Norton, John 137                             Quantum mechanics 3, 14, 15, 16, 30,
                                                   87, 101, 102, 107, 109, 114, 121,
O                                                  127, 130, 132, 141
Occupation numbers 83                         deterministic? 5
Order 17, 76, 131, 133, 135, 142             Quantum numbers 32
 biological 131                              Quantum-to-classical transition 109
Organized complexity 11                      R
Origin of life 133
Ostwald, Wilhelm 80                          Randomness 9, 10, 11, 30, 57, 58, 70,
                                                    72, 75, 76, 78, 79, 80, 85, 86, 87,
P                                                   88, 90, 92, 93, 94, 99, 143
Parallax 25                                   maximal 36, 131
Pauli exclusion principle: 32                 objective 87
Pauli, Wolfgang 32                            primordial ix, 2, 16, 17, 19, 97, 100,
Pearle, Philip 115                                  121, 129, 131, 135
Penrose, Roger 18                             quantum 129
Penzias, Arno 29                              repeated 98
Periodic table 32                            Redhead, L.G. 99
Period-luminosity relation 26                Reductionism 129
Perpetual-motion machine, 43                 Reflective choice 143
Philosophy of science 8                      Relativity
Physicalism 1, 4, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16,      general theory 34, 127
        19, 129, 135, 141                     special theory 33, 34, 59, 124, 127
Physics 5, 9                                 Repeated randomness 98
Planck, Max 32, 103                          Reproductive success 134
152                                  Why We are Free

      Ridderbos, T.M. 99                            Thales 25
      Riemann, Bernhard 23, 127                     Thales of Miletus 60, 62
      Rimini, A. 115                                Theory of gravitation 35–36
      Roulette 118                                  Thermodynamic equilibrium 17, 33,
      Russell, Bertrand 58                                  35, 36, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52, 54, 70,
                                                            76, 79, 80, 83, 86, 87
      S                                             Thermodynamics 17, 18, 38, 39, 40,
      Schack, Rüdiger 114                                   45, 46, 53, 55, 70, 114, 119
      Schlosshauer, Maximilian 112                   first law 47, 53
      Schrödinger equation 34, 111, 125,            Thomson, William 39, 40, 43, 45, 46,
              126                                           49, 67
      Schrödinger, Erwin 89, 106, 125               Time
      Schrödinger’s cat 106, 112                     universal 33
      Scientific American ix                        Two places at the same time 107
      Searle, John 5                                Two-stage models 143
      Second law of thermodynamics 2, 17,           Two-step proces 142
              18, 39, 40, 45, 47, 50, 52, 55, 96,   Two-step process 143
              97, 119, 121                          U
      Self-determination 143
      Sentience 134                                 Uhlenbeck, George 101
      Shannon, Claude 89, 131                       Unified scientific worldview 4, 11
      Shapiro, Alan E. 64                           Universal time 33
      Shapley, Harlow 25
      Slipher, Vesto 28                             V
      Special theory of relativity 33               Value systems 142, 144
      Spin-echo experiment 99, 100                  Velocity-distance relation 25, 27
      SQUID 100                                     Virial theorem 55
      Statistically homogeneous and isotro-         Visual perception 143
              pic ix, 35
      Statistical mechanics 83, 95, 98              W
      Stellar populations 27
      Stern-Gerlach experiment 101, 102,            Watson, James 1, 4
              103, 106, 132                         Watt, James 37
      Stern, Otto 101, 102                          Weber, T. 115
      Strong cosmological principle 1, 15,          Wegner, Daniel 6
              16, 34, 35, 100, 120, 121, 123,       Weinberg, Steven 109, 127
              127, 131, 135, 141                    Wheeler, John A. 115
      Structures 132, 142                           Wigner, Eugene 113
      Subjectivity 4, 7, 114, 134                   Wilson, Edward O. 6
      Superposition 106                             Wilson, Robert 29
                                                    Wright, Thomas 24
      T
                                                    Z
      Tegmark, Max ix
      Teleology 10, 136                             Zeh, Hans-Dieter 110, 112
      Teleonomy 8                                   Zurek, Wojciech H. 112
David Layzer was the first Donald H. Menzel
Professor of Astrophysics at Harvard, and a
pioneering interdisciplinary thinker in cosmology,
astrophysics, information theory and biology. A
wide-ranging and foundational thinker, his 1990
Cosmogenesis, The Growth of Order in the Universe,
laid out a compelling holistic understanding of
cosmic evolution, structure formation, and the
growth of information in a big-bang universe.
In Why We are Free, his final book, Layzer distills a lifetime of thinking
about the fundamental nature of order and cosmic evolution, to address
one of the most basic questions: what is our place in nature, in a world
governed by physical law? Why We are Free crisply presents and rigorously
defends a view “in which our joys and our sorrows, our memories and
our ambitions, our sense of personal identity and free will, are just as
real as the objects and relations of the world. physics describes.”
In Cosmogenesis Layzer described the initial conditions
of the universe and how orderly structures like the
planets, stars, and galaxies can form despite entropy
increase of the second law of thermodynamics.

In this book Layzer began his study of free will,
connecting it to a “primordial randomness.”
He saw this randomness as an alternative to quantum
indeterminism and as the source of freedom from
philosophical determinism.

In Why We are Free, Layzer writes, “the strong cosmological principle and
the assumption of primordial randomness explain...the irreversibility of
the universe.” They are also his basis for freedom of the will.



                                                            David Layzer on the web
                                                               www.davidlayzer.com
                                                  en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Layzer
                               informationphilosopher.com/solutions/scientists/layzer/
